In the meantime, however, Turkey and the other candidate countries will start to benefit from a strategy of rapprochement and stronger political dialogue.

The main element in this strategy of rapprochement will be the accession partnership which is currently being prepared and which will set out the short- and medium-term priorities which Turkey must meet, in accordance with the Copenhagen criteria, in the political, economic and Community acquis areas.

We plan to submit the first accession partnership in the autumn of this year.

I think that the accession partnership will be a central instrument in speeding up the process of political and economic reform in Turkey and we made it quite clear in the discussions held in Brussels, Luxembourg and Ankara that this accession partnership must address important questions in connection with the democratisation process and human rights.

The President-in-Office has already spoken about screening and I need say no more on that subject.

I should, however, like to say a few more words about the political situation in Turkey.

I am sure that you will agree that a series of incidents over recent months has given real cause for concern.

For example, 18 members of the pro-Kurdish HADEP Party were sentenced to three years and nine months in prison and three leading members of HADEP were taken into custody but then released shortly afterwards.

The three mayors who support HADEP were released after the EU troika had expressed its serious concerns to the Turkish Government.

I particularly regret that Akin Birdal, whose health clearly continues to give cause for concern, was returned to prison on 28 March to serve his four-and-a-half month sentence.

The Commission seriously regrets that Akin Birdal, an advocate of the peaceful solution of conflict and human rights, has been thrown into jail once again.

I am sorry that the opportunity was not taken to suspend imprisonment on humanitarian grounds.

I think that everything points to the urgent need to tackle reforms in a decisive manner and to ensure that freedom of expression is properly protected.

I should like, nonetheless, to draw Parliament' s attention to something which bodes well for the future; I refer to the interministerial government committee in Turkey which is currently advising on the reforms which need to be implemented in order to comply with the political criteria.

This interministerial committee will submit a report - an initial draft was published in the Turkish press recently and the final report will probably be submitted in June - containing specific proposals on political reforms and the legislative changes needed.

I think it is important for you, honourable Members, to bring pressure to bear in future contacts with the Turkish side, especially the Turkish parliament, in order to ensure that the relevant reform proposals are also accepted.

From an economic point of view, Turkey is in a position to make rapid progress.

It has a clear strategy for structural reform, which is supported by the IMF and the World Bank.

I hope that Turkey can cultivate social dialogue and an active labour market policy still further in order to underpin the adjustment process.

The country has a dynamic economy and a highly entrepreneurial population, which will benefit from a more balanced and transparent growth model based on the EU acquis.

Our relations with Turkey entered a new stage after Helsinki and making progress with the new tasks represents a challenge for both sides.

Of course I shall continue to keep you informed of all aspects of these new endeavours.

Mr President, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, Commissioner, your statements have reinforced a belief and an impression I have.

I believe that the journey on which we embarked at Helsinki will be a long one and that no one is yet able to predict where it will end, except in Turkey' s assuming an important position either inside or outside of the European Union.

The public and private sector spokesmen we recently met in Turkey all readily agreed on this.

My feeling is that certain representatives of the Turkish people are discovering, as a result of December' s decision, that accession to the Union will mean not only drastic reform of their institutions, but also radical changes in mindsets.

This is reflected in the distrust shown, as the Commissioner has just reported, towards European institutions in general and the representatives of the European Parliament in particular.

Firstly, there was the refusal of the request to visit Leyla Zana, which resulted in the postponement of the meeting of the joint European Union-Turkey Parliamentary Committee scheduled for 22 and 23 February.

Then, on the same day, at a time when your rapporteur was in Ankara, there was the arrest of three Kurdish mayors from the south-eastern region.

Lastly, on 28 March, there was the arrest and reimprisonment of Akin Birdal, President of the Turkish Association for the Defence of Human Rights, at a time when a delegation from this Parliament was visiting Turkey.

I would ask the Council and the Commission whether it would not be appropriate, given the circumstances, to state quite clearly that while the Union is not in the business of telling anyone what to do, it is founded on the will to promote and safeguard certain fundamental values, prominent among which are respect for human rights and the rights and duties of minorities.

This is what Parliament will once again underline in the resolution, which is to be submitted for the approval of the Members next Thursday, urging the Turkish Government and the political parties of Turkey to turn to good account the constitutional review that is currently in progress in order to implement pressing reforms, in line with the Helsinki Agreements, that will enable the Turkish State to guarantee the democratic rights that we consider essential.

The ball is in Turkey' s court.

It is up to Turkey to decide whether the first obstacles encountered on this new road are to prove insurmountable or not.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I am pleased to hear that both the President-in-Office and the Commissioner have taken stock of the first four months and have come to the conclusion that the climate surrounding relations between the Union and Turkey and the potential for discussion have improved.

We MEPs are particularly pleased because most of us - and this cut across all Groups in the House - expressed our scepticism as to whether the Helsinki resolution was the right resolution at the time.

The European Council in Helsinki did what it was entitled to do and passed a resolution which, when it was passed in Helsinki, incorporated certain expectations of the Turkish side and here the European Parliament is in agreement with the European Council.

Commissioner Verheugen has just recapitulated these expectations.

He has spoken of democracy, the rule of law and the protection of minorities as three basic elements in the expectations which the European Union, the Commission, the Council and the European Parliament have of Turkey and which they have formulated.

Four months after Helsinki, Commissioner, I can say on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists that we fully subscribe to your view that the climate surrounding relations has improved but no progress has been made on the three points which you listed.

It is difficult to discern any further democratic developments during these first four months.

Even progress with the protection of minorities leaves much to be desired and we are somewhat sceptical about the question of the rule of law.

You mentioned the example of Akin Birdal and Turkey must look at this example and ask itself how it intends to make us believe that progress is being made in the areas referred to when incidents occur within the country which, in my opinion, are typified by the example of Mr Birdal.

Mr Birdal advocates solving the problem of minorities without violence.

Mr Birdal' s reputation as a human rights activist extends well beyond the borders of Turkey.

The way in which the Turkish Government has dealt with Mr Birdal, the way in which the Turkish judicial system has dealt with this man seems to be typical of the manner in which Turkey proposes to deal with people who stand for exactly what the European Union is demanding of Turkey.

If politics contains symbolic messages then, in my opinion, the Turkish judicial system has committed a serious error four months on from Helsinki in treating Mr Birdal this way.

We in the European Parliament expect far greater efforts than those made so far and we are assuming that what we are saying in this debate here will not go unheeded.

Mr President, when Turkey joins the European Union the impact and the benefits will be considerable.

The EU will then have to adjust, and in a welcoming way.

But, in the shorter term, it is Turkey which has to adjust the most, in particular to meet the Copenhagen political criteria.

I am glad the Commissioner stressed these.

We cannot fulfil our role of critical friend by soft-pedalling on the need for drastic change, particularly with regard to guaranteeing individual freedom and a legitimate right to the Kurds.

Indeed the key to reform is ending the war against the Kurds, which gives the pretext for the state of emergency and the repression that goes with it.

The Kurds deserve a peaceful settlement involving a degree of political devolution and respect for their cultural and linguistic rights.

To say this is not to be anti-Turkish.

Will not other Turkish citizens benefit also?

The arrest and imprisonment of HADEP leaders like Sakharov prize-winner Leyla Zana and human rights campaigner Akin Birdal is an impediment to Turkey's progress to the EU.

To allow the European Parliament to vote for Turkey's accession when the time comes, reformers in Europe and Turkey must work together to lobby for change, as the Commissioner advised.

Mr President, the majority of my Group supported the Commission' s policy on Turkey and the resolution passed by the Council in Helsinki.

It was and is extremely important to us that the candidate status granted to Turkey should bring about fundamental changes to democracy and hence the way in which human rights are dealt with within Turkey.

We were pleased to acknowledge the declaration by the Turkish Prime Minister that Turkey would meet the Copenhagen criteria as quickly as possible.

The decision to defer the death sentence on Mr Öçalan was also welcomed as a step in the right direction.

However, we were then forced to acknowledge a number of incidents which we were and are unable to accept.

The mayors belonging to HADEP were arrested and we rightly criticised this move.

We are pleased that the Turkish Government reacted quickly and the mayors were released but we shall monitor the court case against them.

The former president of the Turkish human rights association, Akin Birdal, is again under arrest, despite the fact that he requires medical care.

Unfortunately, he must serve another six months of a one-year sentence.

We realise that the measures needed to guarantee the permanent democratisation of Turkish society cannot be introduced overnight.

However, a number of small steps are urgently needed in order to demonstrate that Turkey is prepared to take the path trodden by Spain, Portugal and Greece.

Turkey must at last abolish the death penalty, the only country in Europe yet to do so.

And we should not have to wait for a reform policy on the Kurdish question.

Today' s report from Luxembourg is good news but we would say, nonetheless, that Turkey must realise that respect for human rights and minority rights are prerequisite to any accession negotiations.

We are prepared to be patient as far as the speed of democratisation is concerned. But we will not accept a standstill on this issue.

When my fellow Member Daniel Cohn-Bendit visited Leyla Zana, she said to him - and I think to us too - that we should support the reforms in Turkey and that the Helsinki resolution was Turkey' s only chance.

In this sense we shall continue to support the Helsinki process.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, whoever wants to join the EU must meet the Copenhagen criteria and abolish the death penalty.

Despite frequent promises by the Turkish Government, human rights violations continue there.

I should like to list a few examples. The Kurdistan Democratic Party has been exposed to attack since 20 February.

Three Kurdish mayors belonging to HADEP were arrested recently and then released but are not allowed to leave Turkey.

Then the former and present leaders of HADEP, Murat Bozlak and Ahmet Turan Demir, were sentenced to three years and nine months in prison together with 18 other members of HADEP.

It was maintained that HADEP was supporting and helping the PKK which has opted for peace rather than war.

Akin Birdal has started serving the rest of his sentence.

Thousands of Turkish troops marched into northern Iraq at the beginning of April.

More than 50 000 soldiers are stationed on the border in order to fight the PKK, despite its call for peace.

Why are arms being delivered to Turkey?

More than 300 000 people gathered for the Navruz festival in Diyarbakir under the banner "Peace, Brotherliness and Democracy" .

Having been there, my personal impression is that the people are longing for peace and democracy.

The leader of the ANAP, Mr Mesut Jilmaz, said at an event in Diyarbakir, that the way to the EU was via Diyarbakir.

I therefore call on the Turkish Government to respect human rights and to find a political solution to the Kurdish question.

Because the only way into Europe is via the Copenhagen criteria.

It will be the task of the European Commission and the Council to strengthen their commitment here.

At the moment, the most important task is to advance the democratisation of Turkey, which is why I call on everyone to unite without hesitation and to reinforce democracy and peace.

Mr President, all of us who have visited Turkey recently realise that the picture is very complex.

The first impression is that there is a sort of EU euphoria in Turkey when it comes to the media.

There is a very lively debate in the country.

Secondly, the trade unions, popular movements, etc. all say the same thing.

They think it is positive that Turkey is a candidate country.

We even heard Akin Birdal, on the eve of his imprisonment, say that a new Turkey has been emerging in the last five months.

We must realise that we will have a lot of ups and downs in our relationship and that we will have both progress and setbacks.

Perhaps we are seeing something new being born.

But the old legal system is still there.

That is what is working against democratic fighters such as Akin Birdal.

But we also see the reformists who know very well what has to be done according to the Copenhagen criteria.

One party leader said to us that at least 65 articles of the constitution and penal code had to be changed.

When we spoke to people in that country during the Socialist Group visit we found three different approaches to EU membership.

First you have the anti-reformists, the fundamentalists and so on, who do not want membership.

And then you have the reformists - within the government, administration, human rights groups and other parts of civil society - who really want it.

Then you have a third group, who say that they want Turkey to become a member, but on Turkish terms.

Here the Copenhagen criteria, and the Commission and our screening are very important.

Almost automatically they will have to deliver if Turkey is to become a member one day.

There are two final impressions and messages received from the people we talked to during the two or three days we were there.

The first was that nothing will prevail without a strong civil society in Turkey.

People we met from civil society also said they appreciated the help from the European Union, but that some of it was slow.

We know that and we would like the Commission to look into that.

The other and last message is that yes, we have the road-map. But we need more precision from the road-map.

Help us to be more precise with the road-map because we want to follow it.

Mr President, the question of whether or not Turkey belongs to Europe is not primarily a geographical issue, nor is it primarily an economic one.

The deciding factor, however, will be whether or not Turkey will subscribe to a European set of values in which human rights, democracy and the protection of minorities are guaranteed.

This will not require any sacrifices, probably unlike Turkey' s other issues, but it will be for the good of all inhabitants of Turkey itself.

The political solution to the Kurdish issue would not only liberate the Kurds, it would also take a heavy weight from Turkey' s shoulders.

As a matter of fact, I am of the opinion that we should not aggravate the situation by supplying arms.

I myself am sceptical of Turkey joining the EU, but the current process may well promote peace and stability.

This is why we want to give Turkey the benefit of the doubt.

Whether or not Turkey will join may therefore depend largely on how it will fare in matters pertaining to human rights, democracy and the protection of minorities.

I would like to ask both the Council and the Commission to see things as they really are and not as they appear to be.

I should like to point out that in Helsinki, Greece withdrew its reservations and Turkey became a candidate country.

Greece has made a great many gestures of good will and good neighbourliness, a great many.

Turkey has made none. Even today in the Association Council, Turkey' s Foreign Minister, Mr Cem, said that there is no occupying army in Cyprus, only the army which entered Cyprus in order to liberate Greek and Turkish Cypriots alike.

I just wonder who have they been trying to liberate for the last 25 years, and from whom?

Have they still not managed to do so?

I would point out that, when we visited Turkey as Parliament' s representatives, we asked to see Leyla Zana.

We were not allowed to see her because she was in prison.

Akin Birdal, who held talks with Mr Barón Crespo, was taken into prison while he was standing outside.

I just wonder if the Commission' s regrets will help to get Akin Birdal out of prison tomorrow?

Is that such a drastic step?

Finally, I would like to say, to keep within the time permitted, that only two weeks ago, Turkish newspapers published a list of some 100 European journalists, parliamentarians and other individuals, including Archbishop Christodoulou of Greece, who are persona non grata in Turkey. Today, Mr Cem dismissed the list as media hype; but, at the end of the day, Turkey does in fact reserve the right to publish lists of persona non grata.

I should like to close by saying that I hope they will not get wind of what I have said here today and include me on this list, because I love Istanbul and I like to go there quite often.

Mr President, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, Commissioner, I was a member of the delegation from our Group which visited Turkey.

I do not want to recount my experiences at length, I just want to tell you what my impression was. It was one of disappointment.

I am extremely disappointed that four months after obtaining candidate status, nothing serious has yet been done to move towards compliance with the Copenhagen criteria, especially the political criteria.

Commissioner, you mentioned the interministerial committee.

It is true that numerous structures are being set up.

I have been aware of this in Turkey since 1995.

If they are obliged to comply with something, they start by setting up committees and commissions, interministerial, extraministerial, every sort of committee under the sun.

The structures are superb, we can all agree on that.

For example, it would have been very easy without any committees, without any commissions, to abolish Article 312 of the Criminal Code; all it needed was a vote in the Turkish Grand National Assembly and that would have freed a whole series of intellectuals, authors, journalists and the very same Akin Birdal from jail.

That is how easy it is to take the first steps.

The Turks tell us they need time, they need a great deal of time, because this reform can only be achieved one step at a time.

I told you that numerous fellow Members here in this very House, in the European Parliament, were prepared to allow as much time as they needed, 200 years, 400 years, even more.

But I belong to a Group which enthusiastically helped Turkey to achieve candidate status, not just so that Turkey could be a candidate but to give Turkey a real chance to become a member and start negotiations.

Which is why we want to insist and want to press for Turkey to be helped on its way with a road map and a specific timetable and, of course the accession partnership which the Commissioner referred to earlier, and not just to remain a candidate.

Mr President, Turkey was granted candidate status at the Helsinki Summit, but accession negotiations must go on hold until the necessary internal reforms have been introduced and the human rights situation complies with European principles.

During your recent visit to Ankara, Commissioner Verheugen, you too drew attention to the fact that continuing human rights abuses, the failure to establish rule of law and the fact that no solution had been found to the Kurdish question stood in the way of Turkey' s accession to the EU in the near future.

The unequivocal shortcomings in this area contrast with statements by Prime Minister Ecevit to the effect that Turkey may be ready to start accession negotiations in 2004.

A number of factors which have been listed here several times already make this sort of prognosis appear premature.

Even the fact that the head of government, Mr Ecevit, described Kurdish as a dialect of Turkish, despite the fact that the two languages have fundamentally different roots, is an indication of the hardening of the political situation in Turkey.

The fact that all this has been accompanied by a recent offensive against the PKK in northern Iraq only adds to this impression.

There can be no question of the European Union having any interest in increasing Islamic fundamentalism in Turkey or of wanting to encourage the Trotskyist PKK, which is also guilty of massive human rights violations, to engage in new clashes.

However, one has the impression that anti-European forces within the army and the administration are behind the recent arrests and the new offensive against the PKK in northern Iraq in order to prevent Turkey from moving closer to Europe.

This demonstrates in retrospect that the concessions made to Turkey in Helsinki were perhaps premature and that the strategy towards this country, which is so important to western security, needs to be reviewed.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I have visited Turkey three times in the last six months, once before and twice after the Helsinki resolution.

I experienced surprise after surprise and also disappointment after disappointment.

The situation is in fact as a number of fellow Members have described it.

There are forces which are fighting strongly to move closer to the European Union and there are other forces which reverse all their efforts by carrying out attacks and by putting Akin Birdal back in jail, thereby provoking the pro-European forces.

It is of course a good sign that the Turkish Government now has a written programme setting out the action which Turkey must take on the basis of the demands of the European Union.

And it must take it, because paper alone is cheap.

Changes need to be made here.

The changes also affect the national security council which, according to this proposal, now needs to be reorganised as an advisory council and is no longer the final supreme instance of Turkish democracy or Turkish relations.

It is, of course, a bad sign that there is one incident after another, such as the arrest of Akin Birdal who, as Mr Schori said, has such a positive attitude to the changes in Turkey itself.

It is also a bad sign that no gradual solution has been found to the Kurdish question, the prerequisites for which are much improved today although, Mrs Stenzel, I am unaware of any statement by Ecevit that Kurdish is a Turkish dialect.

What Ecevit said to us was that there were several Kurdish dialects and that he could even imagine Kurdish being used as an official language in Turkey under certain conditions.

I should like to urge you, Mr President-in-Office, to work together with the other fourteen Member States of the European Union to ensure that the European Investment Bank is finally authorised to give Turkey financial support.

It is not easy to ward off criticism in connection with the financial protocol to the effect that we have not kept our promises to support the modernisation and the restructuring of Turkey financially.

My last point is this: of course we are also aware in this House that the question of Turkey, including its relations with Greece, is bound up with the Cyprus issue.

If we could manage to make Turkey more open and more cooperative on the Cyprus question, that would be a very positive development.

However, I should like to say quite clearly on behalf of our Group and, I believe, on behalf of many others, that unless Turkey itself does what it has to on the question of human rights and democracy, even if is cooperative on the issue of Cyprus, and unless Turkey shows that it is willing to change its internal democratic system, there can be no accession to Europe.

Mr President, the discussion here today is quite an interesting one; nonetheless, we should see to it that Turkey is judged in light of the clear-cut European criteria and that Greco-Turkish relations are not used as a fig leaf to mask a different reality.

I would like to add two or three minor points.

Turkey has its internal problems, but it has its external problems, too. It could, for instance, show willing by accepting the jurisdiction of the court in The Hague, or the Court of Human Rights.

But no, this is not the case.

Secondly, in our endeavours to help Turkey integrate into the European Union, we must be strict when it comes to compliance with the political requirements we have laid down.

In this sense, if we try to paint a skewed picture of reality, then of course it will be a false one. And in politics, false realities produce false results.

As for the problems cited by Turkey, there is Kemal Ataturk' s theory which says that "there is a danger that our unity will crumble and henceforth we should not say that we are Turks, we should say that we call ourselves Turks" .

There is a huge difference in meaning, because to say I am not a Turk, but I call myself a Turk leads some to reason that all nationalities should be ground together into one pulp from which a new human race can evolve.

As you know, historically, such a thing is just not possible.

In this sense, it is clear that, first, the democratization of Turkey must be the most we can strive for and, at the same time, the very least and, secondly, we should put an end to Turkey' s fears that it will crumble as a nation if its recognizes the rights it should be according minority groups, because there are not only the Kurdish minorities, there are also Arabs, crypto-Christians, and other minority groups.

In any case, what is certain is that if we do want to help Turkey, we must insist that the political criteria are respected, and I would like to add the following: to date at least, as far as I know, the only real forces in Turkey in favour of the European strategy are the forces of economy and we should bear this in mind.

. (PT) Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I would like to thank all the Members of the European Parliament for their contributions to this debate.

I have not interpreted their opinions and points of view as giving a red light to this policy, which says 'no, this policy is wrong and we want a different one. We want to deny Turkey the right ever to join the European Union' .

And this is something upon which we agree.

I considered the speeches to be demanding ones, calling for the whole process to be scrutinised thoroughly.

The European Parliament obviously has an important role to play in this.

Turkey will not be admitted to the European Union without the European Parliament' s approval.

Well, the decisions made at Helsinki are demanding ones, with clear benchmarks, and we are not currently negotiating Turkey' s accession to the European Union.

Turkey has merely been recognised as a candidate.

In fact, as long ago as 1963, the Ankara Agreement established the possibility that Turkey might join the European Union, with the association agreement to evolve through an initial stage, a transitional stage and a final stage.

The Copenhagen criteria are clear and Turkey must not be discriminated against, either positively or negatively.

Furthermore, the very fact that we are currently making good progress with the planned enlargement of the Union to include Central and Eastern Europe enables us to prove that Turkey is not being discriminated against.

On the contrary, it is being given equal treatment, in the sense that it must comply with a body of legislation, it must amend its own laws and it must behave in the same way in this process as the other countries that have applied for membership.

I can tell you that the Commission is not carrying out an assessment even now.

This has not yet started, but the Commission has been instructed to prepare it.

The Commission is involved in bilateral discussions with Turkey in order to provide it with information on the acquis communautaire.

We have not even moved to the negotiating stage in which the assessment will be undertaken in a multilateral context, with the participation of all countries.

We are, therefore, at an exploratory stage.

We are giving Turkey powerful messages about the need for it to reform itself through its institutions, its laws and its administrative procedures.

We in the Association Council have been very strict with Turkey and Turkey has, to some extent, recognised shortcomings and has stated its willingness to improve them, in particular with regard to laws governing the press, criminal law and the way in which citizenship rights are recognised, specifically in the cultural and language fields.

I think that here too, real progress has been made, although perhaps not progress which has a clear legal form yet.

There have also been steps backwards and we have expressed our deep disappointment at the fate of the leader of one of the most representative human rights organisations, and that of certain council leaders and politicians who have recently been arrested.

It is obvious that the Turkish political process is a complex one.

However, something that can be acknowledged today is that, contrary to what used to happen in crisis situations, when Turkey was always tempted to use military power or to use extremist internal forces, thanks to the guidelines and the frameworks that were laid down in Helsinki, this strategy has contributed in Turkey to the consolidation of pro-European forces, which will, of course, have to develop a completely pro-European programme in terms of constitutional reform, political changes and new legislation.

Criticism must be levelled at the Turks, not in order to prevent them from continuing in this process, but we must monitor the situation closely so that they can implement the changes necessary for this process to continue successfully.

Mr President, I should like to subscribe to the President-in-Office' s evaluation and to say that I feel this debate was helpful and supports the line which the Commission has followed.

It does not matter that Parliament has taken a more critical stance than I am able to do at present, for reasons which you will understand.

I have drawn the Turkish Government' s, the Turkish parties' and the Turkish parliament' s attention to the role of the European Parliament in ensuring that no political compromises are made with candidates during access negotiations and in Turkey' s preparations for access negotiations which contradict the Copenhagen criteria.

I should like to expressly stress here that there can be no discounts for anyone, including Turkey, when it comes to accession conditions.

I should also like to repeat here what I have said on previous occasions: we must be conscious of the fact that the process which we have now set in motion will not be without its setbacks.

I do not know what is easy and what is difficult to do in Turkey.

But I do know one thing and that is that a debate is currently taking place in Turkey of which we only hear a part, a debate which will decide on the fate of the country and, partly on the fate of Europe too.

It is in our interests that the reform-orientated, democratic, pro-Europe forces carry the motion in this debate.

I should like to close by saying that we are still just right at the beginning.

We are in fact at the beginning of the beginning.

We are only just preparing the pre-accession strategy.

We have no pre-accession strategy yet which is why I think it is slightly premature to start talking about disappointments or about the need for a new strategy.

By definition, strategies only deserve to be called such when they can go the whole course.

I therefore advise on a little patience here.

We shall see things more clearly, we shall know what specific progress we can expect in the autumn, once all the elements of the pre-accession strategy have been defined and once we have received Turkey' s reply.

This reply must be given this year and must refer clearly and unequivocally to what we expect of Turkey and must tell us exactly what Turkey intends to do.

That will be the time to say more than was possible today in this cautious evaluation.

The vote will take place at the next voting session.

Deliberate release into the environment of GMOs

The next item is the recommendation for second reading (A5-0083/2000) by Mr Bowe, on behalf of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to adopting a European Parliament and Council directive amending Directive 90/220/EEC on the deliberate release into the environment of genetically modified organisms (11216/1/1999 - C5-0012/2000 - 1998/0072(COD)).

Mr President, I think that today the European Parliament is faced with one of its more important debates in the last few years, given that it is dealing with the dangers of the release of genetically modified organisms into our environment.

It seems to me that this vote could be a watershed.

It would, we hope, give us a new tough set of rules that would ensure that genetically modified crops and other GMO products are used throughout Europe in a safe and sensible way that ensures protection of the environment and guarantees the safety of public health.

There are a number of critical issues which need to be addressed.

The first and the most important is the issue of producer liability.

The European Parliament has long called for legislation which would ensure that companies that want to produce genetically modified organisms would be totally responsible for the products they produce.

In other words, under the terms of the amendments, companies would be required to take out insurance to cover any possible damage to human health or the environment caused by GMOs and could be sued if their crops escaped and created super-wheats or contaminated organic crops or if GM crops were found to damage human health.

Regrettably, instead of accepting their full responsibilities, a number of companies have been launching massive campaigns behind the scenes to try and stop this proposal from advancing.

I am in no doubt that when we have the discussion tomorrow many MEPs will be confused and perhaps split in their vote on this issue.

I feel that the compromise we have found with the Christian Democrats is one that is viable and workable and I hope it will find support here.

At the same time the European Commission can endorse it by giving further reassurances about their own proposals for such a liability measure.

I want to see that European Commission proposals have real teeth when it comes to this Parliament in the not too distant future.

In addition to that critical issue there are also a number of other important questions.

I hope that tomorrow my colleagues will renew their support, as they did at first reading, for the demands for strong new limits on the use of GMOs containing genes with resistance to antibiotics.

Parliament has in the past called for a ban on all GM crops and foods containing such antibiotic-resistant genes, even those used for research.

Tomorrow we may take a softer line, but nevertheless we want to see action in this area.

We want to ensure that serious consideration is given to the dangers of using these crops.

Other measures that I think we need - and on which I would seek the support of the Parliament tomorrow - include new measures to restrict the dangers of the cross-breeding of GMO plants with naturally occurring wild relatives.

We need to ensure that when products are placed in the field, whether they are plants or whether they are animals, they do not cross-breed and irreparably damage the balance that exists in the natural environment around them.

We must also address an issue which was avoided at first reading, and that is the question of the control of the import and export of GMO crops and other GMO products.

Here we need to go to at least as far and perhaps beyond the measures agreed in the Bio-Safety Protocol in Montreal in January.

Many people fear the possible consequences of genetic pollution and it is our job to respond to those fears.

Those fears have recently been heightened by the discovery of GMO-contaminated cotton-seed imported from the USA into Greece for cotton production, which for the moment at least has no approval at all for commercial planting within the EU but nevertheless has found its way across our borders and into use in at least one Member State.

We have been lobbied by very many groups during the process of developing this legislation.

Not just the industry but also Friends of the Earth and Greenpeace have given their backing to various aspects of Parliament's report.

They have supported us in continuing to press the Council of Ministers to agree on new GMO rules on licensing as quickly as possible, to bring to an end the de facto moratorium on new GMO commercial approvals, which has been in operation since the Commission published its proposal almost two years ago.

The lobbying has become quite intense in the last few weeks.

The outcome of the vote in Parliament tomorrow is likely to bring a few shocks and surprises.

But it should mean that in six months' time the European Parliament, the Council of Ministers and the Commission will have arrived at an agreed proposal, at a revised directive for the commercialisation of biotechnological inventions and biotechnological products.

That should give biotechnology companies and others involved in the industry a clear idea of the rules that they have adhere to and consequently a more transparent and predictable regime.

That can be only good for the future development of this new technology within the European Union.

At the same time, I would hope that our governments will be able to assure their consumers and their people that GMOs released into the environment anywhere in Europe will meet the much more stringent standards that we are fixing here in Parliament tomorrow and that the public concerns regarding the protection of human health and the environment from the dangers of GMO inventions have been properly addressed.

And I hope one of the significant non-legislative outcomes of this process will be a shift in the balance of power in the approval and control of GMO crops and food in favour of the public.

For the biotechnology industry that can only be to the good.

It will create an atmosphere, a situation in which it can work carefully, thoroughly and I hope successfully to make positive use of this very brave new technology that we should all welcome, with the appropriate safeguards.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I should like to start by thanking the rapporteur, David Bowe, for his hard work.

He really has tried to find compromises on this complicated issue but has not succeeded in finding compromises in all areas which all the Groups here in the House are able to support, which is why we shall be voting on one or two points tomorrow.

Those who know me know that I am not a blind advocate of genetic engineering.

I even have mixed feelings about the announcements which we heard last week on the almost complete decoding of the human genome because I think that we do not yet have enough strict rules in the European Union on the application of biotechnology to human beings in this way.

However, today we are debating the release of genetically modified organisms, especially plants.

And in my view, and in the view of the PPE, this is a different kettle of fish.

The common position is not too weak to guarantee public safety, as some would have us believe; on the contrary, it is very, very strong.

It makes provision for a great many rules to govern monitoring, labelling and informing the public.

The common position offers an adequate level of safety for both man and the environment, which is why the PPE is against tightening up the common position, especially in certain critical areas.

If certain amendments calling for stricter provisions are accepted, then we can kiss biotechnology in the area of plants goodbye and we can totally ban it right away, but that is not what we want to do.

Take the example of genetic transfer.

All we hear about are Frankenstein plants and superweeds.

However, if you study the subject in detail, you will see that it is not a fact that cross-pollination from genetically modified plants is always an environmental disaster.

I have a key witness here.

The former research policy spokesperson for the Greens in the Bundestag once said that no Frankenstein plants were growing in the fields.

Unfortunately, the Greens did not nominate him again for the Bundestag, but he is right nonetheless, which is why we have tabled a motion stating that we should keep an eye on these risks but not totally ban genetic transfer.

We are also opposed to discrimination against biotechnology when it comes to liability.

We do not want specific genetic engineering liability, we want general environmental liability.

It has frequently been said that the Commission must be forced to do something at long last.

I share that view but we must first praise Mrs Wallström here: she promised during the hearing in the European Parliament that she would present a White Paper on environmental liability and she has done so.

Her predecessor failed to do so for several years and we should now move forward on the basis of this White Paper and decide on specific liability rules to be incorporated in the directive.

The common position is not too weak; in our view it is too strong on certain points.

The general 10-year limitation on release consent is impracticable for plant cultivation, which is why we support the motion tabled here by David Bowe that the 10-year period should only apply from the first registration of the plants.

I think that the common position gives us good control of the risks.

We should not make the mistake of gambling away biotechnology' s chances, which is why we shall not be voting in favour of all the tabled amendments.

I should like first of all to thank Mr Bowe for the work that has been done on the recommendation for second reading on amendment of the directive on the deliberate release into the environment of genetically modified organisms.

I think it is a very competent piece of work, and I think some important improvements have been made to the common position.

I shall single out the points I think are most important.

First and foremost, I think it is right that we should now have an actual ban proposed on the use of substances which can produce resistance to antibiotics.

I think it is important for health reasons.

The second point I would make is that, unlike Mr Liese, I am in favour of including proposals to the effect that measures should, if possible, be taken to prevent gene-transfer from GMOs to other organisms, otherwise known as GMO contamination.

I also think it is important that risks should not be assessed on a case-by-case basis when applications and requests concerning consents are examined. Instead, an attempt should be made to carry out an overall assessment of the accumulated effects of the many consents which are issued upon the fertility of the soil, the food chain, biological diversity and the health issues which are of importance to us as human beings.

I think that is a major flaw in current practice in this area.

In this connection, I also think that consents ought to be reviewed every ten years, so that they can only be issued for up to ten years at a time.

In that way, we can be properly sure that the necessary monitoring is carried out.

I also think it is right that this proposal should provide us with legislation ensuring that, whenever vertical legislation is enacted in specific areas, the same conditions regarding risk assessment and monitoring should be complied with as also apply in the case of the general directive.

Finally, I would call attention to the question of objective liability.

I agree with the original proposal in Mr Bowe' s report to the effect that businesses seeking consents should be made objectively liable and that liability insurance must also be taken out in connection with an application for consent.

If insurance cannot be taken out to cover such circumstances, then the risk in granting a licence is too great.

I hope we shall see the adoption of these amendments designed to tighten up on the common position.

If they are adopted, I also believe we shall obtain a legal basis for granting future consents for GMOs which serves our interests and which will provide the necessary security.

In that way, we shall, in actual fact, obtain the legal basis that should have been in place before the first consent for new GMO crops was issued.

In my opinion, the present legal basis is far too weak.

Mr President, I would like to stress that this is a debate on procedural questions regarding the deliberate release into the environment of genetically modified organisms, or GMOs.

Contrary to what one might think, this is not a fundamental debate on the pros and cons of GMOs or its principles, for that matter.

Needless to say, how we perceive GMOs will be reflected in the positions we adopt during the discussion about these procedures and the framework around them.

In simple terms: in the extensive amendments to this report, which is excellent by the way, the most important aspect seems to be that either we decide to make life easier for the GMO industry or we decide to give it sleepless nights.

But the discussion also reveals that the production of genetically modified food has prompted quite a few questions: ethical and moral questions, questions related to public health and the environment, questions as to what opportunities industry and research are given and questions regarding the freedom of choice for consumers.

The following points are key issues for the Liberal group and these will also influence our voting behaviour.

First and foremost, there is the issue of the freedom of choice for consumers.

It is, of course, too crazy for words, really, that if you want GM-free food, you will need to settle for food with a guaranteed maximum GMO content of 1%.

This is not dealt with as such in the draft directive but public information, labelling and transparency which crop up in this context are very much part and parcel of this issue.

Secondly, we would like to see the public have plenty of opportunity to have its say during the approval procedure of GMOs.

Thirdly, we would welcome a streamlined procedure that offers security to both consumers and producers and, as far as we are concerned, better harmonisation throughout the European Union.

Fourthly, we would like to see research promoted in Europe in the field of biotechnology so as to offer more clarity regarding what is and is not feasible.

One controversial issue is producer liability.

We are in favour of the self-regulating effect this has.

Ideally, we would like to see this liability included in the long-awaited horizontal regulation of environmental liability.

However, some of us are tired of waiting for this horizontal regulation in which the Commission has been engrossed for some 10 years now, and we want to move forward.

The present proposal is important to both producers and consumers and is welcomed by the liberal group.

We, too, would like to congratulate the diligent rapporteur on this report.

Mr President, where the release of genetically modified crops into the environment is concerned, the precautionary principle must be the decisive factor.

At present, it ought to entail a moratorium on the release of new genetically modified crops into the environment.

Scientific ambiguities, especially where the risk of dissemination is concerned, and deficiencies in legislation and in the application of international agreements are both factors which justify a moratorium.

We also consider that each EU country should be entitled to have a tougher policy than the EU in this area, and we shall therefore vote against Amendment No 6 concerning a common EU procedure governing the release of genetically modified organisms into the environment.

The proposals to be adopted tomorrow will not go anything like so far as we would have wished.

We shall therefore vote in favour of as satisfactory a solution as possible to the issue as a whole.

This means that we shall be voting in favour of most, but not all, of the proposals in the Bowe report.

We shall be voting in favour of a situation in which those who release genetically modified crops into the environment are held fully liable under civil law.

We want to see an end to the use of antibiotic resistance markers We want to see clear, compulsory labelling, and we demand that each application should be dealt with separately, and with no use of simplified application procedures.

We are also in favour of having a clear obligation for the provision of information and in favour of recipient countries' being approved in the case of exports to third countries.

Mr President, in February 1999, we discussed the revision of Directive 90/220 at first reading.

I would remind you that in his contribution, Mr Blokland talked about the importance of the precautionary principle.

We are thus delighted that the Council has underlined this principle in the common position.

Both in the main body of the Directive itself, notably in Article 1, and in its application, the precautionary principle has been accorded an important role when it comes to weighing it up against economic interests.

I mainly have the restriction of the simplified procedure and the attention to GMO traceability in mind.

On the whole, we should therefore be satisfied with the present proposals.

We are thankful to Mr Bowe for his report, which once again contains proposals which we are totally behind.

We are particularly delighted with the stricter wording related to reducing the risks for consumers.

Compared to Amendment No 32, the original Amendment to Article 28 (1) was more forceful, in our opinion.

It very explicitly spelled out the possibility of consulting ethical committees in the case of ethical issues.

The present Amendment No 32, on the other hand, only underlines the importance of being open with the public.

Finally, I would like to point out that it is not sufficient to map out and restrict the risks pertaining to these new production methods.

Plants and animals are not production factors which can simply be manipulated.

The biotechnology debate requires an integral ethical approach.

We believe that God created the world.

Based on this awareness, we need to treat the natural world around us responsibly.

Mr President, this is a debate about plant research and plant protection from research.

It is a debate about the potential of GMOs for good and their potential for risk, and how you manage that risk.

You cannot abolish risk because it is part of our natural environment.

We cannot prevent all man-made risk because that would end scientific progress.

But we must respond to public concern about the potential and unknown dangers to our environment, to our food chain and to our health.

I believe there are four areas where we must act to reassure the public.

I believe we can do so without destroying biotechnology.

Firstly, antibiotic-resistant genes must be phased out.

The amendment sets a realistic, but urgent date of 2005 for that.

Secondly, we must be open with the public about where experimental crops are being grown.

In return we must ask environmental action groups to show restraint and responsibility with regard to that knowledge.

Thirdly, we must build on the Montreal Protocol as far as the export of GMOs is concerned, and this should be done on the basis of mutual agreement and transparency.

Fourthly, as many Members have said, we must ensure liability; but it is a question of whether we need any greater liability than applies to other environmental risks.

I suspect we do not, so long as we already have criminal, civil, product and environmental liability in law.

That should suffice, but it is wise to add the provision on negligence as something which can be brought into play within the courts.

We can gain real benefits from GMOs if we get it right.

Fewer crop sprays, for example, would benefit the environment if we grew GMO crops that did not need so many crop sprays.

But we have to take the public with us, with the science.

I believe these measures will help to do just that.

Mr President, ideally GMOs should not be released into the environment.

But if it is going to happen there have to be a number of measures taken to ensure that the industries that say this technology is safe take responsibility.

That is why I cannot understand why the industry and the lobbyists are so concerned about the issue of liability.

If they are so sure that their products are safe then why are they afraid to take responsibility, both as regards liability and compensation?

The other issue I should like to address is the contamination of gene transfer.

We have a situation where, for example, conventional farms can be contaminated with GMOs.

That means there is no free choice, either for the farmers themselves - and that goes for organic farmers too - or for the consumers, in the long run.

If you have contamination of conventional farms or organic farms, there is basically no free option for the consumer.

At the end of the day, the GMO industry does not have anything to offer the consumer or the environment, even as regards the use of chemicals.

It is ironic to think that the same industries that are promoting this so-called chemical-free agriculture are the very same ones that have bombarded us with chemicals over the years and are making those crops reliant on chemicals in the future as well.

Mr President, I would like to thank Mr Bowe for his report and, in one minute, mention four fundamental questions which have already been discussed.

Firstly, the protection of public health.

It seems to us that we should strictly forbid the use of antibiotic-resistant genes.

Germany, Luxembourg and Austria have shown the way by banning Novartis maize, which has a gene which is resistant to ampicillin, a wide spectrum antibiotic.

Secondly, the commitment to international agreements.

Amendment No 1 refers to the Montreal Protocol and the need to defend biosafety and the consultation of and request for authorisation from non-EU countries for exports.

Thirdly, the civil liability clause, which is clearly necessary for those who are responsible for the release of these genetically modified organisms which may have effects on health or the environment.

Finally, Mr President, the prevention of genetic contamination.

This means preventing the spreading of transgenic pollen which may travel and contaminate other plants and, therefore, seriously affect the environment.

Mr President, I should like to start by complimenting Mr Bowe on his objective and balanced presentation.

In previous debates in Parliament I have put on record my own views in relation to biotechnology.

In the short time available, I appeal to the Commission and, indeed, Parliament to urgently expedite the conclusions necessary to allay consumer fears concerning the public health, environmental and ethical aspects of a technology which has the potential to make a significant contribution to food production and public health.

Of course there are concerns on the part of consumers.

They are entitled to an in-depth and independent evaluation of what is a rapidly changing technology.

The longer we allow the confusion to exist, the greater the delay in enabling society to benefit from its full potential.

In this regard the bio-industry has itself contributed in no small way to public unease by the planned introduction of unacceptable practices such as seed-terminator technology and other ethical issues such as experimentation with human embryos.

It was the vigilance of this Parliament in particular that raised a warning flag in relation to many aspects of the application of this research.

But there are now welcome indications that the industry has taken on board Parliament's concern in this regard.

An indication of the potential of genetic research to make a positive contribution to food production is demonstrated by the very recent announcement by Monsanto of a significant breakthrough on the genetic structure of rice, which is the staple food on which millions in the developing world depend and about which there is considerable concern with regard to the continuity of supply.

The bottom line in relation to every aspect of the application of GMO technology, particularly in food production, is transparency, consumer information and accurate labelling.

In short, the consumer must at all times be given a choice.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, European consumers are justifiably concerned about genetically modified organisms and their release.

The industrial lobby continues, unscrupulously and in the name of the great god profit, to play the sorcerer' s apprentice, juggling dangerously with food safety and consumer health.

It is Europe' s duty to pass stringent legislation that will make these alchemists accountable and to guarantee product quality whilst also providing citizens with clear information.

We totally agree with the line of thinking adopted in this report.

The emphasis should be placed on the traceability facilitated by comprehensive information, including that aimed at third countries which import or export GMOs.

Indeed, consumer safety calls for equal treatment with a view to avoiding any deflection of trade or the export of products unsaleable on the European market.

We must also require the prior approval of the recipient country before any trade can take place.

If the liability of the operator responsible for release is to be officially established, it would also be advisable to define this liability precisely and unhurriedly, in order to avoid introducing an over-general concept of environmental liability.

Lastly, the risks to the environment should be assessed via an annual cost-benefit analysis of these GMO releases, carried out in a transparent manner and extended to cover animal and plant health as well as public and private goods.

Mr President, there has been a significant increase in biotechnology applications and they are becoming more and more important both to the economy and to society, because using applications derived from genetically-modified organisms will be instrumental in improving our quality of life.

Hence, it is essential that we introduce a modern framework governing the development, marketing and exploitation of genetically-modified organisms.

Europe must not be left behind the USA and Japan.

This, however, does not mean that we should overlook the safety issues surrounding these innovative applications, such as public health safety and environmental protection.

I must point out that we have all witnessed the ongoing war of words recently over the safety of genetically modified organisms.

This has led to confusion amongst consumers and has resulted in their being unable to form a sound judgement on the benefits and dangers of biotechnology.

We should therefore win consumer confidence and the way to do so is by improving safety standards.

For example, we can build up public confidence by banning the creation or use of GMOs containing antibiotic-resistant genes and by providing agencies and the general public with detailed and objective information.

Parliament called at first reading for amendments to be incorporated into this directive which cover the above two objectives, i.e. the creation of a useful framework of rules for the deliberate release and trade in GMOs, accompanied by safety measures for the protection of public health and the environment and information for the public and consumers.

It is also important for provision to be made for the directive to be adjusted and amended in line with new developments resulting from the fast pace of change in biotechnology and its applications.

In closing, I should like to dwell on one point which I stressed in the Committee on the Environment and which deserves our particular attention, and that is the issue of safety.

We are awaiting a more general proposal from the Commission on product liability and safety.

We must not overreact if we want this directive to promote and support such a promising sector.

Mr President, to genetically modify food means to break through the barrier that divides different species, for example by introducing a fish gene into a strawberry.

This is not possible in conventional agriculture.

Tinkering with genes holds unknown risks.

This is why measures are needed to prevent gene transfer so that this fish gene cannot contaminate conventionally or organically grown strawberries.

According to the gene tech industry, the risks of such unwanted contamination are low.

If these risks are so low, why is it then that the gene tech industry refuses to accept any legal liability?

But maybe there is a risk for the environment and human health and in those cases, such a liability clause is most definitely needed.

The Christian Democrats are playing a dangerous game.

Whilst they are in favour of a liability clause in the directive on disposing of dangerous waste, they suddenly want to wait five years when it comes to gene technology.

If liability pertaining to gene food is not regulated now, suspicion among the public regarding this type of food will only grow.

The Christian Democratic position will rebound perfectly off the gene industry.

Mr President, genetic engineering and biotechnology are the key technologies of the future.

If we in the EU hamper or even block the use of genetically modified organisms, we shall be manoeuvring ourselves into a backwater in this important area.

We are already lagging far behind other countries.

The resultant competitive disadvantages for researchers, breeders, seed growers, farmers and even consumers would be immense.

But it is precisely these obstruction tactics which several groups within the European Union are applying.

They of course appear to be rather ideological in nature because generally there are no material grounds for them.

This attempt at obstruction can be found in a series of proposed amendments in the Bowe report.

They are distinguished by the fact that they demand the impossible, knowing full well that these demands cannot be met and can therefore block the release of GMOs in general.

This applies in particular to genetic transfer, which simply cannot be prevented in the open air, and to the question of liability.

The call for special liability means that farmers dare not use GMOs.

I also think that keeping a register of cultivated land beyond the experimental stage is unrealistic because I assume that 80-90% of farmland would be entered in such as register in a few years' time.

No one wants to play down genetic engineering, including me.

But nor can we demonise it.

Farmers have always endeavoured to use targeted breeding and cultivation techniques in order to develop efficient plant and animal material.

Techniques continue to develop, including in breeding and cultivation and one new technique is genetic modification.

It is our task to ensure that this technology is used responsibly, not to prevent it.

Mr President, I would urge colleagues to strengthen this report by insisting on environmental liability.

Producers of GMOs should be required to take out insurance against any damage to human health or to the environment from the release of their products.

The Commission promised the introduction of horizontal legislation over ten years ago.

But even though we now have a White Paper, the actual legislation is some years away.

This means that, if it is not accepted into this directive, the victims will have to pay for any damage instead of the companies that are making the profits.

Thousands of people across Europe have chosen not to buy products containing GMOs because of the evidence of health and environmental damage.

We must address those very real issues.

I would urge colleagues to accept my group's amendments on liability insurance, GMO contamination and the ban on antibiotic-resistant genes.

Consumers are demanding the strictest controls and will be satisfied by nothing less.

It is vital that all the necessary safeguards are now included in this directive.

Mr President, I am pleased that Parliament, in collaboration with the Council, is now finally in a position to give Europe a chance to make its influence felt in the sphere of GMOs.

We must be careful, however, that we do not now just sit back in the belief that we have finished our work.

We have selected an authorisation procedure which is more restrictive than its American equivalent, and this will of course be significant in terms of our ability to hold onto the best companies and researchers.

The time limits we adopt for processing applications should not, therefore, be applied as the rule but, instead, constitute an absolute maximum.

We must reject the proposal that the entire liability for any damage should be shifted onto whoever has released the GMOs into the environment.

A natural consequence of Europe' s strict authorisation procedure must be that the authorities assume a portion of the liability.

Only by sharing the liability between the authorities and businesses in this way will it be possible to offset the competitive disadvantages presented by the laborious approval procedure, and only in this way will be able to compete with the Americans.

Mr President, when I started at the Commission last autumn I realised very quickly that the directive on the deliberate release of GMOs would be one of the most sensitive dossiers under my responsibility.

Genetically modified products and biotechnology give rise to a number of questions and concerns.

The most important are perhaps: what are the benefits?

How do we best avoid possible negative effects?

How do we ensure that we have access to all the relevant information?

To tackle these three concerns raised by our citizens we need a wide and open debate where all key players participate and the discussion cannot be limited only to the experts.

Here the European institutions, the Member States, industry and science all have to take their responsibilities.

The basis for meeting these new challenges has to be an efficient and transparent legislative framework.

I should especially like to thank the rapporteur, Mr Bowe, and the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy for their hard work in making a rapid and important contribution.

Our role as European policymakers should be to provide for a balanced response to these new challenges.

We need a regulatory framework, based on safety and the precautionary principle which ensure a high level of protection for human health and environment.

At the same time, it has to allow society to benefit from the development of modern biotechnology.

Our European legislation on GMOs guarantees an individual and thorough risk assessment of each GMO product placed on the European market.

We are here today to strengthen and improve the existing framework.

The sensitivity and complexity of the matter might explain why we are confronted with a total number of 52 amendments at second reading.

The Commission can accept in their entirety Amendments Nos 9, 17, 19, 29 and 47, which improve the quality and the clarity of the texts.

The Commission can also accept in principle Amendments Nos 1 to 4, 8, 11, 24, 35 to 38, 46, 48, 49 and 52.

They further strengthen the intention of the Commission to establish an efficient transparent and balanced regulatory framework for GMOs.

Let me comment further on Amendment No 1 and Amendments Nos 13, 14 and 28, which all relate to the biosafety protocol and obligations for imports and exports of GMOs.

The European Community was one of the driving forces in the successful adoption of the Cartagena Protocol on biosafety in January.

The Commission therefore welcomes the spirit of Amendment No 1.

This refers to the need to submit the appropriate proposals for the implementation of the protocol when ratified - work has already begun.

However, the Commission cannot accept the inclusion of provisions on import and export obligations in the text of the directive.

We believe that the implications of the protocol on the overall European Union legislative framework have yet to be fully assessed.

Amendments Nos 13, 14 and 28 are therefore not acceptable in the present revision.

Let me now turn to the issue of liability, and I know that this is an important political subject for all of you.

When I made my presentation to Parliament in the autumn I promised that I would make particular reference to GMOs in the White Paper on environmental liability.

The Commission did exactly that when adopting the White Paper this year.

The Commission is of the opinion that a horizontal approach is the most efficient way to guarantee a comprehensive responsibility regime for environmental damage.

This will provide clarity for complainants and prevent loopholes.

This is also the best way to complement the existing horizontal system for product liability already covering GMOs.

I can assure you that I will do my utmost to be able to present a proposal for legislation on liability before the end of 2001.

I can therefore accept Amendments Nos 2, 36 and 46 in principle, as far as they refer to the Commission White Paper.

Let us be clear, if this is put in this directive, rules will have to be made to ensure legal clarity, and how long will that take?

It must be seen in that context.

However, I cannot accept Amendments Nos 33, 40 and 45.

I am also fully aware of the political importance of certain other aspects raised by the proposed amendments.

It is clear that antibiotic resistance marker genes need to be phased out and be replaced with alternatives as soon as practically possible.

A phase-out is already foreseen in the common position.

The Commission agrees to strengthen this political message.

The Commission cannot agree to a general ban of GMOs containing antibiotic resistance marker genes.

At the moment there is no scientific evidence that all GMOs of this type present adverse effects to human health and the environment.

Instead, we should continue to carry out a comprehensive case-by-case risk analysis.

Within these limits, Amendments Nos 11, 37, 48 and 52 are therefore acceptable in principle.

The Commission can also accept in principle Amendments Nos 3, 4, 8, 24 and 35 to the extent that they are in line with the logic of the texts and fit within the overall legislative framework.

The Commission can therefore agree to a recital concerning socio-economic aspects which refers to the reporting obligation of the Commission.

This will be done every three years under Article 30.

The Commission welcomes Amendments Nos 38 and 49 concerning gene transfer.

They constitute a balanced approach between a total prevention and a permissive approach.

However, the wording should be aligned with the text of the directive.

In addition, the Commission reference should be deleted since the Commission does not necessarily play a role under Part B - national consent.

However, the Commission cannot accept Amendment No 12 concerning the prevention of gene transfer.

Gene transfer between organisms is, as we know, a common phenomenon in nature.

Instead we need to ensure that potential risks from gene transfer are thoroughly assessed before GMO products are released for research or placed on the market.

The Commission cannot accept Amendments Nos 22 and 23 as they stand, since the provisions foreseen in these amendments would not be workable within the authorisation system established by the directive.

This is both for administrative and legal reasons.

The Commission, however, acknowledges that these amendments aim at addressing the possible problems that certain industries might face with strict time-limited consent.

This concerns in particular the plant breeding industry.

The Commission will therefore consider how due account can be taken of these concerns while ensuring political, legal and administrative consistency.

In this context, Amendment No 26 is also not acceptable since this would limit the flexibility of the optional time limitation of consent for the renewal.

Amendment No 25 seeks to introduce a provision which allows for the introduction of differentiated procedures under Part C of the directive.

This builds on the original proposal as presented at first reading in Parliament.

However, this amendment goes beyond the Commission proposal and is therefore not acceptable to the Commission as it stands.

The Commission is, however, willing to reconsider this amendment in the light of its original proposal and within the framework of an overall compromise.

Finally, I should like to deal as a package with the amendments I have not yet addressed.

The Commission cannot accept Amendment No 21 since the legal basis of future legislative measures is subject to its content and cannot be established in advance by this directive.

Amendment No 6, concerning a centralised Community procedure, is not acceptable.

However, I should like to stress that careful evaluation of a centralised procedure would be done in the Commission report required under Article 30 of the directive.

Access to the work of the European Group on Ethics and their opinions is an important of the general evaluation.

The Commission is, however, of the opinion that this is already appropriately covered in the Rules of Procedure of the Committee.

Amendment No 32 is therefore not acceptable.

Amendments Nos 5, 7, 10, 15, 16, 18, 20, 27, 30, 31, 34, 39, 41 to 44, 50 and 51 are also not acceptable since they would introduce legal and technical uncertainty or jeopardise the overall balance achieved in the common position.

To conclude, we urgently need a revised Directive 90/220.

It has to ensure a high level of protection for human health and the environment and, at the same time, allow society to profit from the benefits of these new technologies.

To strike the right balance between these two justified concerns we need a transparent process, a wide dialogue and strong political leadership.

We all have to take our responsibilities in achieving this, and this is the only way in which we will win the trust and confidence of our citizens.

Mr President, I think that tomorrow' s vote is so important that I should like to ask the Commissioner to clarify two points so that we know what we are voting on tomorrow.

Commissioner, my first question is this: have I understood you correctly, can you promise that you are making provision for an environmental liability with compulsory insurance, yes or no?

I just want a yes or no.

Or is it correct that you only agree to liability as set out in the White Paper, i.e. just for Natura 2000 areas and with no compulsory insurance.

In plain text, this means that if damage occurs and the person responsible cannot be held liable, the general public, i.e. the taxpayer will pay for it.

Can you give Parliament a guarantee - and I should like a yes or no - that compulsory insurance is contained in a horizontal directive?

My second point is this: unfortunately, you did not go into proposed Amendment No 42.

Can you confirm that there is no EU legislation for GMOs in contained use?

You know that the contained use directive excludes this and, at the same time, Article 2 (4) of the common position makes no provision for regulations on GMOs for contained use.

There is a gap in the legislation here and I think that this is very important for tomorrow' vote.

For example, transgenetic fish in contained use would not be covered by the two directives.

I should like a clear answer on this.

I am not reopening the debate.

I will give the floor to the Commissioner if she wants to respond to these two specific points, but I thought the Commissioner's response was very clear and comprehensive.

Commissioner, do you wish to reply?

Mr President, I shall start with the second part of Mrs Breyer's question.

It is true that there is no specific Community legislation for the contained use of genetically modified plants and animals.

However, Article 2(4) of the common position obliges Member States to ensure that these GMOs are handed over to a third party only if stringent containment measures are in place, otherwise notification under Part C of the directive is necessary.

Amendment No 42 would prevent any exchange of genetically modified plants and animals for research activities under contained use until Community legislation is in force.

That is why we cannot accept Amendment No 42.

As you know, we have now issued a White Paper on environmental liability.

It is now open for comments and views and we are ready to discuss it because I want to ensure that this environmental liability paper covers GMOs.

I intend to ensure that this paper covers GMOs.

Insurance is one thing we will have to look into in more depth and also get the views of other parties on the practical aspects.

The White Paper is a first step, as you know.

That has to be discussed in depth and I will come back with a proposal.

I believe it will be possible to put an insurance system in place.

The vote will be taken tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.

Identification, registration and labelling of beef

The next item is the report by Mr Papayannakis, on behalf of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation establishing a system for the identification and registration of bovine animals and regarding the labelling of beef and beef products and repealing Council Regulation (EC) 820/97, (COM(1999) 487 - C5-0240/1999 - 1999/0204(COD)).

- (EL) Mr President, we all know that the bovine spongiform encephalopathy crisis, the mad cow crisis, is yet another crime which has not been punished, and I doubt it ever will.

But aside from this serious issue, it has left us with an institutional crisis, a market crisis, a drop in sales of beef products, a drop in prices and, most importantly, a consumer confidence crisis.

The regulation under discussion has come too late, much too late in my opinion, but all the same it will help to provide some answers, some solutions and it will help us to take some action to restore consumer confidence.

As you will recall, we fought a hard battle over this regulation last December in order to protect the rights of the European Parliament.

We also fought a battle to push through the implementation of the measures laid down in this regulation as swiftly as possible.

In short, we all know what we are talking about.

On the basis of this regulation, very soon, this year, all bovine animals will, by law, have to be identified and monitored right up to slaughter.

Meat from bovine animals will carry a label indicating the origin and history of the animals from which the meat is derived.

During our analysis of this regulation, we tried to cater for a great many demands and a great many opinions.

We wanted the provisions of the regulation to be kept as simple as possible so that they could be applied, and applied as quickly as possible.

Let us not forget that the system we are going to implement is an extremely complex, extremely technical system, and concerns approximately 100 million animals throughout the EU. So we are talking about an extremely complex operation.

The system therefore needs to be simple and practicable and it needs to be comprehensible to the consumer; this is of utmost importance to us. Above all, it must not contain exceptions or what we call loopholes, i.e. ways in which the regulation can be contravened either through complex wording or because of local or special exceptions or applications.

I believe that we have managed to achieve this.

The system that Parliament is endeavouring to establish though its amendments could be applied from 1 September 2000 onwards and we insist on this because one demand of the entire House was that specific dates and deadlines should be set at long last and that we should get started.

I would just like to look at two amendments, two categories of amendments.

First, your rapporteur is calling, with the greatest respect, for a report, a Commission proposal, within the year, on the application of this system to meat products.

If we want to be taken seriously, we should also take account of consumer confidence in all meat products, of which, as we all know, there are a great many.

And secondly, some amendments deal with how permits are to be granted to enterprises, operators and so on to apply the labels, to label the meat.

The provisions recommended by the Commission are, to my mind, extremely minimal.

The interested party submits an application and, after a period of time, the system which he wishes to apply is applied.

I propose that we change this system.

Anyone labelling meat must have explicit approval from the competent public authorities.

This may seem a little more laborious, but we already have a laborious system and we must, at all costs, have state approval for meat labelling. If not, then I am afraid that the system will become too lax and may even become corrupt, and, as a result, we will not achieve our main goal of winning consumer confidence in the system.

Mr President, as draftsman of the Committee on Agriculture, I should like to recapitulate a number of the committee' s main causes for concern on this question.

The most important objective of the Commission proposal - and I should like expressly to stress this once again - is the traceability of beef or bovine animals from birth through to processing and sale.

This is one of the consequences of the BSE crisis and we must bear the objective of this proposal, i.e. traceability, in mind when debating what information should appear on the label.

We want labels which are practicable, simple, safe, cheap and easy to control.

Labels must be easy for consumers to understand, which is why the information needs to be kept to a minimum.

Consumers want information, not a novel.

Information on the fattening process and, where applicable, on antibiotics or other stimulants administered, as demanded in proposed Amendment No 48, have absolutely no business to be on the label.

Information which does not come under compulsory labelling but which is requested by market participants or is already included on labels in the Member States can continue to be included within the framework of voluntary labelling.

This applies in particular to information on the region of origin of the meat.

As far as the entry into force of the regulation is concerned, we agree in principle with the Commission' s approach that compulsory labelling should be introduced in two stages, but we do not agreed with the timetable insofar as we think that the date of 1 January 2003 has been put far too far back.

We shall have problems explaining this to consumers.

The Committee on Agriculture agreed on the wording "by 1 January 2002 at the latest" in a compromise on the introduction of compulsory information on origin, i.e. stage 2.

Now the Committee on the Environment has opted for 1 September 2001 and I think that we can agree to this date. It is only a matter of four months.

But we are emphatically against making all the information, including the indication of the place of birth, compulsory when the regulation enters into force in September 2000, rather than in two stages.

That makes no sense, as the electronic database on which traceability depends is not yet up and running in the majority of Member States.

A compulsory labelling system for beef can only be as good as the system for registering bovine animals and all their movements.

Mr President, beef labelling has two distinct functions.

Firstly, traceability in the case of a food safety incident - the recent E. coli outbreak in Scotland for example - and, secondly, to give consumers information about the origin of beef at the point of sale.

The two should not be confused.

For traceability we need maximum information made available to the authorities as and when required but the consumer label should be simple, concise and unambiguous.

The need for information sprang from the BSE crisis.

Member States have differing levels of BSE incidence but there are also variations in the measures to eradicate the disease and protect human health.

Although the United Kingdom has the highest incidence of BSE, it also has the most comprehensive control measures.

Other countries, which admittedly have lower declared levels of BSE, operate a whole-herd slaughter policy which entails the risk of the under-reporting of cases.

Therefore people want to know which country their beef comes from.

Reference to regions should not be an alternative to country of origin but a voluntary addition.

Even regions like Yorkshire, Britain' s premier region and coincidentally the region I represent, are not known by every citizen throughout the EU.

From a marketing and promotional point of view smaller areas and localities could be used, as well as regional breeds such as Aberdeen Angus.

The well established description of Scotch beef should continue to be used.

Small traditional butcher shops that sell beef unpackaged should be allowed to display information as an alternative to labelling each item.

Many consumers would be confused if given information about hanging or maturation, which could be mixed up with sell-by dates in their minds.

I would draw attention particularly to Amendment No 41 which seeks to exclude farmers from Community aid schemes if the regulation is not strictly adhered to.

I have already had cases drawn to my attention regarding other EU schemes where honest errors by farmers, who are not professional bureaucrats, have resulted in punitive sanctions which often threaten the future of a family farm.

We should not go down this road.

The listing of antibiotics and stimulants that might have been administered would, if adopted, create a two-tier beef market.

Animal welfare would be compromised as farmers would be reluctant to treat animals therapeutically.

Similarly, reference to fattening methods should not be introduced.

I hope that in amending this regulation Parliament can for once simplify rather than embellish and make the labelling of beef consumer-, butcher- and farmer-friendly.

Mr President, my group welcomed the report by Mr Papayannakis and salutes him for his persistence.

I say that because he comes from a small political group - and it is often hard to make headway here - and he comes from one of the southern Member States, which will in some ways have to make sacrifices and introduce regulations to bring about effective, proper beef labelling throughout the Community.

He has also had to face the obfuscation and delays brought about by the Council.

The fact that we have had to wait two years for this proposal to become a practical reality is a poor comment on the urgency with which they regard it, although the situation was plainly critical from the time of the outbreak of the BSE crisis onwards.

However, we are not here today for recriminations but for looking ahead.

This is our chance to put right this sorry process of delay.

Parliament has the opportunity, if it is willing to grasp it, to set a realistic timetable for the two-tier implementation of a comprehensive process of labelling for beef and for beef products.

In the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, we supported most of the amendments from the rapporteur and others and we do so again today.

We do that on the basis that the key proposal plainly has to be the issue of timing.

Some of the versions of this report in themselves have been contradictory in the dates that they gave.

We are now talking about implementation of the first stage in September 2000 and the second stage in September 2001.

I was glad to hear the representative of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development say that they would settle for the four-month advance that would involve coming forward from January 2002.

We believe that this is necessary because we should now get the whole European Union on the move.

That is why we want the second stage as set out in Article 13(5) to be distinct and a commensurate advance.

There are some here - certainly some from Member States that have very effective traceability and labelling possibilities already - who would like to do the whole thing at once.

They would be able to say to others: look - you cannot do it, you are at fault.

Our job is to bring all 15 Member States together so that the process of traceability throughout the whole of the food chain, from the birth of the animal to its slaughter and disposal, would be universally applied throughout the European Union.

We say to those who are resistant to this: please remember that it is necessary to bring everybody on board.

What everybody wants - whether they are farmers, citizens or consumers in the United Kingdom or anywhere else in the Union - is to feel that they have equal confidence, wherever they are, in the safety of the product that they are consuming.

We have struck out the second subparagraph of Article 13(5) and all other amendments which follow the same line of allowing imprecise mixed origins or an indication such as "EU origin".

One day "EU origin" may be assurance enough but it is not at this moment.

We need to know from which state a product has arrived.

I know that there are people in the Netherlands who disagree with that and I would be interested to know why.

I cannot see that "EU origin" is currently sufficient in the way of labelling and we are opposed to that proposal.

We are also opposed to the derogation for minced beef, which might apply to something like 30% of the beef output, which ought to be open to labelling.

Minced beef is as much, if not more, at risk as any other form of beef since it frequently comes from a variety of sources.

It is the case in my country that we have seen minced beef and lamb and other meats mixed up together.

We need traceability and labelling there as much as anywhere else.

We agree with the rapporteur' s intention to stiffen and speed up the compliance provisions in Amendments Nos 42 and 43.

We also agree that supplementary information should and can be provided for those Member States that need it and for those special regions which have important information to communicate.

My last point is to end where I began.

My country, Mr President, and yours - if I can call Scotland my country too, as I certainly would - have suffered the horrors of BSE.

We know we bore a large part of the responsibility for it.

It was incumbent upon us to make special provisions by way of food safety as a result.

After our years of effort to that end, we can now justifiably say to the Community as a whole that what we want for ourselves we want for everyone else as well.

Mr President, rapporteur, ladies and gentlemen, it is important to reinstate market confidence.

It is, however, still more important to restore citizens' confidence in the food they buy and eat - in actual fact, it is perhaps in that way that the market will be strengthened.

The crucial factor is that it should be possible to trace with certainty the origins of what we eat.

Amendment No 29 is very important for producers, above all perhaps for small producers in vulnerable areas.

This Amendment would entitle producers to provide information on the label in addition to the name of the nation where the goods concerned originate.

There would be the option to state, for example, the particular area from which the meat comes or the fact that a particular breed of cattle or special breeding methods have been used.

However, there should be no legislation on this matter, other than a ban on lying.

I am very pleased about Mr Whitehead' s remark about minced meat.

I fully and wholeheartedly support Amendment No 30 from the rapporteur.

For me, the most important aspect of this whole issue is that no exceptions should be made for cheap food.

We who sit in this Chamber, for the most part middle-aged and well-to-do, know perfectly well that it is young people and families with children who buy and eat the cheapest food - sausages, hamburgers etc.

In all social systems and at all periods in history, the most vulnerable groups have had the least purchasing power.

It is our absolute moral duty first and foremost to make cheap food safe before we do the same for fillet of beef.

Mr President, Commissioner, the European Parliament has proven its far-sightedness on this matter and I should like to thank the two rapporteurs from the Committee on the Environment and the Committee on Agriculture for their work.

They have approached the issue with the same consistency demonstrated by the European Parliament.

Allow me to refresh your memory: compulsory registration has applied for a long time, because Regulation No 820/97 entered into force on 1 January 2000.

The postponement adopted is not lawful.

The European Parliament has filed charges against the Council because the postponement was not within the Council' s discretion.

Nor did the Commission come up smelling of roses here.

It was the Commission which proposed this seemingly elegant but legally dubious procedure.

If nothing is done, compulsory labelling will enter into force on 1 September 2000.

The Commission is therefore urged to accept the European Parliament' s proposals in this codecision process by 1 September.

We have tried in our suit to ensure that no equally elegant attempt will be made to implement an extension on 1 September - and I hope that we shall succeed in putting a stop to this.

If we cannot agree on Parliament' s proposals by 1 September, then the old regulation with the compulsory system will enter into force.

I therefore hope that you will implement Parliament' s reasonable proposals and that you will give up your plan to postpone this once again until the year 2003.

It will confuse our citizens and will certainly meet with decisive resistance here in Parliament.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, consumers can be given a guaranteed indication of origin for the majority, I repeat the majority of foodstuffs and for beef in its many and varied forms, if they so wish.

The basis for this was and still is the passport for each individual animal which provides information on place, origin and birth.

Thanks to comprehensive controls of and the wealth of data on the animal trade, the place of origin and rearing can be proven.

What I mean is that we are not starting from square one and, as a producer of several tonnes of beef a year, I know what I am talking about.

The latest crisis in the foodstuffs sector may justify the introduction of stricter standards, as contained in the report; however, where possible, red tape should be reduced.

I agree with all the proposed amendments which are predicated upon greater promotion of regional marketing and processing of agricultural products and which help to build up regional markets and create greater transparency, irrespective of the date on which they are introduced.

Mr President, the people who will be most shocked to learn of this evening' s debate must surely be European consumers.

They will be astounded to learn that, so many years after the start of the BSE crisis, the European Union still does not have a reliable traceability system for beef.

Quite clearly, though, consumer confidence must be restored, as a matter of urgency, by guaranteeing the consumer perfect traceability from the stable to the table, so that any potential risk to human health can be efficiently eliminated at an early stage.

Fortunately, the appropriate initiatives by the most enterprising Member States have compensated for the extraordinarily slow reactions of the Community apparatus.

It is therefore all the more deplorable that they should have been deprived of this possibility by the Treaty of Amsterdam.

I am thinking in particular of the compulsory labelling system which was drawn up in France together with livestock farmers and distributors, which has been in force since 1996.

This system has proved very effective. It has made it possible to restore consumer confidence.

France' s legitimate wish not to lift the embargo on British beef prematurely, since Britain did not offer the same guarantees of traceability, was in order to maintain this restored level of confidence.

France had simply forgotten that it no longer had the right to do this.

What a decidedly strange Europe it is that penalises Member States which take the necessary initiatives and action to restore consumer confidence and protect citizens' health!

If legal action can now only be taken at Community level, then let us at least act quickly and stop indefinitely postponing the implementation of the commitments made in 1997 with a view to providing the consumer with transparent and comprehensible information.

Compulsory labelling indicating the origin of goods must therefore be introduced as soon as possible, and it must certainly not be postponed until 1 January 2003, as the Commission proposes.

We must not agree to any exemptions, again as the Commission proposes, for minced and cut meat, which would be tantamount to excluding 30% to 50% of beef, according to the country, from the need for mandatory labelling.

Nor must we agree, as the Commission is once again proposing, to adopt an over-general EC-type generic designation of origin.

Consumers want to be certain of the operators' ability to monitor the origin of meat accurately.

The Member State of origin must therefore be indicated.

Furthermore, beef imported from third countries must be subject to the same labelling regulations as Community beef, and if it does not comply with European Union regulations on traceability, this must also be clearly indicated.

This, Mr President, is the intention of the amendments which Mrs Thomas-Moreau and I tabled on behalf of the UEN Group, which we are proposing to all our fellow Members who are keen to contribute to bringing about genuine traceability of beef.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, fourteen years after BSE first appeared, we have finally got around to doing something about labelling meat in order to protect consumers and ensure traceability.

This protection is undoubtedly belated in principle but, above all, illusory in practice.

Firstly, in the draft regulation, 50% of European meat is effectively exempt from compulsory labelling if it is minced or cut.

For the remaining 50%, labelling is not compulsory until 2003, which means that we have three years to dispose of British surplus stocks.

And after 2003, the designation of origin may be limited to a simple indication of 'EC origin' with no mention of the country.

What is more, to bury the prion under even more details, the label is laden down with indications of: the place where the animal was born, fattened, slaughtered and boned, with the Member State of origin, the region of origin, the farm of origin, a total of twelve items, plus the price and the weight, making a total of fourteen items, which is simply too much to read and take in.

So, Mr Papayannakis is improving the system, the deadline for compulsory labelling has been brought forward from 2003 to 2001, since 2000 is out of the question; labelling is to be simplified, the national labelling systems mandatory in France, Belgium and Finland are to be retained.

The unwillingness of the Commission is, however, with apologies to the Commissioner, apparent to everyone.

As a solution, labelling is a good idea only at first sight.

Labelling is no safeguard against GMOs, chocolate containing vegetable fats or, tomorrow, GMO fats, or, at a later date, American hormone-treated beef, or prion-infected meat.

The only effective protection would be checks, and this requires States and frontiers.

We have, however, eliminated frontiers, and this is the price we have to pay for Europe: freedom of movement at the expense of safety.

I just hope, ladies and gentlemen, that no one will have to be punished in future.

Previously one could be punished at the stake, now punishment would mean a steak, a British beefsteak.

Mr President, I wish to put firmly on the record tonight that the farmers in Northern Ireland are exceedingly angry at the UK Government for not seeking European funding to help promote beef labelling.

Other states have taken up this money to the tune of some £4m. the Irish Republic to the tune of £100 000 - yet the disgraceful attitude of the London Government is to keep this from the UK farmers.

I want also to say that the place of origin mentioned in any labelling system should be the real place of origin, because any idea of stating where meat is processed as the place of origin is not acceptable.

That is a very fundamental question that must be made perfectly clear in any law that we pass.

Any food labelling policy must be accurate and dependable for both the producers and the consumers.

Whatever may be the policy of this Union in regard to an open market economy, those people who want to buy home-produced meat should be given the right to know it is home-produced.

Farmers deserve to have a guarantee of that, and so should the consumers.

Mr President, the discussion on labelling beef has reached a point at which it is crucial to restore confidence among producers and consumers.

The report focuses on the traceability of beef, i.e. knowing its exact origins, but at the same time, this cannot be detached from consumer confidence, as consumers want information.

It strikes me that this Parliament insists on also making national labelling possible and obligatory, while the Commission places the emphasis on labelling which states "originates from the EU" .

I am convinced that one day, we will be proud again of a label which states: produced in the EU, and that we will have a food safety bureau in the European Union with a forceful, supranational mandate which can act promptly as and when problems arise.

This must be our ultimate goal. We will then be where we need to be.

Until such time, we need to be able to find out exactly what is happening, we need to be able to give the consumer sound information and until such time, we will need to use stop-gap measures to do this.

One of these measures is most definitely the use of a label indicating the Member State.

This is good, because in this way we can start restoring confidence in the producer, especially at a time when food safety is so much in the public eye.

Another positive step is if it could also be pointed out that there can be a time when confidence will be restored.

In this sense, I have to say that my delegation and some in my group support Amendment No 61 tabled by Mr Maaten and Mr de Roo, in which the times are indicated when assurances can be given with regard to BSE inspections and other matters and which states that there can also be a time when the EU label will be applicable.

I consider this to be an interim step, and ultimately I can see one key goal: to restore confidence, to produce a forceful EU label and ultimately a forceful food safety bureau, because these discussions are interconnected.

Mr President, Commissioner, food safety gets people talking perhaps more than any other issue, and, for that reason, it is good that it also gets us talking here in Parliament.

But the most important consideration is that it does not just get us talking, but that we should also do something about it.

The work of Mr Papayannakis has already been praised here.

I would like to express my thanks too: it is a good basis for better standards of consumer safety throughout the European Union.

We have plenty of examples of consumers not having always been given priority when it comes to food production.

The Single Market and the free movement of goods provide more freedom of choice for the public and better markets for producers.

As the issue here is about food, it is even more important than ever to ensure that this freedom is also responsibly restricted, that consumers are protected, and that they have a right to know what they are eating.

In this case, it is especially important that meat and processed meat products are among those products whose origin the consumer knows.

Many have mentioned here that the EC label is not enough and that more precise information is needed.

It is absolutely essential to know what country the products are from.

In addition, the origin, not only of meat products, but of the ingredients used in processed meat, must be shown as clearly as possible.

Labels must also be made compulsory as quickly as possible.

The timetable that the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy is proposing is not too pressing.

The Member States should have already prepared themselves for it.

Mr President, this regulation cannot be postponed any longer, and I fully support the stricter timetable that the European Parliament is proposing in the amendments to the Commission' s proposal.

Consumers require information about where the animal was born, bred and slaughtered, and cattle should be identified and registered so that their traceability can be guaranteed.

The Commission must be far more vigorous than it has been so far in putting the screws on those countries which have not established databases, so ensuring that the countries concerned become fully operational in this respect.

The issue is also one of credibility when it comes to implementing joint resolutions in all Member States.

It is also about citizens' confidence and belief that food quality is everything it should be.

A bit of drive needs to be shown, and no exceptions should be made in the case of cattle which graze in the mountains.

Where registration is required, what, in any case, is the difference between cattle which graze in the mountains and those which graze in valleys or in fields?

I am in favour of beef being labelled with the name of the country or countries it comes from and I am strongly against introducing a common EU label from which consumers cannot see which countries are involved.

The purpose of the regulation in question must be to achieve a situation in which consumers have confidence in meat from all EU countries.

Until this is a reality, consumers need to know precisely which country their meat comes from.

I have tabled an amendment to the effect that the slaughterhouse' s authorisation number should not be shown on the label.

In this way, I wished to ensure that small and medium-sized slaughterhouses could continue to supply meat to butchers.

The authorisation number does not provide the consumer with any useful information and has no bearing upon traceability.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I should like to start by thanking everyone who has worked so constructively on this report.

The compulsory registration system for bovine animals due to enter into force is the sine qua non for a reasonable beef labelling system.

As a farmer, I am concerned that every consumer should be able to trace where his schnitzel has come from.

All farmers are proud of the quality of their products and it is therefore in the farmers' interests for everyone to know whom they have to thank for their extremely safe and healthy food.

Such a system must be practicable if it is to achieve its objective.

We must take account of how the procedures will be applied in practice.

Because of the varying topography of Europe, its farmers must apply different working and production methods.

Take the example of summer pasturing in the Alps.

As you know, every spring a total of 400 000 cattle are driven on to the Alps in Italy, Austria and Germany, where they remain for the summer, i.e. for about three months.

Consideration must be given to the pasturing lists which are already in use and which take account of this situation in order to avoid forcing additional unnecessary administrative costs on farmers.

As we have said, traceability must be guaranteed in all cases. But the regulation must be adapted to actual and local circumstances if it is to be seen as anything other than EU harassment, which merely triggers abuse and if it is to gain acceptance among the people.

I therefore hope that proposed Amendment No 19 to Article 7(1) second indent will be adopted by the entire House.

It has already been adopted by the Committee on the Environment and in the Committee on Agriculture.

Mr President, the discussion on labelling beef is quite loaded.

An important question is whether the "Origin: EU" label should be permitted as an added option.

Many in Parliament believe that it is the country of origin that should be on the label.

The background to this is the food crises.

I could not agree more that beef should be completely traceable and that this should be the case as soon as possible.

I also understand that consumers increasingly want information on the country of origin or region of origin concerning their food.

This is often a matter of taste.

Furthermore, I agree with the analysis that the "Origin: EU" label could be abused by countries where food safety is not regulated.

But I do not advocate scrapping the option of including "Origin: EU" on the label either.

In my opinion, we should choose another approach.

We need to prescribe conditions for the use of the "Origin: EU" label.

One condition, for example, could be that the identification and registration system must be fully implemented and observed.

There are, of course, other means of enforcing compliance, but this method is far more direct.

Parliament has to keep an eye on compliance with the directives it produces.

This approach has the added advantage that the "Origin: EU" label has a positive ring to it.

Rather than being a cover-up for countries where food quality needs to be regulated, the "Origin: EU" label is thus a quality guarantee.

If the producer prefers to indicate the country of origin nonetheless, this is possible too.

There are a number of additional arguments as to why "Origin: EU" labelling should be possible.

For example, the meat industry and retail trade have raised all kinds of practical objections and pointed at the red tape which too detailed information would entail.

I will not spend any time on this argument, as it is not of key importance, in my opinion.

However, I would like to ask your attention for a question of principle.

The internal market is a large entity.

The principle of mutual recognition is fundamental.

Mutual recognition requires trust, and trust requires common standards, especially in the case of food safety.

If we prohibit the use of the "Origin: EU" label, we would be resigning ourselves to a kind of re-nationalisation of the internal market.

We would then be accepting that we have more confidence in certain countries than others and this is a sign of little faith in our own food safety policy.

This is unacceptable in my view.

All EU Member States need to guarantee safe meat.

"Origin: EU" is then a symbol for quality and I therefore advocate backing Amendments Nos 60 and 61.

Mr President, Commissioner, in my view, at present this is not a matter of confidence in the safety of food alone: it is very important that we also look to the near future.

We must put our own house, our own part of the world, in order.

The EU is expanding eastward, and we all know the capacity and volume of meat and beef production there, for example.

This should also alert them to the fact that they must now start to put their own affairs in order, so that they can adapt to the model that exists here.

If we are not ready, how can we expect others to be?

For this reason, labelling must be kept very simple: the labels must show the country of origin, and, if one wishes, the region of production.

But a label showing the country of origin of a product is very important to us, particularly if we want consumers to have confidence in food safety in the future.

Mr President, Commissioner, the beef industry has signed a contract with public opinion, based on the transparency claimed and, I might even say, demanded by the citizen.

Today, this transparency is applicable, within the beef industry, to two different but indissociable areas: BSE and labelling.

France is stepping up its precautionary measures for specified at-risk materials and is implementing an extensive protocol to evaluate ESB tests on bovine animals.

Tomorrow, the European Union is preparing to outline a test programme for all Member States.

In this context, consumers would not understand the delays in the matter of labelling.

I am therefore particularly concerned to ensure that the operators in this industry are not confronted with a legal vacuum which would lead public opinion, quite legitimately, to wonder whether there is a real desire for greater transparency.

How else is it possible to explain the fact that at European level we have managed to obtain an agreement on chocolate but that we are unable to meet the deadlines we set ourselves in an area as sensitive and important as beef.

Let us make no mistake as to what is at issue here.

I am convinced that the subject of beef labelling is no mere technical issue.

I should like to point out that if labelling is of such great importance to consumers it is because it is their guarantee that product traceability has been tightened up, that the operators in the industry and also the European and national public authorities have become more accountable, and that control systems have been improved.

Finally, what our fellow citizens are demanding is the right to information.

This right to be informed is the natural counterpart to the development of trade and the proper exercise of competition.

By virtue of the transparency it conveys, labelling makes it possible to improve the freedom of movement of beef, providing assurances to consumers and guaranteeing their freedom to make an informed choice.

In the beef sector, improving consumer information through labelling represents a strong message from Europe to its trading partners: it demonstrates its intention, over and above product health safety, to safeguard the consumer' s freedom of choice.

Mr President, I agree with the many speakers before me that what we need more than anything at the moment is a system which enables traceability at all stages of production.

Fortunately, integral chain control (ICC) is already well-known in many countries.

In my opinion, this is not related to national borders.

If certain conditions are met - and I would like to refer to Amendments Nos 60 and 61 concerning the inspection of BSE, as others have done so before me - then the designation "Origin: EU" is sufficient as far as I am concerned.

This does not preclude all the other information being added to the label on a voluntary basis.

Mentioning the relevant country, region, town, village, and so on and so forth, is fine but let the consumer decide where he wants to buy the product.

But it should not be an EU stipulation. If this were to be the case, then this would be a re-nationalisation of Europe' s common market in a sense, and that would be a retrograde step.

Mr President, I am very disappointed at the delay, though I am delighted now that we are going to have clear compulsory labelling.

I hope this will restore consumer confidence in beef, especially after the BSE crisis.

I would like to see not only the country but also the region of origin on the label.

I represent the West Midlands which has some of the best beef in the world - Herefordshire beef and Shropshire beef.

I should like to see that go on the label.

I would oppose very strongly the idea that "EU" should be on the label and not the country and region of origin.

I am also concerned about some of the words that might go on the label.

One of those words is "slaughtered".

That will not help with consumer confidence and might put some of the consumers off if they actually see where the animal was "slaughtered".

I wish we could find a new word for it.

Generally speaking, I am delighted that at last we are going to have clear labelling and, as I said, I want it to be the country and region of origin.

Mr President, I wish to begin by saying that I welcome the report.

A European Union-wide identification system for cattle is long overdue.

The system is certainly very necessary, if nothing else than to achieve a level playing field within the European Union and to ensure that all countries reach the same standards.

I want to sound a note of caution.

I come from an area in Northern Ireland that has a standard of identification and traceability which is as good as any ever will be.

No system is a hundred per cent perfect, so do not think you can bring that about.

There will always be people out to abuse the system.

That has been the case for centuries - and will continue.

You can only try to develop the best possible system of traceability.

I have a number of concerns.

The problem to date has been, in my experience in Northern Ireland, that the consumer has borne the brunt of the cost of the extra traceability, and this has been substantial.

It has not been borne by the retailer.

The consumer will perhaps ultimately pay - but he or she may not.

From that point of view it is expensive for those people.

I have one further question of the Commission.

Is it wise to renationalise the beef market?

Or even to regionalise it within countries.

We have fought for years within the European Union to achieve a single market and now we are renationalising that market.

I challenge the Commission tonight to answer that question.

Let us not look to the short term, let us look to the long term, because the long term is the challenge - not five years but ten, fifteen years from now.

What is going to be the situation on the beef market?

As I said, in Northern Ireland we have full traceability and our measures go beyond the regulations.

I have to say to the Commission, and to producers in other Member States, that my producers have to date not seen any financial benefit from that which they have suffered.

The proposal, as Mr Goodwill has said, has two important aims.

First to ensure the traceability of beef, second to allow consumers to make a fully informed choice.

Unfortunately, although the two aims are compatible, there is some tension between them where the details of the regulation are concerned.

This is particularly the case in relation to Article 13 and Article 13(2) primarily serving the first and Article 13(5) the second aim.

Amendments Nos 26 and 28 to 13(5) therefore seemed rather confused - one seeking less and one seeking more detailed information for consumers.

For this reason, whatever the final form of Article 13, I regard Amendments Nos 15 and 29 as being of the first importance.

Amendment 29 in particular will allow areas of the EU that are justifiably proud of the quality of their product to identify it as such.

For my own constituency of course, Aberdeen Angus beef is already justly renowned throughout the world but I am sure the same is true for other regions in the rest of the UK and other Member States.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I should like to start by thanking the rapporteur, Mr Papayannakis, and Mr Kindermann, the draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Agriculture, for their constructive contributions to the debate on the draft regulation under discussion.

A whole series of amendments to the Commission proposal have been tabled, 44 of which were accepted by the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Protection on 22 March.

A further 18 proposed amendments were subsequently submitted for this plenary sitting.

I should like to start with the Commission' s views on the first 44 proposals.

The Commission is able to accept 18 of them.

This includes proposed amendments which are accepted in full or in part and amendments which require minor editorial changes.

In another 12 proposed amendments I can see what your concerns are but the Commission is unable to accept these amendments.

However, I shall ensure that the Council is informed of your point of view.

This applies, for example, to proposed Amendment No 20.

A number of the proposed amendments which the Commission is able to accept, such as Amendments Nos 2, 3, 4, 18 and 19 first part, and 21, 33, 35 and 42 tighten up the wording.

I also accept proposed Amendment No 19, second part, which makes provision for a simplification for cattle pastured on the Alps in the summer.

The improvements to the definition of labelling are also acceptable.

The same applies to the information to be included on the label and to the interpretation of the concept of origin.

I am therefore prepared to accept proposed Amendments Nos 22 and 23, insofar as they concern labelling, and the parts of proposed Amendments Nos 25, 26 and 28 calling for information on individual regions to be scrapped.

As we are all concerned that the labelling system should be introduced as quickly as possible, I welcome proposed Amendment No 39 reducing the deadline set for the Member States to appoint the competent authorities.

Finally, proposed Amendment No 44, under which the regulation would enter into force on 1 September 2000 heads in exactly the same direction.

I think the new recital suggested in proposed Amendment No 6, whereby Member States must ensure that their databases are operational as quickly as possible, is also a good idea.

I am also able to accept the parts of proposed Amendments Nos 25, 26 and 28 making information on the region optional, whereby I assume, if no decision is made to the contrary, that this information will come under the voluntary system.

As I too take the view that the possibility of confusion with protected geographical indications governed by Regulation 2081/92 must be excluded, I agree unreservedly with the new recital in proposed Amendment No 15.

Nonetheless, we must still investigate how the stated objective is to be reached, whereby I envisage a more comprehensive solution than that suggested in proposed Amendment No 29.

The question of when compulsory indications of origin need to be introduced is an important point.

As the obligation to enter the place of birth and all stopovers in the animal passport and database has only been introduced for animals born on or after 1 January 1998, it will be difficult to trace the complete origin of bovine animals over the next five years.

According to our calculations, this problem will apply to just under half the beef produced from 2003 onwards, which is why I have reservations about introducing compulsory indications of origin earlier or even, as suggested in proposed Amendment No 26, as early as 1 September 2001.

I would point out in this respect that the Committee on Agriculture has recommended that they be introduced on 1 January 2002.

I also note that you insist that indications of origin must state the country, even if this means listing several countries on the label.

I am sorry that you find the simplified indication "Produced in the European Union" unacceptable, despite the fact that it is in keeping with the principles of the internal market.

As far as labelling of minced meat is concerned, we must bear in mind that the production of minced meat, for example of hamburgers, is a continuous process.

The obligation to provide a complete indication of origin for this meat would therefore give rise to technical problems and may well bring the entire intra-Community trade in processed meat to a virtual standstill.

I would therefore suggest that you reconsider the simplified labelling system.

The proposed labelling regulation makes provision for the possibility of combining animals in groups rather than entering each individual animal with producers who take the trouble to guarantee the traceability of each individual animal given an incentive in the form of a special logo.

I must admit that I do not fully understand why you demand in proposed Amendments Nos 14 and 31 that we should let go of the only instrument which guarantees real and complete traceability.

As far as the Commission' s powers to react to unusual and unforeseen circumstances are concerned, I am, unfortunately, unable to accept proposed Amendments Nos 16 and 38 because they prevent a practicable solution.

Finally, I think it is premature to commit ourselves to extending the labelling system to processed products containing beef, as suggested in proposed Amendment No 40.

Let us gain some experience with the system being proposed now and then we can consider this idea at a later date.

As far as the proposed amendments tabled subsequently at the end of last week are concerned, I have already explained in connection with proposed Amendments Nos 45 and 46 that the Commission agrees with you that the first stage of the compulsory system should start on 1 September this year.

If proposed Amendment No 44 is accepted, the regulation automatically enters into force on this date.

Proposed Amendments Nos 45 and 46 are therefore superfluous for technical reasons.

As far as proposed Amendment No 47 is concerned, I should like to advise against continuing the national compulsory beef identification system as soon as the full EU system has been introduced.

In the end we would have 15 different national systems, which runs completely counter to the internal market.

Proposed Amendment No 48 refers to information on the use of antibiotics or stimulants and to fattening methods.

This idea may look simple on paper, but it is in fact extremely complicated to administer and, more importantly, to control.

In addition, there is no definition of the various rearing methods and every animal will certainly be fed using various methods, rather than one and the same method, during its lifetime.

As far as medication is concerned, it would be much better to maintain our high veterinary standards, thereby guaranteeing that only safe beef reaches the market.

The Commission would therefore prefer not to adopt this proposal.

As far as the voluntary system is concerned, which is to be set up alongside the new compulsory system in order to include all the information which is not being made compulsory, the Commission can accept two of the four amendments adopted by the Committee on the Environment, namely proposals 33 and 35.

It is obvious from the vote in committee that Parliament is not in favour of amending the Commission' s basic attempt to simplify the approval procedure.

However, I see that a total of nine new proposed amendments have been tabled for this plenary sitting which were not adopted by the Committee on the Environment.

These amendments seek to re-introduce a formal approval procedure for voluntary information on labels.

Let me assure you that such amendments do not cause any particular problem because their purpose is to reinforce the administrative procedure.

For the rest, recent discussions in the Council have gone in the same direction.

I am therefore convinced that these proposed amendments will be taken on board by the Council.

From now on, the Commission will be acting as go-between between the two decision-making institutions on this matter.

With just over three months, we do not have much time left for a final decision.

Given the speed with which you have worked here in Parliament, hopefully the Council will decide on its common position as quickly as possible.

The vote will be taken on Wednesday at 11.30 a.m.

(The sitting was closed at 12.10 a.m.)

Adoption of the Minutes of the previous sitting

The Minutes of yesterday' s sitting have been distributed.

Mrs Ludford, are you sure your point of order is related to the Minutes?

Madam President, I signalled I wanted to raise a point of order, although it is not actually on the Minutes.

I do not want to delay the House unduly, but I think that as we prepare to debate the construction of Europe, it is important to take note of a landmark court judgement in the UK.

The so-called historian, David Irving, has lost his libel case against the American academic, Deborah Lipstadt, who accused him of manipulating evidence to deny the Nazi genocide of the Jews.

The judge has ruled, in a devastating judgement, that he was "an active Holocaust denier, anti-Semitic and racist and that he associates with right-wing extremists who promote neo-Nazism" .

This judgement is important, not just for Europe' s past, but also for its present.

With the rise in racism and anti-Semitism and the electoral success of extremist parties, this judgement boosts the fight to make Europe a society free of racism and at ease with diversity.

I am happy to take note of your point of order.

But for the time being I would like comments to relate to the Minutes, so that we can adopt them.

After that Members are free to move any other points of order.

Madam President, item 2 of the Minutes on page 5, which is in fact the first substantive page, refers to the points I raised about certain political groups apparently not respecting the Rules of Procedure in that they appear to allow individual members of their group to table amendments in plenary, supposedly in the name of the group, although this cannot possibly be the case because contradictory amendments are tabled in the name of the same group.

I would like to underline that although the Minutes mentioned specifically the EPP Group, it is in fact not the only group to have acted in this way.

For instance, the Technical Group, the TDI Group, which did not table any amendments at committee stage whatsoever, has now arrived in plenary with between 20 and 30 amendments, many of which are contradictory.

They are tabled by different members within that group taking different positions and therefore cannot possibly be a group position.

That does not respect our own Rules of Procedure, which allow only 32 members or a group to table amendments in plenary.

Madam President, my point concerns the section of the Minutes on Question Time yesterday evening, when I raised a point of order.

First of all, Question Time was put back to 6:30 p.m., then it was announced on the screen that it would begin at 6:50 p.m.

In the end it was after 7:00 p.m. before Question Time started.

The first part was supposed to last 30 minutes, according to the Agenda; but it lasted much longer.

Basically, my problem is that I had questions down - as some other people did - to Commissioner Byrne.

We had group meetings at the time and saw on the screen "Question 41" .

But by the time I reached the plenary, you had moved on automatically within a few minutes to Question 49.

So five or six people had questions down to Commissioner Byrne, but none of us were here to ask the questions.

Commissioner Byrne seems to have taken offence at this and seen it as some kind of snub.

But it is very difficult for Members to sit right through every single question during Question Time just in case we jump from No 1 to No 99 in a matter of seconds.

So, could we please stick to the Agenda: thirty minutes for the first part of Question Time, twenty for the second part and so on.

We should not keep changing the Agenda because then it is extremely difficult for us to operate.

I take note of your comment and will ensure this does not happen again.

Madam President, in recent days, immense natural catastrophes in which quite a number of people have died have again occurred on the banks of the River Tisza.

I would therefore ask the President to send our condolences to both the Romanian and Hungarian parliaments.

At the same time, we must be alert to the kind of environmental risks these natural catastrophes may entail for our common European environment.

The Tisza flows into the Danube delta, which is one of the world' s most significant protected areas of environmental interest.

Thank you, Mrs Thors, I am quite prepared to do so.

Madam President, with rather more levity.

Last night in the Committee on Budgets when the refreshments were being distributed, Mr Colom pointed out that the small cartons of milk were marked "for distribution in schools only" .

Had it said "for schoolchildren only" one could understand why it was being distributed in the European Parliament, but it was marked "for schools only" .

Could we find out why this has happened?

I know we campaigned for more school milk but, on this occasion, we did not want it here.

Thank you, Mr Wynn, I cannot answer you right now, but I will have the matter investigated.

Madam President, I wish to inform you and the Members who come into daily contact, although sometimes without noticing them, with the Parliament staff who ensure the running of the House as a whole, that certain sections (security guards, receptionists, firemen) were on strike yesterday afternoon.

They were protesting at having to work 12 hours at a stretch, day and night, for an average net salary of FRF 6 000, without even receiving extra pay for night or weekend work. I want to express my solidarity with them.

Moreover, we have written you a letter, Madam President, on behalf of the LO and LCR Members, and hope you will follow the matter up.

I will give the letter my utmost attention.

Madam President, I have been listening to the translations of the speeches on my headphones for a long time now, and the sound disappears sometimes, even if I change places, and I also get a rasping noise, not only here but also in our Group' s room.

There is some technical fault here, and I wish the relevant people would check whether there is too much interference here, owing to mobile phones, for example.

Even the position of my head affects audibility, and I cannot really sit here listening with my head tilted to one side.

The other request I have is for a technician to adjust the sound volume here.

Some Members shout into the microphone, even though the microphone is, in fact, there to make shouting unnecessary, thereby making it impossible to hear anything over the headphones.

So whenever someone shouts into the microphone - even though they should not - I would ask that the sound volume in the Chamber be lowered immediately, so that we can also hear what is being said over the headphones.

Thank you, Mr Paasilinna, we will look into all that and check the sound system in general.

The next item is the report (A5-0086/2000) by Mr Dimitrakopoulos and Mr Leinen, on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs, on the European Parliament' s proposals for the Intergovernmental Conference (14094/1999 - C5-0341/1999 - 1999/0825(CNS)).

First of all I must inform the House that the Union for Europe of the Nations Group has moved the report' s inadmissibility, pursuant to the Rules of Procedure.

Let me point out that the Council consulted Parliament on convening the Intergovernmental Conference and that the report by Mr Dimitrakopoulos and Mr Leinen was entered on the agenda in accordance with the appropriate Rules.

Mr Ribeiro e Castro will present the motion.

Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, this report should not have been admitted.

It is generally anti what Europe really represents and anti most of what Europe has achieved.

Paragraph 15 of the motion for a resolution is a symptom of this aggressiveness towards Europe.

We are all attached to fundamental rights and the rule of law, starting here in this House.

So how can we agree when the fundamental right of recourse to the courts is being threatened?

This is not a question of internal affairs, but external affairs of great importance.

We are Members of this House and we represent our electors.

Anything which discriminates in our legal and political conditions, between our political parties and groups in terms of freedom and equality affects our right of representation and ultimately the rights and very freedom of our electors.

These are the elements particularly under threat in this report which wants to interfere with and discriminate between the statutes of the political parties.

The very essence of Europe is under threat.

The fundamental right of recourse to the courts cannot be altered by anyone and nor can the rule of law.

Paragraph 15 ruins the whole text by defiling a very serious issue.

The temptation for those in power to act arbitrarily which this paragraph encourages is a clear illustration of the position taken in the rest of the report, and a terrible omen.

We therefore move the inadmissibility of this report which, in addition to having a dubious legal basis, was not properly prepared and does not enjoy the broad consensus which Europe must have.

This is evident in both the injudiciousness of this regrettable paragraph and the fact that 222, I repeat 222, amendments were tabled on this report.

Is there any better proof that this report is totally inappropriate?

We therefore propose, in order to defend Europe and the rule of law, the immediate rejection of this report.

Thank you, Mr Ribeiro e Castro.

Does anyone wish to speak in favour of this request for referral back to committee?

Madam President, I think Mr Ribeiro e Castro is quite right to consider the Dimitrakopoulos-Leinen report inadmissible because it conflicts with and even infringes a number of rights enshrined in our institutions.

First of all, Mr Ribeiro e Castro is right to single out paragraph 15, which states that 'no actions may be brought in connection with the interna corporis affairs of the European Parliament.'

That statement clearly infringes the fundamental right of every citizen, and thus also of Members, to bring an action.

But more generally I believe this report infringes a whole range of different rights, beginning with the rights of the small and medium-sized states which have formed an integral part of our institutions and been highly respected by them since the early days of the Treaty of Rome.

Mr Dimitrakopoulos and Mr Leinen, the two rapporteurs, wish to speak against this motion.

Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, however much I respect the opinion of the Members who have just spoken, I find it harsh and unjust to regard our report as inadmissible because of paragraph 15.

Other colleagues have tabled amendments with a view to voting against that paragraph, and Members may agree with those amendments.

To agree or not agree with a paragraph in a report is justified and democratic, and that is what we are here for.

But I do not think it is right to move that a report is inadmissible because of one paragraph.

I call on Members to vote against this motion.

We must examine and vote on the report during this part-session, because it is not a matter of voting for the two rapporteurs but of voting for the European Parliament' s opinion.

Madam President, I am delighted that of all the groups, it is the UEN Group that is standing up for more fundamental rights and more democracy at European Union level.

I am pleased about that; it is a major step forward.

However, I also believe that the strong language my fellow delegates are using is completely uncalled for.

The EU countries have completely different cultures.

In some countries Parliament can draw up its own rules of procedure and one does not have the option of going to the court of justice.

Some countries have a different system.

Mr Dimitrakopoulos has already mentioned that there are amendments.

The UEN Group are welcome to vote against them and then we will see if it is left in or taken out.

All in all, I believe that there is no call for excessively strong language, and I am also in favour of us rejecting this amendment.

Madam President, I do not think this amendment is something we can vote on, as the Treaty of Amsterdam makes express provision for the relationship between the institutions and the procedures to be framed differently.

In this respect, this report forms part of the implementation of the Treaty of Amsterdam, and one cannot vote on erroneous, legal proposed amendments, one can only reject them!

If you feel duty-bound to reject it, you will have an opportunity to do so.

I shall now put the motion presented by the Union for Europe of the Nations Group to the vote by roll call.

Madam President, Minister, Deputy Minister, Commissioner, we are at a really very important juncture so far as the vocation of the European Union is concerned.

Today, through the proceedings of the Intergovernmental Conference, the European Union is being called upon to address the great challenges involved in the transition from the 20th to the 21st century, challenges we all recognise, which are important, which influence the course of the European Union every day, and challenges which, above all, raise a fundamental issue: how ready are we, as an institution, as the European Union, to face them?

The Intergovernmental Conference attempts to answer just that question.

It is common ground that in the face of all those challenges, the way the European Union functions at present is certainly in need of some changes, changes whose important aim will be the future progress of the European Union on the basis of what we have all accepted until now.

The report you have before you today is significant in that it covers the following points.

The first point is once again to consolidate the institutional nature of the European Union.

We repeat and insist that the European Union is both a union of states and a union of peoples.

It is precisely our acceptance of that principle which has guided the European Union towards the many successes we can mention, and which, of course, we all like to refer to from time to time.

The second point is to reconfirm and consolidate another important principle, the principle of a balance of powers, a principle that relates precisely to the role and relationship of those who participate in the European Union, a principle expressed by the way all the Member States express themselves in all - I repeat, all - the European Union' s institutional bodies.

And as you know, the European Union has got to where it is today, achieved what it has achieved, precisely because it has been and is functioning on the basis of a balance of powers as agreed and commonly accepted.

The third basic principle safeguarded in the report is the proposal for a general - and I stress the word general - review of all the institutional bodies that make up the European Union.

For some, perhaps, that may be a risky proposal. However, I must stress that it is necessary and essential, particularly since we all agree that over and above all, the current reconsideration of how the European Union works is directly linked to the great challenge presented by the European Union' s enlargement.

It is only natural, when already in a Europe with 15 Member States we find and all agree that some things do not work quite so well and must be put right, that this will be all the more necessary when we it concerns a European Union with 18, 20, 25 and 27 Member States.

The fourth point concerns a number of new proposals, despite the fact that the issues to which they relate had always been debated.

I refer very specifically to closer cooperation.

Closer cooperation, at least as we view it, must comprise two main elements.

Firstly, it must be an incentive and not an obstacle - I stress: not an obstacle - it must be an incentive for all the Member States to participate more and in greater depth in the European procedures.

Secondly, it must contain a very highly developed element of democratic awareness, which means that if any country or countries for some reason do not wish to participate, at least during a first phase, this should not be regarded as an exclusion or as a factor that restricts the presence of those countries in the European Union.

We have taken a great many steps and we certainly can point to two examples of closer cooperation.

The Schengen Agreement, and Economic and Monetary Union itself.

I would also like to see closer cooperation in foreign policy issues and others as well.

To put it clearly, closer cooperation is a Community process and both foreign policy and common defence policy issues should be dealt with as a Community process, because it provides control mechanisms.

I would like to close by expressing my thanks to the Portuguese Presidency and in particular to Mr da Costa for his cooperation, to Commissioner Barnier, to you and all our colleagues, and of course, to my co-rapporteur Mr Leinen, with whom we worked hard but very well. I would also like to thank the members of Parliament' s Secretariat who assisted us and the interpreters, who on very many occasions worked long hours to enable the difficult negotiations you all know about to take place.

Madam President, I am sure it will come as no surprise to you if I talk about citizens' freedoms and rights and justice in relation to this fascinating report, whose two rapporteurs I congratulate.

It is the view of this Committee that the construction of this area of justice is important and, to this end, a reform of the Court of Justice is necessary.

In order to reform the Court it will be necessary to amend the Treaty, so that the Statute and the Regulations of the Court of Justice and the Court of First Instance become operative.

None of them is currently operative.

Our first demand is therefore that qualified majority be established with the assent of the European Parliament.

With regard to the Court, Parliament also asks to be able to participate in the process of selecting judges as already happens with the posts in the constitutional courts in our states.

On the other hand, with regard to freedoms and rights, we want citizens to be provided with full rights to appeal so that they can be assured that Community legislation will be enforced in the event of violations of fundamental rights. This is not currently the case.

We want to see a reform of Articles 230 and 300 of the Treaty so that Parliament is on an equal footing with the Commission and the Council as far as appeals are concerned.

Lastly, Madam President, we want to see a reform of the Treaty so that Parliament, in relation to the third pillar, also has full access to justice by means of repeal in the event of regulations and acts which do not conform.

Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, the Court of Justice needs to be properly armed in order to be able to cope with the growing number of disputes, as well as its ever expanding authority.

The Court must be able to focus on the real legal issues and legal protection of EU subjects.

The Court of First Instance must be better accommodated in this framework, and both jurisdictions must be able to take more autonomous decisions regarding their own structures and procedures.

Sound and timely administration of justice is a vital component of the constitutional state.

In the light of this, the role of the European Parliament should be upgraded to that of a fully-fledged legislative body and that of a fully-fledged European institution.

These are, in a nutshell, the motives underlying the opinion issued by the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market.

As rapporteur, I am also delighted to note that the Committee on Constitutional Affairs is on the same wavelength for the greater part of its principal report.

Unfortunately, time constraints prevent me from going into any detail.

But in order to bring the report of the Committee on Legal Affairs as far as possible into line with the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market, I tabled four more amendments in the plenary meeting.

As some of these amendments are also to be found in the opinions of other committees, I believe that these amendments deserve - and will probably receive - the support of the entire Parliament.

This is where I would like to conclude my brief report on a not unimportant contribution to what will probably be the last IGC before the largest, most historic and most risky enlargement since the inception of the present European integration process.

This is why we need to seize this opportunity with both hands to prepare the European Union, with all its institutions and in all fields, to face the challenges of the 21st century successfully.

, draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Budgets. (ES) Madam President, the conditions of my intervention in this plenary session are illustrative of the budgetary problem.

I have just hurried from a meeting which, according to the Treaty, does not exist.

I am participating, on behalf of Parliament, in the tripartite dialogue on the budget to set the budgetary guidelines.

This is precisely the point we have raised on behalf of the Committee on Budgets.

It is the adaptation of the Treaty, Article 272 in particular, to the real situation.

We have spent twelve years practising with a timetable set by the interinstitutional agreements.

We have renewed them three times, and we believe that the time has come to include the fundamental principles in the Treaty so that we will not find ourselves in legally dubious situations, such as the case of the meeting which I have just mentioned.

Specifically, we must simplify the procedure in order to prevent the blocking of the budgetary procedure.

When there are 25 members, the current procedure will not work.

We should simplify it while respecting the existing balances of power.

Lastly, Madam President, we also believe that Parliament, as an institution embodying democratic legitimacy, must fully participate in the decisions on own resources.

Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, as rapporteur on behalf of the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy, I would like to congratulate both rapporteurs on their report and I would also like to thank them for the pleasant cooperation.

I would like to raise two points.

Firstly, my Committee is of the opinion that in the field of trade policy, the European Community' s authority and also, therefore, the European Commission' s negotiating mandate must be reinforced.

So too, however, must be the role of Parliament.

This can be done a) by introducing codecision for the common trade policy, b) by introducing an assent procedure for all external agreements and c) by according Parliament a greater role in approving and monitoring trade negotiations.

My second point concerns energy. The Commission has concluded that a coherent European energy policy has been lacking in the past.

There are no clear guidelines on institutional mechanisms for defining a common energy policy, let alone cooperation to guarantee the supply of energy or in terms of the environmental aspects of energy policy.

With a view to sustainable development, a new chapter on energy policy must be included in the Treaty, as well as the relevant sections of the ECSC and EURATOM Treaties.

In addition, the European Parliament powers must be adequately enhanced.

This means that the codecision procedure needs to apply to the EURATOM Treaty too.

It will specifically need to apply to the drafting of minimum safety standards for the design, construction and operation of nuclear reactors within the Union.

So far, the Member States have had their own technical standards and regulations.

In the light of Central and Eastern countries joining the EU, it is vital that uniform, European safety standards for nuclear reactors be drafted.

Unfortunately, my proposal to this effect has not been included in the current report.

I would therefore urge you most emphatically to vote for Amendment No 60 which I have tabled on behalf of my group, so that uniform safety standards can be drawn up for nuclear reactors.

We owe this to our citizens.

Madam President I would like to congratulate the rapporteurs warmly on their report, both in general terms and in specific terms because I believe that they have managed to address the points which we have raised in our opinion, albeit not always literally, within the confines of this reasonably concise report, which I hope will be adopted in this meeting by a large majority.

It is very important to mention the social market economy, as already indicated by Mr von Wogau.

It provides a kind of framework for internal policy which we need and renders a whole raft of discussions redundant.

I believe that this results in satisfaction all round.

The second major point is the Union' s legal personality.

It has been formulated here as if it were only related to foreign policy but it also has enormous significance for internal policy.

Indeed, it then becomes possible to ratify a number of Treaties, such as ILO Treaties and some UN Treaties in the social field, which will add legal clarity to this type of issue.

There are nonetheless two points that are lacking.

One of them is the issue of Article 137(6) which, in my opinion, should be repealed.

There are also a number of amendments on the table which I hope will yet be added.

I would like to finish off with a remark on the issue of the tax policy.

The report, in fact, mentions very little about this.

The tax policy, which also includes social security policy, is nonetheless of great importance, and not only to the Member States. The Commission too has given the matter rather a lot of attention and has devoted a great deal of thought to it.

It is rather a pity, in my opinion, that we talk about it so little.

Maybe we will do so in future.

The policy is implicitly included in the report but I still think that, in a sense, not dealing with it now is a missed opportunity.

That does not, however, detract from the deep appreciation which we have for this report.

Madam President, the proposals by the Committee on Women' s Rights for the Intergovernmental Conference aim to enhance democracy and effectiveness.

It is a fact that the Treaty of Amsterdam was a major step forward for women' s rights, since it provides a firm base for an effective policy on equality, but unfortunately it does not go further than the professional sector.

For that reason we are proposing that the Treaty should include a uniform and cohesive legal base for equality between the sexes, which will include all policy sectors.

We declare that balanced participation of women and men in decision-making at every level is a prerequisite for democracy and social justice, and we are therefore asking for the related articles of the Treaties to be amended to take account of that principle in the composition of the Commission, the European Parliament, the Court of Justice, the Court of First Instance, the Court of Auditors, the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions.

We also stress the need for a close link between the Intergovernmental Conference and the procedure for drawing up the Charter of Fundamental Rights, so that within the scope of the constitutionalisation of the Union, the fundamental right of equality between women and men will be enshrined in Community law.

So besides the essential equilibrium and cohesion that must be secured between the Union' s large and small countries and between the more and less developed areas and population groups, it is also necessary to take into account the balance between the sexes in planning the future of the EU and in decision making.

- (PT) Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, the work in the Intergovernmental Conference has been intensive.

This time the European Parliament' s participation has been reinforced through your President and two other representatives and also through full dialogue between the Council presidency and your Committee on Constitutional Affairs. This reinforcement also stems from the direct information of this House and its debate in plenary, which have no precedents.

This is very encouraging for the future results of the IGC.

So far five main in-depth meetings of the preparatory group have been held, together with three meetings of the IGC itself.

Also planned are all the events in the calendar up to the end of Portugal' s presidency, involving both the IGC and the preparatory group.

A report is also to be prepared which will be submitted to the Feira European Council.

The Council presidency considers that this report should not be purely theoretical but should also make practical proposals. It must enable the next holder of the Council presidency, which will be France, to continue developing this work and to reach a decision by the end of the year.

The issue tackled at the last IGC meeting was the question of extending qualified majority voting.

The Member States demonstrated a certain openness towards this but many have still not made a definitive decision.

Certain areas can already be identified on which the attitude of the large majority of Member States is that these should remain subject to the unanimity rule.

Debates on these issues reveal that there is actually significant reticence, although this may be overcome during the IGC.

The preparatory work carried out to date has also involved questions connected with the European Parliament, the courts, the Committee of the Regions and the Economic and Social Committee.

As regards the decision-making procedure in the European Parliament, there is broad consensus that no revision of the Treaty should be effected which involves changing the existing institutional balance.

As for the scope of codecision, there is some openness towards extending this procedure to all legislative acts adopted by qualified majority without, however, establishing any kind of systematic correlation.

With regard to the Court of Justice and the Court of First Instance, a group of friends of the Council presidency has been brought together to examine possible amendments to the Treaty relating to these two courts.

The study of possible amendments to the Treaty in respect of the Court of Auditors, the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions has also been started.

Many consider that changes should only be made where strictly necessary to ensure the effective functioning of the European Union after enlargement.

Consideration has also been given to matters which may be included on the agenda of the IGC, on the Council presidency' s proposal.

It should be recalled that the conclusions of the Helsinki European Council specify that the Council presidency will submit a report to the European Council and may propose in this report the insertion of new items on the IGC' s agenda.

In the area of security and defence and the Charter of Fundamental Rights, the Council presidency considers that, depending on the progress of the work, the right should be reserved to propose to the Feira European Council next June the inclusion in the IGC of any adjustments or additions to the Treaties which may prove necessary in these areas.

With regard to other issues likely to be added to the IGC' s work, an initial debate has been held based on a list drawn up by the Council presidency.

The argument put forward in favour of a prudent approach to the inclusion of new items on the agenda concerned the risk, inherent in the technical complexity of this debate, of causing the deadline of this December for the completion of the IGC' s work to be missed.

On the issue of the size and composition of the Commission, there is a consensus that the Commission to emerge from this IGC must be strong, independent and legitimate. Its collegiate nature must be preserved.

However, there is clear disagreement between, on one hand, the small and medium-sized Member States which want a Commission composed of one national from each Member State, all with equal status, and, on the other, the large Member States which favour a fixed number of Commissioners regardless of the number of Member States.

The size of the Commission is the main point of disagreement between the delegations. The rest of the debate on the Commission is dependent on this issue as some directly link this question with their positions on the composition, internal organisation and structure of this Community institution.

With regard to the individual responsibility of Commissioners, there is general support for keeping the undertaking currently made by each Commissioner to stand down when asked to do so by the Commission President. The delegations are divided into those which want to keep the informality of this undertaking and those which want the process to be enshrined in the Treaty.

As for the Commission' s collective responsibility as a college, there is some reluctance to accept alterations to the current institutional framework, with the current supervision exercised by the European Parliament being regarded as sufficient.

The idea submitted by this House of the Commission being able to request a vote of confidence in it was positively welcomed.

On the issue of the weighting of votes in Council, there is consensus that the criterion which should be used as the basis for qualified majority voting in Council must stem from the combination of the two elements which form the foundations of the European Union. These are the population and the existence of sovereign states.

The EU is just as much a union of peoples as it is of states.

As for specific mechanisms to be established for the future system, there is also a split between those who defend a double-majority system and those who prefer simple reweighting. One recurring argument is that the reform should be acceptable to public opinion and likely to be ratified by the national parliaments.

This is a common concern of all the Member States, whether large or small, not only due to the need, in ratifying the new Treaty, to enable enlargement and respect for its timetables, but also due to the feeling that a European crisis should not be allowed to occur on this type of reform. There is also the idea that these reforms must be submitted to public opinion in the candidate countries of Central and Eastern Europe so that the impression is not given that these are reforms which must be rushed through, not to improve the European Union but to prevent the new Member States from having access to the EU' s decision-making system.

With regard to closer cooperation, the need or the usefulness for the IGC to tackle this issue was also discussed in an informal debate. Again there was a division of opinion both about the possibility of this issue being discussed and about the scope and nature of any alterations.

The next informal meeting of the Representatives Group on 14 and 15 April in Sintra, Portugal, will deal specifically with this issue which is problematic as there are no examples to follow. There are no specific examples as the Treaty of Amsterdam already allows closer cooperation and so far no Member State has used this instrument and there are no theoretical examples as these are never put forward by the debaters.

Although this issue comes up time and again, it is very abstract.

In terms of the substance of the issue and the introduction of closer cooperation into the Second Pillar, an informal debate has revealed that the majority regard this as unnecessary in external or common security policy, although the possibility of its use in the area of security and defence may be considered.

This means that if closer cooperation were included within the Second Pillar, it would then be necessary to find a specific way of implementing this concept in this area. This could not copy the First Pillar given the dissimilarity between the operation of these two pillars.

With regard to making the existing model more flexible, as supported in particular by the Commission, a certain openness has been detected towards eliminating the recourse to the European Council when launching closer cooperation. However, the limit of eight Member States has been questioned even by those who support altering the requirement for the participation of the majority of Member States.

As you can see, the Portuguese Presidency is continuing to make every effort to take the work forward in order to achieve a comprehensive and balanced agreement which is acceptable to everyone by the specified deadline. Close contact has been maintained with the Commission and the European Parliament.

In the latter case, this has been through both the participation of your President and two selected Members and the regular information provided to the Committee on Constitutional Affairs and this House. This is ensuring that this institutional reform work is carried out with a much higher degree of participation by the European Parliament than the previous revision of the Treaty.

This augurs well for the success of our work.

Mr President, with the Dimitrakopoulos - Leinen report under discussion, the European Parliament is declaring its great vision for the European Union of the future.

This is a truly historic moment, as has been stressed.

Our fellow-citizens are waiting to be told what we are going to demand from the Intergovernmental Conference for that future.

Institutional proposals on particular issues without prior clarification of the basic philosophy of tomorrow' s Union of 27 are not convincing.

The draft resolution is therefore quite right to define that basic view in the form of three principles.

According to the draft, the European Union is, first and foremost, a Union of peoples and a Union of states. Its citizens therefore have both a European and a national identity.

Secondly, it is based on an institutional equilibrium between large and small states.

That must not be just on paper.

Thirdly, the way the Union functions must be made more effective, so that it can cope with the major enlargement.

The above philosophical principles, to which the draft resolution remains faithful, are not metaphysical inventions of the European Parliament but arise from the history and from the political reality which we call the area of Europe.

Anyone who ignores that is building a Europe founded on sand.

The Intergovernmental Conference of 2000 is taking place to make the Union as effective as is required in view of the major enlargement that has been decided.

In this process Parliament' s responsibility is very great indeed.

For that reason, Parliament' s approval of enlargement cannot but depend on the adequacy of the institutional changes that will be decided.

That is not a threat, it is a declaration of responsible attitude.

In good faith, all sides are trying, by means of amendments, to make the way in which European Union functions more effective.

But is it enough for procedures to be simplified and speeded up for them to be described as effective?

The effectiveness of a police service, which indeed demands both simplicity and speed, is quite different from the effectiveness of the fundamental institutions of a democratic public regime.

The effectiveness of democratic institutions is not measured either with a stopwatch, or according to the number of decisions taken.

It is measured by the degree of legitimacy.

The dual legitimacy of the European Union by its European but also its national citizens, by its peoples but also its states, makes the European Union institutionally complex by its very nature.

For that reason the extent to which these procedures can be simplified and speeded up is restricted by the whole complex system of dual legitimacy.

We must bear that in mind tomorrow, when we come to vote on the amendments and the text.

Mr President, within our groups in Parliament and within the IGC itself we are still struggling with the problems that proved fairly intractable at Amsterdam.

These issues are tricky because they expose both the exaggerated self-importance of small states and the folie de grandeur of the big states.

These issues can only be resolved by a greater sense of trust between partners - such trust that is the essential glue of successful federal pacts.

This trust is precisely the quality that is needed so that we are able to ensure the successful accession of the new Member States.

The fact is - and somebody should say this - that if the IGC fails to resolve the Amsterdam questions, enlargement must be postponed.

The Liberal Group supports the efforts of the presidency and of the Commission to build up the extra trust required.

We support the main thrust of this report.

We support especially those elements which expand the European Union' s capacity for action in global affairs: those that strengthen the status and the profile of the citizen, including the Charter; and those that will postulate further political reform in the interests of a strong executive and a mature parliamentary democracy.

In this respect the splitting of the Treaties is vital.

So is retention of unanimity within the Council exclusively for the most serious questions.

Liberals everywhere support ministers that will subscribe to the development of European parliamentary democracy.

But we will be savage critics of those who prefer narrow self-interest and threaten the accession of new Member States.

Mr President, the European Parliament does not take part in Intergovernmental Conference negotiations.

It plays a secondary role, as do all those who are not part of a national government.

The Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance has always maintained that the intergovernmental method, which excludes elected Members and does not allow public debate, is a very significant weakness of the reform of the Treaties and a substantial barrier to its success.

Therefore, our assessment of this report is based on the fact that it is being presented in an unsatisfactory context, in which our priorities - an open, working democracy capable of rendering economic development environmentally sustainable, which ensures the respect and consolidation of the rights of the citizens and residents, and, most importantly, which is able to enlarge to include new Member countries in a short period of time - are not the same as those of the negotiating governments.

The governments have one sole objective: to reach a unanimous agreement in Nice, whatever the outcome, so that they do not have to move on to some other city as obscure as Maastricht.

Although Parliament cannot take part in negotiations, it has a duty to indicate the way, to define clear options for the future, without pretending to take part in the actual negotiations and without being conditioned by governmental pressure or pressure from artificial comparisons, such as the comparison between large and small countries.

This report only partly achieves this objective, and this is why our Group was not able to be unanimous in its final assessment.

But although the final decision was not unanimous, the Group was united in its view of the positive and negative points of this resolution.

We fully support certain central points, but, unfortunately, our view is not shared by many national governments. The issues on which we agree are as follows: systematic extension, not extension on a case by case basis, of the majority vote to the Council; codecision; the urgent need to make the Charter of Fundamental Rights binding and to extend the possibility of recourse to the Court beyond the economic sphere; the provisions on closer cooperation and so forth.

We are, however, very critical of the reduction of the constitution issue to a mere technical operation separating the Treaties into two parts, which, apart from anything else, would be very similar.

This is not the constitutional process, which should bear no resemblance to convoluted diplomatic negotiations and which, we feel, is essential to give the necessary boost to the integration process which, alone, can mobilise the citizens to strive for a better Europe.

We consider that the insistence on maintaining the limit on the number of Members at 700, even when we become a 20-State Europe, unnecessarily penalises the regions and those whose political orientations are neither socialist nor conservative.

In this regard, we hope that our amendment will find consensus in the House.

The Group is divided over double majority, closer cooperation, the number of Commissioners and security policy.

In particular, as regards the subject of the number of Commissioners, we will support the balanced position of those amendments which ensure both sufficient representation of the Member States and the efficiency of the Commission.

To sum up, this report may well be useful in assisting our two representatives in their often extremely frustrating daily work at the Intergovernmental Conference where others take the decisions, but to our citizens, it will seem about as clear as an interministerial memorandum.

Most importantly, in the same way as the 1984 Spinelli Treaty, this report does not live up to the challenge of being a milestone, a clear, unambiguous indication of where we want to be with those who wish to be there.

Mr President, our Group wishes to thank the rapporteurs, Messrs Dimitrakopoulos and Leinen, for the important work which they have carried out.

I must also tell them that, within my group, there are differing views, according to differing national experiences.

I will say the same thing here that I have said in my group: the debate is not whether we say yes or no to federalism.

The debate is how to go about European construction at the point of enlargement.

It is making sure that we do not just build a Europe of the States and a Europe of the people, but, especially, a Europe of the citizens.

We must create a fully democratic institutional fabric.

We know that there are democratic deficits and that they are considerable.

At the moment the challenge in the face of enlargement is to achieve, as the rapporteurs have said, greater efficiency and greater democracy.

The Intergovernmental Conference cannot end with the same disappointment that we had in Amsterdam.

We cannot create an Amsterdam 2.

We have to create a Treaty which gives rise to genuine European construction in which more than 400 million Europeans can share economic prosperity, a social dimension and a democratic life.

This is the great challenge for the European institutions and for European politics.

My vision of European construction is compatible with the fundamental lines which are laid out in the report which we are discussing today.

It is, of course, necessary to give the Commission the powers it needs and make it responsible to Parliament.

This is precisely the issue. We must clearly define the different democratic powers in the field of European competences and we must know who is making decisions and to whom they are responsible.

Mr President, Parliament does not take a corporate position.

Our minimum demand is that Parliament be treated as an adult which has to request that the Commission take certain responsibilities, but which also has to participate actively in European construction on behalf of the European citizens.

On behalf of the European citizens, we have to ask today not only for that fine-tuning of decision making but also for the incorporation of the Charter of Fundamental Rights into the Treaty.

The Charter of Fundamental Rights must give citizens the capacity to demand compliance with these rights in the European courts.

This is the position which we can adopt in our Group, asking for more efficiency and more democracy.

Mr President, in our view the European Parliament' s proposals for the Intergovernmental Conference, as set out in the Dimitrakopoulos-Leinen report, are a misinterpretation.

What we urgently need today, on the eve of enlargement, is not to deepen the integration of the existing Member States at a faster rate.

It is not to trot out the old federalist recipes of the European Movement yet again.

It is not to propose a super-State again, with its own constitution, uniform rules and majority decisions.

No, what we urgently need today, ladies and gentlemen, is to show some evidence of clear-headedness, to accept that economic and political integration cannot be taken any further and to design new forms of cooperation that are far freer, and that will enable 30 or more States to work together on a basis of mutual respect.

Unfortunately, it would seem that the latest debates within the most well-informed groups of society stop at the doors of this Parliament.

In this matter, as in the case of the Charter of Fundamental Rights, our Parliament seems unable to depart from the federalist line it has been pursuing for many years.

That approach leads to an impasse, to what Mr Tsatsos a moment ago, if I understood him rightly, called a Europe built on sand.

First of all, it takes us away from the concept of Europe as an association of states, an association of national democracies, and puts all the countries, great or small, that are afraid of being marginalised on the defensive.

More generally, the rigid federalist approach reflects a more or less unconscious desire to set up institutional barriers against enlargement, which will once again call in question a whole range of long-standing patterns of behaviour.

We must adopt a more positive approach.

We must promote enlargement by adopting a new form of cooperation that is more differentiated, shows greater respect for national sovereignty, that is based on full recognition of the Luxembourg compromise, as I explained in the minority opinion attached to the Dimitrakopoulos-Leinen report.

Mr President, in Denmark there is a concept known as asset stripping.

Top class lawyers and accountants are being convicted one after the other because they have helped strip companies of assets and then left them with tax liabilities.

Asset stripping is a punishable offence.

The Intergovernmental Conference is designed to strip our constitutions and fundamental laws of assets and leave the voters with a democratic deficit, but constitution stripping of this kind is not punished.

The asset under our constitutions is the right of voters to be heard and to choose representatives who can pass laws on our behalf.

If we are dissatisfied with the laws, we can choose new representatives and obtain new laws.

This is the beating heart of our democracies, a heart which, because of the constitution strippers, will stop beating.

They are taking legislative power from our 15 national parliaments and transferring it to officials and ministers, from voters and elected representatives to the executive and from open assemblies to meetings behind closed doors in Brussels.

Electoral power is being transferred from our constitutions, but is not being transferred to the European Parliament.

Power lies with the Commission and the Council of Ministers.

The EU is not a parliamentary democracy, and the national parliaments have been still further marginalised.

A number of us in this House have therefore prepared 19 proposals for democratic reform of the EU.

We call the initiative SOS Democracy - "SOS" because it is a matter of urgency and "Democracy" because that is the heart of the problem.

We do not have democracy in today' s EU.

We should like to have it in tomorrow' s.

We have different opinions as to how the laws should look.

We have support across the political spectrum from communists to conservatives. We disagree about a lot but agree that our differences should be resolved in democratic parliaments.

The voters in our countries should always have the last word.

We reject any attempt to strip our constitutions of democratic content and we urge the public to get involved in the negotiations concerning the Nice Treaty before it is too late.

Mr President, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, Commissioner, I am speaking as draftsman of the opinion of this Parliament' s Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism.

I understand the importance of institutional reforms, but I would also like to express the opinion of the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism on the issues which we must tackle in relation to the Intergovernmental Conference.

We would like to make three points.

Firstly, the active recognition of the role, protagonism and participation of the regions in the process of European construction which began 50 years ago.

To this end, we want an extended Article 70 and we also want it to be supplemented with a provision on the creation of a single European agency for air traffic control.

Lastly, the role of tourism for both the economy and for employment.

We - or at least I personally - accept Amendment No 168, presented by the chairman of the Committee on Regional Policy on this issue.

Mr President, I would first of all like to express my appreciation for the sterling work carried out by Mr Dimitrakopoulos and Mr Leinen.

I believe that this is one of the best reports which have so far been produced in the framework of IGCs over recent years.

I am making this statement as former rapporteur on the Maastricht Treaty.

By the way, Maastricht is not a strange city, Mrs Frassoni, it is a very exciting city where the Dutch-Flemish, German and French cultures all flow into one.

Just try one of the pavement cafés and you will see what I mean.

I will repeat this to Mrs Frassoni in Italian some time.

Mr President, it is rather a shame that so many amendments have been tabled as this might affect the quality and balance of the report.

The large groups should, therefore, restrict themselves to the absolutely necessary amendments during the vote. This seems the best way to retain the good work which the rapporteurs have put in.

As far as our Group is concerned, the resolution needs to be amended on a number of points.

For example, we do not agree with the proposal in the resolution to restrict the number of Commissioners to 20 and to introduce a rota system for the smaller countries.

One Commissioner per Member State seems a much better solution to us.

In order to boost citizens' confidence in the European Commission, it is vital that each Member State should have a Commission Member.

Our Group, too, has therefore tabled amendments to this effect.

Next is the number of MEPs.

The resolution argues in favour of the possibility of European lists.

This is a sound idea, but if we want 10% of the European members on European lists, then this should not, of course, result in additional MEPs on top of the 700 which have been agreed upon.

It is important that we retain a maximum of 700, with or without the European list.

Parliament is already vast, the buildings are already packed and the whole thing has to remain workable.

The third point concerns the issue of unanimity.

We believe that in an enlarged Union, decision-making should not always be blocked by an excessive right of veto.

Unanimity should, therefore, be restricted to the bare essentials. These are constitutional issues such as the deployment of military troops and issues pertaining to territorial integrity.

All other decisions should be taken by qualified majority with weighted voting, as is proposed, and - this is vitally important - with colegislative powers exercised by Parliament.

We would also thank the Commission for this support.

I would like to end by commenting on the Charter of Fundamental Rights.

According to our Group, it is of paramount importance that this Charter be included in the Treaty.

Work to this effect is being carried out, and we sincerely hope that a text can be produced which everyone can agree to incorporate into the Treaty.

This is a key issue for the citizens of Europe.

Mr President, firstly, on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists, I would like to express my support for the Dimitrakopoulos/Leinen report and, furthermore, thank the Portuguese Presidency for their positive attitude towards the incorporation of Parliament into the Intergovernmental Conference.

This report is of great value and I therefore believe we should support it today by a majority in this Parliament, because this is an opportunity for a completely open debate on the great issues still facing us in Europe.

This debate is going on between political and national groups in different Member States.

Please allow me to make a correction, Mr President: there are no large and small countries here.

Here we must consider ourselves to be small. In the past, the countries in Europe which considered themselves to be large tried to impose their hegemony by force.

Here were are all amongst small countries, especially given the challenge of globalisation.

I believe this should be an important element in our coexistence.

In European Parliament debates, political groups, citizens of different countries and diverse interests and prejudices come into play and this allows us to be aware of when we touch a nerve and of when it is necessary for us to take special care in what we do.

Therefore, this is an important debate and I believe the Council should take account of the position we take.

Secondly, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, Commissioner, I believe we should also try to introduce some vision and some idealism into this debate.

I have always been against the idea that we had to deal with the 'leftovers' from Amsterdam.

Leftovers are thrown in the bin.

These are clear and fundamental challenges, which refer to and are linked to the membership of the Commission, the power of the President, fair contributions by the Member States and such important questions as closer cooperation, majority voting and - a vital issue - the Charter of Fundamental Rights.

I say this particularly in view of the crisis which we have seen in a Member State as a result of the presence of a party whose fundamental values are contrary to the community of values which we hold here.

A final consideration: Commissioner Barnier has said that, before the end of the Conference, we must resolve certain problems relating to the chain of command.

Mr President, in relation to the appeal to public opinion which we are making, I believe we must clearly affirm the principles of democracy and transparency and also the chain of command.

We must not allow a situation where, while we are discussing this, a kind of Loch Ness monster reappears every month in the press.

I understand the journalists, but we cannot allow a situation where crises are created by certain anonymous officials, who are frustrated mandarins, and certain ambassadors, who seem to behave like a Praetorian Guard, and who do not hesitate to make anonymous declarations in the press.

Here, the only risk involved in democracy is the risk taken in elections.

This is the risk taken by Minister Gama, Commissioner Barnier and by all of us.

However, here in the gossip shops of Brussels we create a situation and certain centres of power which do not correspond to the principles of democracy and transparency, which are precisely the principles which we have to strengthen in this Intergovernmental Conference.

I believe that it is important for all of the institutions to confront this issue responsibly.

If not, the Intergovernmental Conference will not have been a success for our future.

Mr President, the EU is faced with enormous challenges.

In just a few years' time, the Union is to be enlarged to include almost double the number of Member States.

The euro is to be introduced.

We are to have a security policy worthy of the name, implement administrative reforms and, hopefully, win back some of the confidence our citizens have lost in the European project.

The Intergovernmental Conference should prepare the EU for these changes.

It provides us with the opportunity to adapt our work to the new Member States and to the new tasks we have before us.

It is a question of finding a balance between democracy and efficiency and of maintaining the historic balance between small and large countries.

These are the questions which remain following the conclusion of the Treaty of Amsterdam.

It is important in these discussions not to become lost in technical details and lose sight of the goal - that of making the EU more open, more efficient and more intelligible.

We must all make sacrifices in order to achieve this goal.

Unfortunately, governments appear to have lost sight of this goal.

The Intergovernmental Conference is making only limited progress, which is not the fault of the Portuguese Presidency.

Probably what will happen is what usually happens: at five minutes to midnight on the last day, a compromise will be reached with which no-one is entirely satisfied.

The talk is already of the next Intergovernmental Conference where the major questions will then be solved.

There is starting to be a surfeit of half-baked intergovernmental conferences.

Our citizens have higher expectations than that, and we do not have much time.

That is why we have to take the opportunity now.

The EU must be changed in the way we Liberals have demanded, that is to say in the direction of transparency, public control, more explicit accountability, a clearer distribution of competences and a common constitution.

Quite simply, the EU must become more liberal.

The report includes many of our amendments, and I support these with few exceptions.

The challenges faced by the EU are exciting and historic.

They should inspire us all to roll up our shirt sleeves.

We are in a position to create something unique: democratic, competitive and peaceful cooperation throughout the continent.

Instead, however, of awakening hope and enthusiasm, present developments appear, rather, to be giving rise to anxiety among governments.

One might well ask what has become of political leadership and vision.

Mr President, if the changes to the Treaty proposed in the resolution we are debating are implemented, the European Union will take an absolutely crucial step on the way to becoming a federal state and one, moreover, in which the national parliaments will lose control over almost all crucial areas of policy.

In addition to the massive increase in supranational forms of decision-making, the proposal contains quite a few qualitative changes in the direction of federalism, among these the proposal to remove the national right of veto in the course of changes to large parts of the current Treaty and, also, the demands for a single EU constituency in the elections for the European Parliament.

I am convinced that this transformation of the EU into a federal state is a blind alley in every way.

The EU' s major problem today is not a lack of centralised power but a shortage of real democracy.

What the Union needs in place of more supranationalism is democratic reform leading to a dramatic reduction in the Commission' s political power, to the legislative process in the Council' s being made public and to the national parliaments' being given decisive influence.

Through the Treaty changes proposed in the resolution, the EU would become a Union wholly dominated by the big Member States.

The power wielded by the major countries would be increased dramatically through the introduction of a system of "double simple majority" voting in the Council of Ministers.

Their power would also be increased through the increase in their representation in the European Parliament.

In an EU which has been enlarged by a further twelve States and in which seven hundred seats in Parliament have been distributed as proposed in the resolution, Sweden would have thirteen seats, Finland seven and Ireland five.

This would mean that, in many Member States, important political powers would not be represented at EU level.

This also shows how weak the democratic basis of such a Parliament would be.

Compared with other federal states, the "EU state" would, on this model, be unusually centralised and offer little protection to small constituent States.

A comparison might be made with the United States in which the one chamber in a two-chamber system has proportional representation, while representation in the second chamber is the same for all constituent States.

In the EU, the big countries would instead dominate both chambers on the basis of the proposal we are now debating.

For anyone who wants to change anything regarding monetary union or EMU, it is now, when the Treaty is being changed, that the opportunity exists.

Many adherents of EMU on the Left have, of course, argued in favour of altering the nature of monetary union in such a way that the Central Bank is placed under democratic control and that the goals of economic policy are not merely monetary.

It is noticeable that they are now completely silent and that it is now only the Confederal Group of the European United Left/Nordic Green Left which is demanding the democratisation of monetary union.

As you have perhaps noted, I am going to vote against the present resolution.

(The President cut the speaker off)

Mr President, I support the enlargement of the European Union because I know it will consolidate the new democracies in eastern and central Europe.

I know it will also increase the size of the European Union as a trading block which in time will ensure that the Union as an economic entity becomes more competitive.

I know that reform within the existing European institutions must take place.

However, any changes within the internal decision-making procedures must be balanced and fair.

We do not want to see a two-tier European Union in which larger Member States dictate the pace at the expense of the smaller Member States.

For example, the report which we are debating today recommends a rotation system for the composition of the European Commission.

This will mean that the automatic entitlement of smaller Member States to have one Member of the Commission will be downgraded.

I do not believe that this is a particularly sensible proposal.

380 million citizens of the Union have an affinity with the Commission.

Certainly, from an Irish perspective, Irish people recognise the importance of the Commission as an institutional body within the European Union.

It is still the institution that controls the operations of competition policy, the common agricultural policy, the common fisheries policy and the common transport policy.

The Union must draw nearer to the citizens of the Union.

We should also remember that some Member States, including my country, must hold a referendum on any Treaty changes that arise at the forthcoming IGC.

The loss of an automatic right to nominate a Commissioner would certainly be a very difficult, if not impossible, proposal to sell to an Irish electorate in this referendum.

I would now like to return to the issue of extending the qualified majority voting system at European Council level.

The Council represents the interests of the 15 Member State governments within the institutional framework of the Union and currently, under existing EU Treaties, unanimous agreement of the 15 Member States is required for any tax changes sought within the Union.

The report we are discussing today seeks to extend qualified majority voting to all legislative activities except those of a constitutional nature.

I believe that national Member States should retain the right of veto on taxation matters.

The Irish taxation system is innovative in many ways and has contributed to our present growth rates.

I do not believe that the extension of qualified majority voting to taxation matters at European Council level is a particularly welcome development.

Mr President, a biblical parable teaches the reader to build his house on a rock.

After all, a house built on sand has no solid foundations.

This parable was meant as a reference to faith and its foundations.

Nonetheless, I was reminded of this parable during the IGC discussion.

The relentless attempts to turn Europe into a political unity seem to be built on quicksand.

Indeed, the citizens of Europe do not feel European and this will not change overnight.

Still, the discussion on the EU' s future is peppered with concepts such as European citizenship.

This does not exist by any stretch of the imagination and is simply quicksand!

In the IGC discussion or the present report for that matter, the end goal of European cooperation is not taken into consideration.

What do we want to achieve as a European Union?

I would be keen to hear the Council' s and Commission' s opinion on this.

If there is a well-considered vision on the foundation of European cooperation, the European House will be on more solid ground and will be able to brave the bad weather.

I share the minority view of Mr Berthu, a member of the Union for a Europe of Nations Group, as it has been included in this report.

This document does include a solid foundation for the Union, namely a cooperative of independent states, in which the national democracies enjoy the highest level of legitimacy.

Regarding the enlargement issue, the fact that Member States joining the EU can become fully-fledged Members of the Union should be central.

"Degrading" acceding countries to second-class members does not do them justice and has unwanted political consequences.

Instead of the idea of different speeds, I support the idea of carrying out only the core tasks, that is to say in cross-border policy areas, at European level.

Another specific point I would like to raise concerns the European Commission.

This high official college should in future not have more or fewer than 20 members.

If necessary, combinations of countries can alternate in appointing a Euro Commissioner.

I support the policy of granting the European Parliament codecision in all cases in which the Council decides by qualified majority.

This must, however, go hand in hand with sound scrutiny by the national parliaments of their "own" ministers in the Council.

President, Commissioner, we are faced with a fundamental difficulty, in the exercise in which we are involved, in maintaining the balance between enlarging the EU and reforming the institutions to make that enlargement possible.

British Conservatives cannot accept the report, based on the long list of ancillary items which are not on the agenda of the IGC.

We are concerned by the proposals for constitutionalisation of the Union, by the proposals to incorporate the Charter of Fundamental Rights into the Treaty, by the progressive diminishing of the distinction between the first and second pillars, by the proposal that the Council should adopt broad guidelines of economic, employment and social convergence policies by qualified majority.

These are just some examples of the complex and controversial issues which are raised.

We are overloading the wish list of the IGC.

The great danger, if all these extra items were to be adopted on the agenda, is that the deadline of December 2000 would inevitably be missed.

Where would that leave the candidate countries like Poland and Hungary, whose government leaders have already expressed concern over the timetable?

We believe the IGC should concentrate on the essential institutional reforms.

It should ensure that it meets the deadline, to enable the first wave of enlargement to include Central and Eastern European countries by 2004, and to continue any further necessary reforms with the full inclusion of our new partners.

If the EU delays enlargement too long, it may make it more difficult, or impossible, for some candidate countries to join within the envisaged timetable.

The President-in-Office addressed some of these concerns in his speech.

Commissioner Barnier in his speech said that the intention is to succeed with the reforms, not necessarily to conclude them.

Some people say that this is the last opportunity for reform.

I do not think that is a very fair reflection on the extraordinary reforms that many of the candidate countries have made in the last 9 and 10 years since they were within the Warsaw Pact or formerly part of the Soviet Union.

We should not confuse or reverse our priorities.

Mr President, my group welcomes this report.

It sends a clear message to the IGC to be ambitious, to think long-term and not short-term, to think of how a Union with nearly double the number of Member States we have now can actually function effectively and to take this opportunity to change the Treaties, because future IGCs with nearly 30 states around the table will find it even more difficult than it is now to agree on reforms.

The report puts forward ambitious proposals, as one would expect of the European Parliament.

If adjusted by the amendments by my group, it will be a well-balanced set of proposals, well-balanced notably on the delicate question of the equilibrium between large and smaller Member States.

On the size of the Commission, for instance, the formulas that are likely to be adopted tomorrow will refer either to one Commissioner per Member State or to a smaller number, a fixed number of Commissioners.

The Commission cannot go on expanding indefinitely.

In the second case, it will be a rotating system, so that every Member State, large and small, has equal opportunities of seeing one of its nationals serve in the Commission.

On the question of the size of the European Parliament, we have also found a point of equilibrium, based on to a minimum number of Members for each Member State.

Every state will, of course, have to make a sacrifice following enlargement, but a minimum number will be guaranteed, with digressive proportionality thereafter.

So the report is balanced and I think can be welcomed.

Some people are saying: ' The IGC will never agree to this point or to that point' .

But we are not in this Parliament trying to guess the outcome of the IGC; we are trying to encourage it to move in a particular direction, in a more ambitious direction, to make sure that we actually have a Union capable of functioning effectively when we enlarge to nearly 30 Member States.

That is essential for our future.

Mr President, the aim of the IGC is to reconcile enlargement with deepening.

In particular, we need to review the interinstitutional balance, representation within the Commission and the other institutions, the weighting of votes and the areas covered by qualified majority voting.

Unanimity voting must apply to decisions of a constitutional and fundamental nature.

Closer cooperation must make it possible to manage diversity and avoid getting bogged down, without calling the fundamental structure of the Union into question.

The report by our fellow Members, whom I want to congratulate, has been substantially improved over the course of the discussions.

Nonetheless, the outlined reform will hit the small Member States hardest.

That applies in particular to the provisions on the composition and operation of the institutions.

A Parliament in which the ceiling of four seats per Member State, which does not allow for a balanced representation of the political forces, is unacceptable.

The same is true of a Council in which the qualified majority rules have to be readjusted and whose proposed method of operation will inevitably lead to deadlock and inconsistency, and of a Commission in which the rule must be one member per Member State.

Lastly, let me bring up the question of the seat of Parliament and call for the promise made to be respected.

I am always surprised to see our Parliament, which sets itself up as the committed champion of respect for minority rights when it comes to others, go against this approach when it comes to deciding on the institutional architecture of our own House.

Mr President, we, for our part, welcome the enlargement of Europe and will participate in the discussion of how to prepare for it.

The Scottish National Party, which I represent, is committed in its manifesto and its general policy to the idea of Europe as a confederation of peoples, countries and regions, not as a sovereign federal union in its own right.

That is something which the parties of European Free Alliance have in common and our votes will be cast in that light.

I want to draw attention particularly to Amendment No 138, in its interaction with paragraph 32 of the Dimitrakopoulos-Leinen report.

Regarding its proposal for all-Europe lists of candidates, we in Scotland - a small nation within a large Member State - are seriously concerned about the practical disappearance of Scotland as a distinct entity within the Union This would also apply to Euskadi, Flanders, Galicia, Andalusia and Wales.

The reduction in Members of the European Parliament that we would face, coupled with the arrival of new Member States which are smaller in population than Scotland or Wales and which would be fully represented in all the institutions of the Union, will certainly increase the pressure for and our people' s commitment to the idea of our own independence in this great European confederation.

As it is now voting time, the debate will be adjourned and will resume at 3 p.m.

Recommendation for second reading, in the form of a letter, on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development, on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to adopting a European and Council Decision on the application of aerial-survey and remote-sensing techniques to the agricultural statistics for 1999-2003 (13300/1/1999 - C5-0065/2000 - 1998/0296(COD))

(The President declared the common position approved)

Proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive amending Council Directive 95/50/EC on uniform procedures for checks on the transport of dangerous goods by road (COM(00)0106 - C5-0129/2000 - 2000/0044(COD)) (Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism)

Proposal for a decision of the European Parliament, the Council, the Commission, the Court of Justice, the Court of Auditors, the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions on the organisation and operation of the Office for Official Publications of the European Communities (EC, ECSC, Euratom) (C5-0080/2000 - 2000/2043(ACI)) (Committee on Culture, Youth, Education, the Media and Sport)

Recommendation for second reading (A5-0071/2000), drawn up on behalf of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to adopting a European Parliament and Council directive on action to be taken against the emission of gaseous and particulate pollutants by engines intended to power agricultural or forestry tractors and amending Council Directive 74/150/EEC (10323/1/1999 - C5-0225/1999 - 1998/0247(COD) (rapporteur: Mr Fitzsimons)

(The President declared the common position approved)

Report (A5-0102/2000) by Mr Lehne, on behalf of the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs, on the initiative of the Republic of Finland with a view to the adoption of a Council decision concerning arrangements for cooperation between financial intelligence units of the Member States in respect of exchanging information (11636/1999 - C5-0330/1999 - 1999/0824(CNS))

Recommendation for second reading (A5-0083/2000), on behalf of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, on the common position of the Council with a view to adopting a European Parliament and Council directive on the deliberate release into the environment of genetically modified organisms and repealing Directive 90/220/EEC (11216/1/1999 - C5-0012/2000 - 1998/0072(COD)) (rapporteur: Mr Bowe)

Mr President, as I explained during the debate yesterday, the Commission is able to accept fully Amendments Nos 9, 17, 19, 29 and 47.

The Commission can also accept Amendments Nos 1 to 4, 8, 11, 24, 35 to 38, 46, 48, 49 and 52 in principle, as far as they clarify the intention of the Commission to establish an efficient, transparent and balanced regulatory framework for GMOs.

Some of these amendments need only to be brought into line with the legal wording of the text of the directive and the overall legislative framework.

For other amendments, for instance those amendments concerning antibiotic-resistant marker genes, the principle is politically acceptable but the proposed text as such does not seem to be appropriate.

The Commission is unable to accept Amendments Nos 5 to 7, 10, 12 to 16, 18, 20 to 23, 25 to 28, 30 to 34, 39 to 45, 50 and 51.

More specifically concerning Amendments Nos 22, 23 and 25, the Commission cannot accept them as they stand but is willing to consider how due account can be taken of the concerns they reflect.

Mr President, I have a question for the Commission, so as to make it quite clear to my fellow delegates what we are voting about.

I have the Council' s common position of 9 December 1999 before me.

It says in the document passed to us by the Council that this common position was adopted unanimously.

If I remember correctly, we were still under the Finnish Council Presidency in December 1999, with a Green Environment Minister.

Political Union took place in June 1999, under the German Council Presidency, also with a green Environment Minister.

However, I am a little confused because the Greens in this House are maintaining that the common position is so weak that it is imperative that we make a huge number of improvements to it.

That is why I wanted to put the question again as to whether we are really voting on the common position that all the Environment Ministers subscribed to, or whether we are mistaken?

May I remind you that the debate is closed. Nevertheless I will give the floor to the Commission if it wishes to clarify the matter further.

It is that very common position.

Mr President, since Mr Liese has addressed a question to us, I will take the liberty of answering him.

The Green Group is not dependent on the positions of the Green ministers represented in the Environment Council.

We have freedom of choice, and I would hope the same applies to all the political groups here present.

But I wanted to speak specifically on the vote on Amendment No 37.

I think it is quite logical to vote on Amendment No 11 first, before Amendment No 37, because Amendment No 11 goes further than Amendment No 37.

It proposes a total ban on antibiotic-resistant marker genes, which is not the case in Amendment No 37, which relates only to Part C of the directive.

So I believe it would be more logical to vote first on the amendment that departs furthest from the original position.

Mr Lannoye, the rapporteur discussed this question with the competent services yesterday.

He does not seem to agree with you.

In fact he believes that the wording of Amendment No 11 is such as to suggest a different voting order from the one you recommend.

After the vote on Amendments Nos 38 and 49: President.

We will now adjourn the vote and resume after the formal sitting.

(The sitting was suspended at 12 noon for the formal sitting and resumed at 12.35 p.m.)

Mr President, I understand perfectly that it is an honour for us to receive a distinguished guest of state.

However, I would ask you, when the Bureau next meets, to address the question as to whether it is a constructive use of time to interrupt a vote that we need a qualified majority for and for which there are only seven or eight proposed amendments.

I would urge you to address this matter in the Bureau.

I am happy to put this question to the Bureau, Mrs Roth-Behrendt, but I was bound by decisions outside my control.

Mr President, just before the formal sitting you interrupted this vote very suddenly.

It rather surprised me, and I am sure many other Members of the House, who during the formal sitting expressed their surprise at the way in which the vote was interrupted.

We have just seen the first vote after the formal sitting fail to secure a qualified majority by only a handful of votes.

Does that not demonstrate what we were talking about and the point Mrs Roth-Behrendt has raised?

When we have qualified majority votes they should not be interrupted in any way by the formal sitting.

There were eight votes to go.

I can inform you, on the basis of my experience, that you could have completed that in three minutes.

It is ridiculous that we are now proceeding with qualified majority votes when Members have not been given a reasonable amount of time to come back into the Chamber.

I hope you could address that issue, Mr President.

I quite understand your feelings, Mr Bowe.

To tell the truth, I agree with you.

But I also had to respect the protocol which, once again, unfortunately often takes precedence over our proceedings.

That said, it is true that your comment makes good sense and I think the Bureau will have to give it the fullest consideration.

Mr President, I have a question about the method applied here.

It seems to me that, normally, when the sitting resumes and we resume the vote after a formal sitting, a bell sounds to warn our colleagues that the sitting and the vote are resuming.

I did not hear that bell and I would ask you to confirm the method used in such cases, for this probably adversely affected the result of the vote in this Chamber.

In principle, Mrs Lienemann, the bell sounds when the sitting has been adjourned in order to call Members back.

Some Members had left the Chamber, others remained.

I had in fact announced that the voting would resume immediately after the formal sitting. Moreover this was indicated in the Minutes and on the agenda.

But I too am sometimes faced with imponderables.

Let me assure you that all your comments will be passed on to the Bureau.

You yourself are a member of the Bureau.

I think that by taking concerted action we will manage to improve the system.

Once again, Mrs Liepitz, I can only take note of the situation, deplore it like you and propose that we finally press on with the vote.

(The President declared the common position approved as amended)

Report (A5-0088/2000) by Mr Papayannakis, on behalf of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation establishing a system for the identification and registration of bovine animals and regarding the labelling of beef and beef products and repealing Council Regulation (EC) No 820/97 (COM(1999) 487 - C5-0240/1999 - 1999/0204(COD))

Joint motion for a resolution on the Lisbon Summit

(Parliament rejected the motion for a resolution)Motion for a resolution (B5-0320/2000) by Mr Suominen and others, on behalf of the PPE-DE Group, on the outcome of the Extraordinary European Council in Lisbon on 23 and 24 March 2000

(Parliament rejected the motion for a resolution)

Motion for a resolution (B5-0322/2000) by Mr Cox and Mr Jensen, on behalf of the ELDR Group, on the outcome of the Extraordinary European Council in Lisbon on 23 and 24 March 2000

(Parliament rejected the motion for a resolution)

Motion for a resolution (B5-0328/2000) by Mr Le Pen and others, on behalf of the TDI Group, on the Lisbon European Council

(Parliament rejected the motion for a resolution)

Motion for a resolution (B5-0329/2000) by Mr Bernié, on behalf of the EDD Group, on the Extraordinary European Council of 23 and 24 March, on the subject 'Employment, economic reforms and social cohesion: towards a Europe of innovation and knowledge'

(Parliament rejected the motion for a resolution)

Motion for a resolution (B5-0331/2000) by Mr Figueiredo and others, on behalf of the GUE/NGL Group, on the outcome of the Extraordinary European Council in Lisbon on 23 and 24 March

(Parliament rejected the motion for a resolution)

Motion for a resolution (B5-0333/2000) by Mr Queiró and others, on behalf of the UEN Group, on the outcome of the Extraordinary European Council in Lisbon on 23 and 24 March 2000

(Parliament rejected the motion for a resolution)

Motion for a resolution (B5-0335/2000) by Mr Flautre and others, on behalf of the Verts/ALE Group, on the outcome of the European Council in Lisbon on 23 and 24 March 2000: Presidency' s conclusions

(Parliament rejected the motion for a resolution)

Motion for a resolution (B5-0338/2000) by Mr Goebbels, on behalf of the PSE Group, on the meeting of the European Council (Lisbon, 23 and 24 March 2000)

(Parliament rejected the motion for a resolution)

Joint motion for a resolution on the EU-Africa summit

Mr President, an error has slipped into paragraphs 15, 17 and 18 of this joint resolution of the European Union and Africa.

In paragraph 15, instead of saying "the OAU" it should say "the African States" .

In section 17, instead of "the OAU" it should say "Africa" .

In section 18, "members of the OAU" should be replaced by "Africans" .

(Parliament agreed to vote on the oral amendment)

(Parliament adopted the resolution) EXPLANATIONS OF VOTE

Mr President, I would like to give the following explanation of the vote that I cast in the debate concerning additionality.

I would like particularly to underline the point in the motion that Parliament fully endorses the Commission' s statement that the spirit of additionality, as well as the letter of the law, represents a key consideration and is vital to ensuring that programmes have a maximum impact on the ground.

In that light it is absolutely unacceptable that the current policy allows Member States, after submission of region-based plans, to reallocate funds internally yet still formally comply with the additionality principle while defying its spirit.

This matter urgently calls for review by the Commission.

Since the debate - yesterday in fact - I have received a very courteous and helpful letter from Mr Barnier indicating that the Commission is moving our way on this.

I am very glad about that.

I should like to congratulate my colleague, Mrs Evans, for setting up this marvellous debate and getting this superb result today.

Mr President, I am delighted this resolution has been adopted by Parliament in recognition of the problem that exists with additionality.

I represent Wales which, due to the practices of the UK Government, has not received, and will not receive, what the EU intends to be spent on combating poverty over and above normal government spending, even with Objective I status in the current programme period.

As Commissioner Barnier has stated, it is as important to comply with the spirit of additionality as with the letter of the law.

The Commissioner also endorsed the statement by Commissioner Liikanen that in future the Commission would be particularly attentive to the spending figures put forward by the Member States when there is evidence of reduced expenditure in a given region or regions.

I trust now that the Member States will comply with the wishes of Parliament and the Commission in this matter to ensure that the effective targeting of structural funds at the poorest regions is not undermined.

- The EPLP delegation voted in favour of the compromise resolution on additionality because we believe that the principle of additionality is one of the core fundamental pillars of the structural funds reforms, for which I was Parliament' s rapporteur.

However, I believe that parts of this resolution, rather than bringing clarity to the rules, will only serve to confuse the general public and in particular funding operators.

Paragraph A continues to confuse the principle of additionality with the separate but equally important principle of co-financing.

There is no regulatory requirement to check additionality on an annual basis, but as stated in the regulation, simplification requires three checks on additionality during the programming period.

It is inappropriate for Members to try with this resolution to rewrite regulations which were agreed unanimously by this Parliament and will be up for review in 2006.

More disappointing is the naked party political games which British Members Mr Davies, Mr Bradbourn and Mrs Evans have attempted in this resolution.

This will not serve the best interests of our poorest communities, with deliberate misinformation and hijacking this debate for narrow party political advantage.

Our real goal must be to plan and give our support to the successful implementation of these funds to improve the life prospects of people in our poorest regions.

My party is committed to this goal and will work with other parties in a constructive and positive way to achieve this.

Agricultural statistics for the period 1993-2003

Mr President, of course, it is important, if not essential, for the European Union to be engaged in statistics.

However, this undertaking can sometimes be extremely harmful for certain States in our Union, take, for example, the milk quotas which have been so detrimental for so many areas of Europe.

In my opinion, we must ensure that these statistics are calculated, and are calculated appropriately, but, most importantly, I would like to take the opportunity presented by this explanation of vote on statistics to invite Parliament, the Commission and the Council to avoid what so frequently occurs as a result of the application of statistics to milk quotas and agricultural products, for example, according to which a certain amount may or may not be produced - namely, the waste of resources due to the destruction of excess produce.

Checks on the transport of dangerous goods by road

Mr President, I voted for this resolution because, clearly, the transport of dangerous goods is constantly in need of regulation.

We must do everything possible to reduce the number of vehicles carrying dangerous goods along the roads of Europe to a minimum.

I would argue that rail, sea and air transport should be favoured instead, and, in particular, we should favour employing the elderly to drive dangerous goods vehicles and work in related activities.

Young people lack experience and are certainly at greater risk than the elderly.

The experience of workers who have been performing this activity for a substantial period of time should be recognised, and employment of the elderly in all the most hazardous activities should be promoted.

Recommendation for second reading: Bowe (A5-0083/2000)

Mr President, I feel that we should not be too alarmist in these matters, and that, with regard to genetically modified organisms, we should not hold back scientific progress with an excessive amount of regulations.

In any case, no one has ever succeeded in blocking the advance of science. I have heard on the grapevine that a gene is being discovered which prolongs human life, and I am a little concerned that we may be placing too many restrictions on science and the use of genetically modified organisms.

When this gene is discovered, it would be a shame if Parliament decided not to allow the movement of genetically modified organisms, ourselves, in fact, when, at last, we could live longer in better health.

For this reason, in the interests of the elderly, I would call for less stringent regulation of GMOs.

Mr President, I want to give an oral explanation of vote because what has happened, once again, is not very good news for our Parliament.

In fact consumers, associations and all those concerned with the environment, with health, with the expected risks due to GMOs released into the environment, were expecting the European Parliament to send out a strong signal.

Once again we have simply kowtowed to the lobby of the advocates of GMOs on the pretext that science will help to make the world a better place.

We know full well that as yet there is no toxicology study that evaluates the consequences of releasing GMOs into the environment.

So we can only regret that those amendments that went much further, that indeed allowed us to anticipate the implications of GMOs for nature, were not accepted.

Mr President, I therefore condemn the kind of compromise reached between the major political groups, which goes against what the consumers and associations expected of us, as well as all those who trusted the European Parliament and who expect our Members to adopt firm positions.

- The European Parliament will vote on 12 April, to adopt a new directive on the deliberate release of genetically modified organisms (GMOs).

There are major issues at stake.

The time has come to make those who engage in the deliberate release of genetically modified organisms legally responsible for damage to human health and the environment.

They should be liable for any damage caused by such releases and they should be required to take out liability insurance just as every driver has to take out liability insurance in case he kills or injures another human being.

The argument has been made that this issue should instead be covered by horizontal legislation.

It is worth noting, however, that we have heard this argument since discussions about Directive 90/220/EEC first started in 1989.

At that time, the Commission promised that liability for environmental damage caused by GMOs would be covered by horizontal legislation, but we have been waiting for more than 10 years for that promise to be fulfilled.

We must adopt an immediate and categorical ban on the use of antibiotic resistant genes.

Many scientists and organisations, such as the Pasteur Institute and the British Medical Association, have called for a ban on the use of antibiotic-resistant marker genes, which do not perform any relevant function on the plants and are therefore completely superfluous.

In the common position antibiotic-resistant genes would just "be phased out" in the future, and only if "they may have any adverse effects on human health and the environment" .

This would mean that antibiotic-resistant products that have already been authorised would remain.

There are many less damaging forms of marker genes available and it is EU policy to prohibit all unnecessary use of antibiotics if there is a risk for human or animal health.

The directive should take a clear stand and insist that the use of these marker genes is stopped now.

The pharmaceutical industry wants a total exemption from the directive.

The Environment Committee adopted two contradictory amendments, one for a total exemption and one tightening up the common position line of a conditional exemption with all the normal environmental risk provisions.

It is unacceptable that the industry could be allowed on exemption unless the environmental risk provisions apply.

- (FR) I am extremely disappointed at the way the second-reading vote on the amendments to the draft directive on procedures for authorising genetically modified organisms (GMOs) went.

Admittedly, we have known since first reading that the principle of banning GMOs, or at least having a moratorium to allow for more in-depth studies, was rejected.

But the least we could have expected was for Parliament now to decide to take serious steps to protect the consumer.

Nothing of the kind has happened, however.

The European Parliament has just given way on three vital issues, in circumstances I consider shameful:

On banning the release of GMOs containing antibiotic-resistant genes: Amendments Nos 11 and 37 which called for such GMOs not to be released into the environment were rejected.

Instead we have adopted an amendment that simply calls for particular consideration to be given to this problem in order to identify and phase out by 2005 antibiotic resistance markers in GMOs which may have adverse effects on human health and the environment;

On the risk of unintentional gene -transfers to other organisms: Amendment No 12, which called for measures to be taken to prevent such unintentional transfers, was not adopted.

Instead, Parliament adopted Amendment No 38, which is much more vague and simply calls for an assessment of the various forms of risk that might be involved in such transfers;

On the liability and insurance obligations of persons deliberately releasing GMOs: to our great indignation, Parliament rejected Amendment No 33 which called for persons legally responsible for releasing these GMOs to assume total liability for any damage they caused to human health or the environment and which required them to take out adequate insurance to compensate for possible damage.

Instead, it adopted much weaker amendments that express the hope that, in the future, general legislation will be adopted in relation to environmental liability and that call on the Commission to submit a proposal on the impact of biotechnology on all areas over which the European Union has jurisdiction.

Alas, as we already know from the White Paper it prepared on the subject, the Commission is not in favour of compulsory insurance in this area.

We are particularly disgusted that Amendment No 33 was rejected, for if we want to authorise the marketing of products containing GMOs, we should at least ensure that those who sell them assume liability.

The pressure groups in the biotechnology industry explain that there is no risk, while at the same time saying that compulsory insurance is impossible because the risk is not insurable.

I have never seen an insurer refuse to insure a non-existent risk.

One obscure aspect of this business is that the French Government which, according to the most recent information, includes ecologists, had officially expressed reservations about this Amendment No 33.

Once again the biotechnology industry pressure groups have done their job at every level, out of sight of the citizens.

I warmly congratulate Mr Bowe on his report on the deliberate release into the environment of GMOs.

This subject, which has given rise to much debate, is a very topical one, given that yesterday two European regulations entered into force which require manufacturers to label "food and food ingredients" containing more than 1% of GMOs, together with "genetically modified additives and flavourings" , although without setting out any threshold value in this case.

As a consumer, I am very pleased about this compulsory labelling because it will allow us to make an informed choice, although I would have preferred stricter rules that required a very clear indication on the outside packaging!

Yet this is a positive first step, since it has led several large firms to stop putting GMOs into their products.

Coming back to the issue under discussion today, this is a proposal to amend Directive 90/220/EEC, which covers both the deliberate release of GMOs for experimental purposes and their deliberate release with a view to putting the products concerned on the market.

In the light of the progress of scientific research in this field, it seemed vital to clarify the scope of this legislation in order to give due protection to consumer health as also to the environment.

The proposals of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy set out a strict and transparent framework, thus responding fully to consumer concerns.

The purpose of the three main amendments I support is as follows:

to prevent any accidental contamination of fields by cross-pollination between GMO and non-GMO crops.

To that end, we must require either minimum distances between fields in which GMO crops are grown and those reserved for traditional crops, or that GMO crops are confined to special greenhouses because of the inherent risk of genetic pollution;

to prevent any risk of antibiotic resistance developing as a result of the transfer of the resistant gene from one species to another.

So we must ban the release of all GMOs containing an antibiotic-resistant marker gene;

to impose a strict liability system on producers.

Like the rapporteur, I am convinced that the person legally responsible for releasing a GMO into the environment must assume full civil liability for any damage to human health or the environment.

This principle of responsibility, together with that of GMO traceability and, in particular, the precautionary principle, will enable us to limit the risks as far as possible!

Given the uncertainties that remain in this area, we must be as prudent as we can!

Let me conclude by repeating and emphasising that we must listen to what the people of Europe expect of us!

Public opinion has in fact expressed its reservations about the development of 'Frankenstein foods' on several occasions and its desire for healthy and natural food.

So we must be the spokespeople of this desire to preserve high-quality food in the European Union!

It is good that the Council common position already incorporates some of the amendments approved by the European Parliament.

However, as proposed by the rapporteur, the amendments approved at first reading but not accepted by the Council must now be included.

Following the approval of the Biosafety Protocol in Montreal in January 2000, we must take further steps to protect the rights of consumers and to re-establish their confidence.

We therefore support the amendments which aim to include in the directive the ban on the release of GMOs containing antibiotic resistance markers, even for the purposes of research, and the requirement imposed on the Commission and Member States that no GMO and/or products thereof should leave the territory of the European Union without the prior informed consent of the importing country.

We also support the defence of total environmental liability as it is unacceptable not to force companies in the biotechnology sector to take the necessary measures to protect human health and minimise environmental risks.

Finally, when consenting to a deliberate release, Member States and the Commission must ensure that measures are taken to prevent gene-transfer from GMOs to other organisms in the environment.

- I welcome Mr Bowe' s report as a balanced and considered approach to the important subject of the release into the environment of GMOs.

The three key issues covered in Mr Bowe' s report are: environmental liability, antibiotics and gene transfer.

On environmental liability I tend to take the Commission' s view that this is best dealt with through horizontal legislation.

On antibiotics I would be in favour of a ban on the use in GMOs of genes conferring antibiotic resistance.

As far as gene transfer is concerned I believe measures must be foreseen in the new Directive to control the release of GMOs which can outcross with other plants.

A strong Directive which deals with concerns about the environment and the health risks of GMOs could go a long way to ensure we realise the potential benefits from GMOs and avoid the pitfalls.

Genetically modified organisms, or GMOs, mean that industry and, ultimately, human beings themselves are, in the name of health, medicine, larger harvests, insect-resistant crops and other supposed forms of future progress and improvements to human existence, embarking upon a path towards an unknown destination.

The path may one day prove to have led to something which is the total opposite of all the promises which were given when the journey was begun.

I want to issue this warning today.

The European Union needs new, tighter regulations in place of the first and still current directives concerning GMOs from 1991.

Since 1998, the Commission' s proposals have been under discussion.

Further delays would be a mistake.

As a Swedish Christian Democrat Member of the European Parliament, I want to state that it must never be the GMO industry and economic interests which are allowed to govern legislation and regulations.

The representatives of these have, on repeated occasions, expressed the view that Europe has "fallen behind" the GMO industry in, above all, the United States and China, that the GMO industry cannot be "developed" as "freely" in Europe and that opportunities for new jobs and businesses "are being lost" in the EU' s fifteen Member States.

Our political decisions must instead be guided by the concept of stewardship and not by manipulation of the genetic code.

Our task is to hand the earth and the environment over to future generations in as good a state as possible.

We must be able to show that, on the basis of stewardship and the precautionary principle, human beings have a desire to forgo what might appear to be short-term "gains" in favour of higher and significantly more long-term values such as a concern for creation and for genetic diversity.

In purely practical terms, this means regulations which guarantee a minimised risk of the spread of GMOs, a halt to the use of antibiotic resistance markers, an increase in independent research into the risks presented by GMOs, liability for damages based on the principle that those who release GMOs into the environment with deleterious effects upon health or the environment should be held strictly liable, long-term evaluations of the socio-economic and environmental consequences of the release of GMOs into the environment, permanent labelling of GMO products, compliance with all current regulations, such as the Biosafety Protocol, and an open application and decision-making process in which the public are entitled to express an opinion and in which each application is dealt with separately and no simplified application procedures are approved.

- (SV) It is an important report which Parliament has voted on today.

There are many uncertainties surrounding the use of genetically modified organisms, and there is good reason for being very careful.

On important points, the Council has wished to introduce risk assessment, together with evaluation of the use of genetically modified organisms.

The Directive guarantees a high level of protection.

Where most of the points are concerned, I have been able to agree with the amendments tabled by the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy.

Where other points are concerned, however, other measures can justifiably be demanded. In the case of genes expressing resistance to antibiotics, the Council' s position makes continued research possible under strict conditions based upon environmental considerations and respect for the consumer.

Nothing is so enduring as the accidental.

I therefore consider it very important to devise general regulations governing liability for environmental damage.

Dealing separately with the GMO sector may lead to major differences in the regulations governing liability in different areas.

When it comes to investigating the costs, together with the benefit to the public finances, of releasing genetically modified organisms into the environment, I have voted in favour of Amendment No 8 in order to guarantee continued discussion of how such an investigation ought to be carried out.

I do not, however, believe that investigations of that kind can be carried out annually. The EU ought not, therefore, to become inundated with reports on the matter.

- Madam President, I wholeheartedly applaud the efforts of my Labour colleague, David Bowe, to put forward measures to control the release of GMOs into the environment.

With such fast-changing science and a host of possible unknown effects, it is important to protect Europe' s people and our environment.

Strict controls on plants to prevent the transfer of genes from GMOs to other species are crucial.

This will ensure that other species are protected.

We must put safety first and make sure that GMOs do not enter the food chain unseen by the back door.

Furthermore, those responsible for the release of GMOs should bear full financial liability for any damage to human health and the environment.

Industry should pay and face the consequences of its actions, not the man-on-the-street.

Europe should stand up for the rights of the citizen and force industry to take responsibility.

Of course, the health and well-being of our citizens is of paramount importance.

I say no to the release of GMOs resistant to antibiotics.

We must not put our people or our animals at unnecessary risk.

Labour Euro MPs have been at the forefront of protecting our citizens and our environment.

We have consistently backed proposals to ensure that the use of GMOs and products derived from GMOs are strictly controlled within the EU.

David Bowe' s report is yet further proof of Europe greening up its act and putting the safety of our citizens first.

Mr President, I voted for the measure on the labelling of beef.

At last, we are going to be told the place of birth and residence of the cattle, and, doubtless, whether they were called Daisy or Buttercup.

Likewise, however, it would be as well if everyday folk, human beings, pensioners even, were not treated as mere numbers; it would be as well if, rather than just being a file on a desk, they were to become a person with a name, a surname and a life story.

All too often, the governments of our 15 States think of citizens, particularly pensioners and the elderly, as numbers, people without an identity, a life story or a date of birth.

Let us place photographs of our citizens inside all the bureaucratic files with which the States fill our offices.

It is a good thing that a system for the identification of bovine animals and the It is right that this should enter into force as soon as possible but not, however, before September given the codecision procedure which is being used.

Through this system, consumers can obtain information about the origin of the meat which they buy and the background of the animal can be checked.

Due to this improved link between producer and consumer, potential risks to public health can be detected at an early stage and avoided much more effectively.

It is essential that identical labelling rules are applied to beef imported from third countries.

If not all the information required by Community regulations is available, it is vital that a specific label is attached to the product clearly indicating its non-EC origin.

The European Parliament report also proposes, to ensure consumer protection, that operators or organisations producing and marketing minced beef, beef trimmings or cut beef should also be subject to the compulsory labelling system. They should not benefit from the exceptions proposed by the Commission as this would be equivalent to automatically exempting between 30% and 50% of beef from the labelling obligation.

- I welcome Mr Papayannakis' report on proposals for an EU-wide compulsory identification system for cows and the labelling of beef and beef products.

The main aim of the new regulation is to enable consumers to trace the source of the meat they buy right back to the animal.

This system should enable any potential threats to human health to be tackled early and effectively.

I support the rapporteur in stressing that the same rules must be applied to imported beef from non-EU countries and, in cases where not all information is available, a clear indication to that effect should be provided.

Mr Papayannakis is right to insist that labels mention antibiotics and stimulants that have been administered and to oppose derogation from the regulation for minced beef, beef trimmings or cut beef.

Properly applied this regulation will go a long way to enhance the reputation, quality and safety of EU beef - good news for consumers and producers!

- (FR) By way of introduction, let me point out that Directive 79/112 clearly sets out the purpose of food labelling, by stating that the prime concern of all rules on food labelling should be to inform and protect the consumer.

Consumers need to have confidence in the food they eat.

In this case, the aim is not simply to change our tastes and our traditions in regard to chocolate, but to deal properly at last with the consequences of "mad cow" disease.

It is quite astounding that, given the gravity of the situation, today, so many years after the crisis, we still do not have an effective system of traceability in place.

We do not propose to repeat the debate we had in December 1999, but the Commission would have been well-advised to scrupulously monitor the application of that regulation; so once again it committed a serious political mistake.

Let us look back for a moment at the embargo on beef.

Although one swallow does not make a summer, in this case the French Government gave precedence to reason and caution over the ideology of the single market.

Knowing the options that exist in matters European, we can gauge what that must have cost it.

The reason why France chose this option is that the Community institutions are not always able, at this point in time, to ensure real traceability of food products.

Our consumer information and protection system is totally inadequate: for example, there is no way a citizen of the Union can know whether ravioli imported from another Member State contains any British beef.

Should the general public trust a Commission that does not ensure the compulsory traceability of beef yet lifts the embargo?

I did not find it acceptable for the Commission to teach lessons to France, which, for its part, knows that the impact of the voluntary rules it adopted effectively helped restore consumer confidence.

Indeed we also defended that point of view by tabling amendments in the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy and the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development.

We note with satisfaction that some of the amendments we tabled in the Committee on Agriculture and the Committee on the Environment were adopted.

The Committee on the Environment amended important points of the Commission proposal.

It is high time we set up a reliable and transparent system.

During this vote, we supported the rapid and rigorous application of traceability, with a view to ensuring unfailing traceability and clear and transparent information, and we are satisfied with the results.

We hope that today' s vote will not lead to new and shameful calls for an extension or a derogation a few months hence.

- May I support the efforts of Mr Papayannakis to endorse proposals for an EU-wide compulsory identification system for cows and the labelling of beef and beef products.

Following the hullabaloo of food scares in recent times, most notably Mad Cow Disease, it is vital that we take measures to ensure that this type of food hazard does not happen again.

Food safety is a top priority and we must work hard towards alleviating the fears of consumers.

These new proposals enable consumers to trace the source of the meat they buy right back to the animal.

This should allow for any possible health threats to be tackled early and effectively.

From September 2000, beef labelling must show the point of slaughter of the animal, and from 2003, the origin of the animal including where it was born, reared and slaughtered must be added.

Public confidence in food safety has fallen tremendously in the past.

We must, of course, put safety first, and also make moves towards rebuilding public confidence.

British farmers particularly recognise that clear labelling is the best way of reassuring worried consumers that the beef they buy is safe.

This House should do its utmost to ensure that public health and safety is high on the agenda.

Pushing for clear labelling is the only way to convince our customers that food safety is top of our list.

Mr President, I have taken the floor, for the last time today, to explain the way I voted on the conclusions of the Lisbon Summit.

I am not very happy: I would have preferred our 15 heads of government to have been more effective, more decisive, more energetic and more courageous.

With regard to social security, I would have preferred it if the decision had, at last, been taken to create a single European pension for the Union.

When the European citizens grow old, all the governments abuse them. They are told off for living too long, whereas the real problem is that their contributions have been wasted.

The European citizens call upon the Union to set up a single European pension and thus show itself to be more capable, a better administrator and less careless with money than the individual governments.

- (FR) The Lisbon Summit was supposed to focus on a social Europe.

In fact, a new wave of neo-liberalism swept through Lisbon and gave the EU its marching orders in the global economic war.

Far from focussing on social and democratic rights, indeed looking more to the US social model, the summit once again sang the praises of the law of profit, workforce flexibility and all-out competition, with new forms of privatisation and liberalisation.

In short, everything should be quoted on the stock exchange.

And this was done with the complicity of all the left-wing governments present in Lisbon.

To sugar the pill, the EU is promising us quasi-general access to the Internet and cutting-edge vocational training.

To crown it all, it is actually dangling the idea of full employment, i.e. the creation of 20 to 30 million new jobs, before our noses.

These splendid promises mean only one thing: a huge rise in insecure jobs, casual work and low wages, with the constant threat of redundancy and, on top of that, a scheme for an inegalitarian overhaul of the social protection system.

Employers, for their part, will once again enjoy quite indecent subsidies.

A new economy, but we are being served up the same old recipes again.

- The Portuguese presidency is to be congratulated for calling a summit to agree new strategic goals for the Union in tackling unemployment, economic reform and social cohesion in light of the new knowledge-based economy.

The Council is right to say that the shift to a digital, knowledge-based economy, prompted by new goals and services, will be a powerful engine for growth, competitiveness and jobs.

In addition, it will be capable of improving citizens' quality of life and the environment.

However, it is equally true that without active intervention this shift will widen the gap between the haves and have-nots.

The Council is therefore to be applauded for acknowledging the importance of promoting social inclusion, for emphasising the role of education and training for living and working in the knowledge society; for highlighting the need for more and better jobs; and for stating that social protection must underpin the transformation of the knowledge economy.

I understand the presidency' s conclusions as confirming the goal that every section of society should have the opportunity to benefit from new technology.

The Lisbon Summit created enormous expectations.

Some saw this as the 'Employment Summit' , others as the 'Summit for the Society of Innovation and Knowledge' .

In the end, it turned out to be the 'Internet Summit' , as it was in this area that some of the most promising promises were made, if you will forgive the repetition of terms.

If only these promises could be fulfilled.

We share these expectations but we should also like to be able to congratulate the practical results achieved.

On this score, only the future will tell.

Yet we already regret certain weaknesses.

Furthermore, the mainly socialist European leaders who met at this summit could not resist the bewitching rhetoric of promising results for which they are not really responsible, yet did not make any promises on the issue which is their responsibility, namely the actual means to achieve these results.

We should also like to have seen more practical emphasis on two basic points. These are the reduction in tax and the obligation to pay employment contributions and the effective deregulation and removal of red tape, thereby stimulating entrepreneurial initiative and promoting growth.

The desire to defend the 'European social model' is admirable. Yet this defence cannot be achieved at the expense of economic dynamism and, ultimately, the very future and quality of this social model.

These thoughts are reflected in our votes and the amendments tabled.

- (EL) The Lisbon Summit, which can only euphemistically be termed "an Employment Summit" despite the clamorous declarations that went with it, achieved no more than to take another step towards changing employment into employability, redefining the concept 'working person' and destabilising labour relations and rights, to serve the celebrated 'New Economy' in the best possible way for big business, this being the new name for the old, familiar but still more unrestrained and harsh economic and social liberalism.

Masquerading with the greatest cynicism under the grandiose title of 'modernising the European social model by investing in people' , are the demands of big business for greater profitability as a means of 'supporting employment' . The competitiveness of enterprises is being increased by cutting labour costs, the labour market is being fully liberalised and made more flexible, atypical forms of employment are being promoted, social security systems are under review and any remnant of the welfare state is being provocatively squeezed.

That is not 'investing in people' as the Summit meeting would have it.

That is the estrangement of people to the benefit of the market, the subjugation of working people to the demands and criteria of monetary credit, and the subjugation of the social state to the indexes and criteria of nominal convergence and EMU.

What the Lisbon economic and social policy guidelines are promoting, what is in practice being prepared for working people and 'served up' under a misnamed 'modernisation' - intended to 'sugar the pill' , deceive working people and reduce public reaction against the anti-labour and anti-grass roots economic and social policy of the EU - is a minimum level of poverty and not a minimum level of prosperity.

The 'New Economy' is actively preparing the creation of an extensive stratum of 'employed poor' , with miserly wages, restricted security and welfare rights, who will be obliged to change jobs according to the dictates of the unaccountable market and the laws of the lawless interests of big business.

The EU does not seem interested in fighting unemployment and promoting and supporting stable and full employment.

On the contrary, it is preparing working people, and this indeed at a fast rate, to live in a situation of complete and permanent insecurity.

Besides, the Presidency' s conclusions boldly state that the aim is 'improved employability' and both the information society and education are dragged along in chains to serve that rationale as tools to support part-time work, tele-employment and piecework employment.

Prosperity is destined for big business, to which splendid fields of glory are being opened since, in order to satisfy its demand for a 'fully operational internal market' and greater competitiveness against the USA, the pressures of international competition are being fully transferred to the labour market, liberalisation is being speeded up and the so-termed 'structural changes' (privatisations, market liberalisation) in vital sectors such as energy, telecommunications, postal services, transport, water supply and others are being promoted.

Instead of being controlled, restructuring, mergers and company relocations leading to tens of thousands of job losses are being made even easier.

Public and social investments are dwindling, equal opportunity and the fight against all forms of discrimination related to access to employment, and labour relations are being undermined, and priority is being given to whatever serves the aim of the 'economic productivity of labour' for big business, in other words low wages, lack of social protection, flexible and temporary employment, and the persistent exclusion of women, young people and people with special needs from the labour market.

The more than 60 million people who are victims of long-term unemployment, mass poverty and social exclusion, and all the working people in Europe too, cannot react 'adaptively' , 'supportively' , 'obediently' or 'cooperatively' to such choices.

You will find them in front of you, unsubdued, uncompromising and unyielding, fighting for and demanding full and steady employment and a system of social policy that includes insurance, health, pensions, protection for the unemployed, real equality of opportunity, quality education and substantive professional training.

The only thing in the Lisbon conclusions one could agree with is that 'people are Europe' s main asset' , except for the fact that they are not disposed to be 'liquidated' in the international money markets and to sacrifice themselves so that the monopolies can inflate their profits.

That asset is, and will prove to be, valuable in the struggle for a social, democratic and supportive Europe, a Europe of peace, progress and socialism.

Mr President, I voted against the motion for a resolution on the EU-Africa Summit for several reasons.

The first was because the respective conclusions do not contain any significant reference to the issue of protecting human rights in Africa or to the development of independent legal systems. The second reason was specifically because there is no mention in the text of last week' s events in Angola which involved yet another brutal attack on the freedom of expression and freedom of the press, values which are so dear to the European Union.

Two journalists and human rights activists - Rafael Marques and Aguiar dos Santos - were sentenced by a court in Luanda to imprisonment and fines for simply having criticised, in a press article, the Angolan President, José Eduardo dos Santos.

As defendants, their rights to a defence, which are fundamental in any rule of law, were violated, particularly by the absence during the trial of Rafael Marques' lawyer and by them not being permitted to prove the veracity of the facts as the judge argued that the case concerned the figure of the President of the Republic.

The international community and the political leaders of Europe must react against this climate of intolerance and constant disregard for human rights in Angola. On this first occasion for the discussion of EU-Africa relations in this House, I must therefore once again strongly protest about this attack on the freedom of expression by the Angolan authorities.

Finally, having taken advantage of this opportunity to highlight these events, I must remind you that this Parliament recently approved a resolution on freedom of expression and press freedom in Angola which condemned the abuses occurring in that country. I therefore ask the Council and its presidency, and also our President, to use all the means at their disposal to put pressure on the Angolan authorities to re-establish the rule of law, freedom and peace in Angola.

This is the only way to end the suffering of a people who are as entitled as anyone to human dignity and happiness.

- (FR) The solemn declaration of the first EU-Africa summit in Cairo opens by stating, and I quote: "Over the centuries, ties have existed between Africa and Europe ... developed on the basis of shared values of strengthening representative and participatory democracy" .

Given that this secular past was a story of slavery, massacres, forced labour, plundering, colonial conquests and oppression, during which the rich European countries bled that continent dry, we can only wonder what is the most shameful aspect: the pride of the representatives of the imperialist countries or the baseness of the local Heads of State who agreed to co-sign such a declaration, on the pretence that they were doing so in the name of their peoples.

We express our solidarity with these African peoples who have paid a heavy price to our ruling classes; and it is not even enough for us to cancel a debt that has already been largely repaid.

Genuine cooperation with Africa could only begin if we return to the people of that continent what was stolen from them over a century of colonisation and is still being stolen from them today.

Genuine cooperation on an equal footing can only be established between Europe and Africa if they are no longer in thrall to industrial and banking groups that grow rich on exploiting the working classes of the two continents.

In view of these circumstances, we voted against the joint resolution that welcomes the Cairo summit, while voting for the only amendment that contains concrete proposals.

- (FR) This Cairo summit is the first meeting at the level of the EU and the African continent as a whole.

Yet the EU persists in wanting to divide Africa between the Mediterranean area and black Africa.

During this neocolonial transition period, the EU is seeking to impose a system of neoliberal relations dominated by liberalisation and structural adjustments.

In fact the only purpose of the famous equal partnership is to remind the Africans that they are indebted to international law and must bow to the panoply of neo-liberal instruments.

The various conflicts in Africa were discussed, but no support is being given because of the rivalries between the great Western powers that are either sharing out or contesting spheres of influence.

As for the question of Aids, although its urgency is recognised, and aside from a moralising approach, the fine speeches cannot mask the cold reality of the figures, which reflect the fall in EU development aid to Africa now that priority is being given to Central and Eastern Europe.

Although the Africans have managed to wrest a few promises of debt cancellation from a few EU countries, the EU remains opposed to the idea of a global cancellation of the third world debt, which means the people are starving daily.

Like the EU-Africa civil society Forum in March, which brought together more than 80 NGOs, we declare our opposition to the structural adjustment programmes and our continued support for the debt-cancellation campaigns.

That brings us to the end of the explanations of vote.

(The sitting was suspended at 1.25 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m.)

Madam President, I did ask to speak this morning when my intervention would have been more appropriate. However, as this was not possible, I will speak now.

I regret that the President-in-Office was this morning struck down by an Austrian malady and was absent from this Chamber. As a result of his indisposition, he was also absent when we voted on two issues of particular interest to the Portuguese presidency, namely the Lisbon summit and the EU-Africa Summit.

As a Portuguese person and as an MEP, I regret that the Portuguese presidency has confused the position which it took as a government in its bilateral relations with Austria with the responsibilities which it must assume and fulfil when holding the Council presidency.

As we were all here, apart from one political group which was also absent from a certain point, I must regret that the Portuguese presidency chose to align itself with a political group which has the most recent totalitarian memories in this House.

In a fair and respectful manner, I must also criticise the behaviour of our President.

I have the highest respect for her but she must also respect us.

Frankly this does not appear to be the case.

Our President exceeded the rules of protocol. She must realise that being President of the European Parliament does not make her the leader of the majority.

She represents this institution and must act and speak in this House with respect for all the different positions expressed here.

She is not the leader of the majority and I must therefore register my protest.

Mr Ribeiro e Castro, your views will certainly be conveyed to the Council and to the President.

The next item is the continuation of the debate on the report (A5-0086/2000) by Mr Dimitrakopoulos and Mr Leinen, on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs, on the European Parliament' s proposals for the Intergovernmental Conference (14094/1999 - C5-0341/1999 - 1999/0825(CNS)).

Madam President, tomorrow I am going to vote for the Dimitrakopoulos/Leinen report.

The Committee for Constitutional Affairs has done a good job and has taken a progressive, courageous position on certain areas of reform of the Treaties.

However, if I were asked to give my opinion on the overall status of the situation in Europe, I would have to say that I am somewhat confused and concerned.

There is no point in trying to deny anything. Certain facts which have become clear in the last few days, some of which have been the subject of furious political debate in recent weeks, show that, in actual fact, much of the confusion and fear that has been expressed and many of the objections raised are well-founded.

In connection with this, a few days ago, Le Figaro published a revealing article by Mr Schmidt and Mr Giscard d' Estaing, the founders of the European monetary serpent, which frankly and explicitly repeated an observation previously made by Jacques Delors, to the effect that if the institutions do not undergo thorough reform, the European Community will rapidly be reduced to a free trade area.

Personally, I find some of the decisions adopted extremely excessive, if not rash, such as, for example, the proposal to open the Community to Turkey - a country which I respect and which it is right to respect, despite its differences from the European Community in terms of history, culture and politics and the concept of the State as well, quite apart from the issue of human rights - and these decisions are evidence of an organisation which is becoming increasingly more economic than political.

There are two alternatives: either the founding countries of the Community change direction, or else, slowly but surely, we will be forced to abandon all hope.

There is no longer even any question of the creation of a different State; it is history which must change course.

The Europe which we Europeanists dream of is a Europe of States, and it should therefore be no cause for concern to anyone who, and rightly so, believes strongly in national identity.

Nobody wants to eliminate the States: however, all these different national situations in the different States, which have reached the point where they are incapable of overcoming the challenges of the world today, must be adapted and tuned to something greater.

I should now like to touch on the vicious attacks on President Prodi, not only from the press but also within the political sphere.

There is no point in denying anything in this case either.

I am not passing judgement on President Prodi now, for it would not be appropriate to do so at this time, but I do feel that these attacks are evidence of strong criticism of a Commission line, a line which has been progressive and open. It has sometimes been a little on the optimistic side, but it certainly represents progress.

Madam President, the fact that I am addressing Commissioner Barnier in this Chamber, with whom I have often had the opportunity for discussion in smaller meetings, gives me a positive feeling about tomorrow' s debate, but my view of the medium- and long-term progress of European development is pessimistic.

I feel that Parliament will be required to take courageous, decisive action in matters much more important than a resolution, if, as I fear, the agenda is not extended, and if, in the end, as the current state of affairs would suggest, an excess of caution results in a Conference which makes nothing more than cosmetic changes to the Treaties and avoids any substantial modifications.

Madam President, as far as the budget is concerned, it is becoming increasingly essential that we bring the Treaty up to date with the procedures.

The integration of the financial perspectives into the Treaty will thereby be a medium-term financial plan which will be agreed between Parliament and the Council.

This integration will create much more stability, as well as the legal certainty which Mr Colom i Naval, the permanent rapporteur for the financial perspectives, spoke of this morning.

Let us remember that the financial perspectives procedure has brought budgetary stability to the European Union.

Nevertheless, Parliament believes that the integration of the financial perspectives into the Treaty will mean that, as well as stability, there will be sufficient flexibility to allow for a review of those perspectives when necessary.

If we do not do this, we will run the risk of confusing the financial perspectives with the annual budgets.

This confusion will lead to conflict year after year.

With regard to the classification of expenditure, which this House has also long wanted to see, we must find an institutional point of balance which combines the European Parliament' s requests for a greater degree of codecision in budgetary matters with the defence of the privileged nature of certain expenditure which forms the basis of the European Union' s economic and social cohesion.

The European Parliament wants the Community budget to be financed by own resources rather than by contributions from the Member States.

The fiscal and budgetary autonomy of the European Union rests on this, as does, to a certain extent, its political autonomy.

However, let us remember that, if what we want is an autonomous financial system for the Union, we must at the same time create a fair tax system.

Progressiveness cannot only be based on expenditure.

Sooner or later we will have to be sufficiently progressive in terms of own resources as a basis for this fair tax system.

Madam President, we are usually very quick to criticise the Commission or the Council when they do not attend our debates, but this time, ironically, the finger seems to be pointing the other way.

At the very least, the two rapporteurs should have been present during the debate on their reports.

I am aware that these days are extremely tiring for all concerned, but duty comes before everything else.

I listened to Mr Segni' s speech.

Somewhat aided by the fact that he was speaking in Italian, I realised that he was not speaking on behalf of the Union for a Europe of Nations Group, whose views are completely different from those he expressed and which I share.

We are on the brink of an historic occasion where the risks are great, but so are the opportunities.

We must be aware that this historic occasion provides us with the opportunity to enlarge a community of values and not merely orchestrate the geographical and territorial enlargement of an advanced economy which has raised the standard of living of our communities.

Enlargement is thus our opportunity to change our operating rules and ensure that they are based on greater transparency and stronger guarantees of the rights of citizenship, and also streamline our decision-making.

The basic requirement we uphold is the need to confine unanimity to constitutional issues and to use qualified majority voting for all other matters.

In the very short space of time remaining, I would like to refer to paragraph 51, which puts forward the idea of our coming together with the national parliaments to examine the possibility of holding an Inter-Parliamentary Conference on the future strategies of the Union.

Clearly, a substantial amount of responsibility would fall to our President and to the French Presidency.

I am convinced that this opportunity for representatives of the national parliaments of both the Union countries and the candidate countries to meet and discuss future strategies and the implications of the Intergovernmental Conference is extremely valuable and must not be passed up.

Madam President, why is the gulf between the European Parliament and the European governments so wide?

There is an excellent resolution on the table which refers to the many necessary reforms.

Indeed, majority decision-making as a rule and reinforcement of the Commission and the European Parliament are essential in order for the enlarged Union to function.

Cooperation should be more flexible and each Member State must retain a Commissioner.

Unfortunately, the many sound proposals from Parliament are at odds with the willingness of the governments to extend the IGC agenda and reach compromises.

If the European governments do not change their attitudes soon, a treaty will be drawn up in Nice which guarantees to cripple the Union once it has been enlarged.

Over the past few years, many European government leaders have presented their own people with the view that the European Union is becoming too powerful and too bureaucratic and is taking away too much national sovereignty.

They have contributed to a climate of Euroscepticism where there is no room for compromise.

At the same time, the same politicians have decided in favour of a substantial enlargement, necessitating reforms which were declared taboo in the first place.

As such, many European politicians are hostage to their own rhetoric.

If the European government leaders are serious about new countries joining, they must display the necessary political courage and agree to far-reaching reforms.

We are the representatives of the people.

If the governments manage to narrow the gulf between themselves and Parliament, they will ultimately be able to narrow the gulf between themselves and their own people and, at the end of the day, this is what matters.

Madam President, aside from the letter of the report, I want to draw attention to a few of the numbers contained in it.

Limiting the number of Members of the European Parliament to 700 would not be a cause for concern were it not that it would render our Parliament less representative.

By marginalising small countries, while at the same time allowing high electoral thresholds to be set up in the largest ones, this sordid electoral mechanism would prevent whole sections of European society from being represented any more in this Chamber.

We must reaffirm that it is our Parliament' s prime and absolute task to represent the people and the peoples of Europe in all their diversity.

Two thirds of the vote is the majority required for our Parliament to censure the Commission.

This very high threshold of two thirds is a sad and unique case.

For what European government can boast of being so safe from any real parliamentary control, of having such impunity?

We must create a formal symmetry.

If a simple majority is good enough for the investment of the Commission, then the same majority should suffice for a vote of no confidence.

The people' s representatives have the power to undo anything they have done.

That is the rule everywhere, and it must be the rule here too.

The report proposes the year 2009 as the date for electing MEPs from transnational lists.

Now this is a case of either or: either our Parliament decides this measure is not a good one, which would mean abandoning it - even in 2009 - or, like the Greens, it must admit that such lists are vital if we want to create real families of thought in Europe, in which case this important political debate can begin by the time of the 2004 elections.

Otherwise we would be being neither lucid nor ambitious enough.

Nor does this report, which, without being bad, does not match up to the issues at stake, seem very lucid or ambitious.

In changing size, the European Union will change in nature.

So our continent will have to rethink its rules rather than simply tidy them up.

This timid IGC 2000 can in no way represent an end result, but only the first step towards a constitution.

Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, we should go back to basics and ask ourselves what makes the European Union different.

Over the centuries many attempts were made by some countries to dominate others.

Ideas may have varied according to the times and individual countries' interests, but the system stayed the same, with power for some and subjugation for others.

We suffered centuries of war and even destruction and ruin on several occasions.

Many times we had to start over and it was the last time this happened that the European idea came into being.

We have a system based on mutual freedom for everyone, instead of supremacy for some.

We have a framework agreed between nations and not one imposed on the nations.

We therefore have a permanent contract between free and sovereign states which are all equal.

Instead of changing majorities, we have the rules of a stable contract in which we are all minorities.

This is the secret of the unequalled peace and progress which we have enjoyed, based firstly on a common culture of human rights, democracy, the rule of law and free markets and, secondly, on strict mutual respect with no trampling over other countries.

The instruments which we use are procedural rules, unanimity or at least broad convergence, and substantive rules, concrete harmonisation policies and the promotion of economic and social cohesion.

The price is patience, which is a small price to pay for such great results!

We need to be patient with each other and in terms of time so that Europe can continue along the same lines. We particularly need to resist the age-old temptation of wanting to impose ourselves on others, to break this contract between equals, for this has never led to union.

By cherishing the idea of union in Europe we are being realistic, not imposing a rose-tinted fantasy.

It would be wrong to strip away the rules of the game which have brought us so much success to date.

In my opinion, the motion for a resolution is a dangerous anti-Europe deviation, which completely alters the balance.

This would be a disaster for my own country, Portugal, as for other smaller or medium-sized Member States.

For Europe in general it would mean a crisis or breakdown.

We cannot have a Europe in which less rules over more, which gets annoyed but does not listen and which aims to replace a Treaty between states with a constitution imposed on the states.

We want an open Europe, not one tied in a straitjacket.

Finally, I must mention the idea of transnational European parties.

As a Conservative Christian Democrat, I stand as a witness against this.

My party, the Popular Party or CDS-PP, founded the PPE.

Some years ago we were expelled from the PPE because we advocated a referendum on Maastricht.

It is now our former Austrian companions from the Christian Democratic Union who are in difficulty because of elections in their country.

What a frightening idea of democracy!

We need to be careful, for federalism is so dazzling that it destroys with its hands those concepts which it asserts with its own mouth.

This is because it covets power and ignores partnership and we cannot go down this road.

Madam President, the IGC should prepare the EU for the reorganisation needed to bring about the complete process of enlargement that is in hand.

The most important consideration regarding enlargement in the Dimitrakopoulos/Leinen report is increased flexibility.

Only differentiation within the EU can create the preconditions necessary for enlargement on such a massive scale.

It is important that the report proposes that closer cooperation should be facilitated.

The Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party has recommended that the principle of flexibility should also be realised in the form of greater scope for cooperation for those countries that cannot or do not want to accept the Union' s statutes in their entirety.

This would facilitate and speed up enlargement of the Union.

In making its review the Group of the Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party states that flexibility might lead to a larger concentric Europe, composed of a federal core and a less integrated outer circle.

At this stage it is not necessary to adopt a precise position on how the Union should be differentiated.

It is enough for now that we create an institutional framework in which it is possible to deepen and expand the Union in practical terms.

I hope that Amendment No 154, which the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party has tabled regarding increased flexibility, will be adopted.

Madam President, the European Union is starting the necessary process of enlargement, initially involving thirteen new Member States, without defining what the Union is and even without knowing the size of its future territory. This is causing a situation of uncertainty which could lead to the dilution of its political character into a union of national governments without the means to solve the internal problems of social cohesion and territorial balance or to take its place in the world according to its full political and economic weight.

As a Member for Galicia and a European citizen, I must express my disapproval of this legislative initiative from the Commission. This disapproval does not relate so much to the issues dealt with in this initiative as to its fundamental failings which this House still has time to remedy.

How can this Parliament, which represents all European citizens, rule out its own full legislative initiative?

How can we, in the same context, not accept that the Commission President must be elected from among MEPs?

Why is the exercise before the Union of the powers of the national authorities, federal states and Autonomous Communities not recognised?

How can we deny the establishment of a European employment policy linked to the Structural Funds policy?

These questions are useful to highlight some of the grave deficiencies in the legislative proposal on reforming the Treaties.

Madam President, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, Commissioner, what are the issues at stake in this Intergovernmental Conference?

Manifestly, the first and main issue is the quality of the decision-making process in the Union.

Here we attach the utmost importance to extending the scope of qualified majority voting.

If we were certain that tomorrow every decision could be taken by a qualified majority in the European Union, we would not have raised the question of closer cooperation.

But we have to acknowledge that undoubtedly we will also need this instrument.

That is what this Parliament said when it first stated its position and I think that in a way we have helped persuade the community of Heads of State and Government to listen to our refrain.

Of course we can only be delighted at this.

But today I want to address those MEPs who see, behind this closer cooperation, the risk of too far-reaching consultation between the large countries.

It seems to me that at present it is in the interest of all the members of the Union that any closer cooperation within the Union should be established on a basis of respect for the Union' s legal system and institutions.

To that end, let us authorise closer cooperation when one third of the Member States takes part or is involved, and let us authorise this closer cooperation by a qualified majority, after obtaining Parliament' s assent.

Tomorrow we will certainly have to consider the question of the democratic scrutiny of this closer cooperation, an area where our Parliament will have to play a major role.

So I understand why the Intergovernmental Conference will look into these questions and I am glad the discussions are thus going to the heart of the matter.

But you will find these same questions coming up again in other discussions you will be holding during the Intergovernmental Conference.

Let me make one more point before concluding, Madam President.

I want to sound the alarm about the progress in drafting the Charter of Fundamental Rights we want to see incorporated in the Treaty.

It is most important to incorporate that Charter.

At a time when the values of the Union are at times being overturned or seem undermined, that Charter is coming at just the right moment; but it will be meaningful only if it is incorporated in the Treaty and has real substance, based on the Cologne mandate, the entire Cologne mandate, i.e. only if it includes economic and social rights.

Madam President, this is a strange, uncomfortable and schizophrenic report.

Parts of it are clearly crafted as helpful suggestions to the IGC; other parts form a list of pious hopes and hopeful wishes which are certain to be rejected by the Conference.

How much of this schizoid quality reflects the positions of the two rapporteurs is hard to estimate.

If so, I am sure that I can attribute the better parts to my friend and colleague Mr Dimitrakopoulos and the more unusual parts to Mr Leinen.

However, the majority of my Conservative colleagues have voted to reject the report and will vote accordingly in this House.

The Conservative delegation regards many of the ideas in the report as centralising, syndicalist, unnecessary and backward-looking.

Instead of examining new, flexible and radical approaches to an enlarged Union in the global market, the message of this report is: carry on regardless down the road from Maastricht and Amsterdam!

Nevertheless, in rejecting this report the Conservative delegation shows it too has a schizophrenic quality, since it therefore rejects the excellent amendment by Mr Duff, to give a legal opt-out to Member States, and that of my friend Mr Perry and others, to enable Parliament to put public money where its mouth is by saving wasteful expenditure entailed in the absurdity of these Strasbourg sessions.

That is the nature of democracy and democratic decisions.

They too are often strange, uncomfortable and schizophrenic, but they remain the best we have all the same.

Madam President, the report by the two rapporteurs is very ambitious, very ahead of the times, but it has two major defects, which ought to be corrected by the vote in plenary.

Firstly, to generalise the system of dual simple majority voting is not the panacea of the future integration of Europe.

A principle of that kind could induce public opinion in the Member States and the national parliaments to reject that system for the most sensitive issues which are in fact exceptions to the general rule.

It would be better to seek a compromise acceptable to all, as in the past.

It is a question of legitimacy and acceptability.

Secondly, Member States with a large population get more than their fair share.

The underlying principle of "one man - one vote" is unacceptable.

It conflicts with Article 190 of the Treaty which provides that the number of elected Members must ensure the appropriate representation of the peoples of the States brought together in the Community.

It is a question of equality and solidarity.

Finally, there is no serious argument to back up the thesis we keep being served up, namely that a Commission of more than 20 members would not work.

Equally, in the case of the Commission, let us avoid making numbers into an absolute principle.

On the contrary, if we want decisions proposed on the Commission' s initiative to gain wide support in all the Member States, it is vital for them all to be represented.

The important vote we will be holding tomorrow will, I hope, enable the European Parliament to put an end to this ambiguity and to make some adjustments.

Only a more politically realistic proposal will have a chance of being taken into consideration.

IGC 2000 is not the end of the story.

Madam President, I would first of all like to thank both rapporteurs.

Long before the IGC was launched, the Dutch social democratic delegation had already taken an active interest in the IGC.

We have held large public debates in the Netherlands and have done a great deal of groundwork.

After all, the IGC should prepare the Union for enlargement, and this enlargement will require the current Member States to make sacrifices.

These sacrifices, however, are small, given the historic opportunity of unifying the East and the West in a secure Europe characterised by peace.

In addition, it should, of course, bring Europe closer to its citizens, because the distance between Brussels and our citizens is still far too great.

The IGC should therefore make up the democratic shortfall.

For this purpose, it is essential to extend majority decision-making to all legislation, except for constitutional matters, and have codecision power for Parliament, as well as the well-known double formula in the Council decision-making process.

Simply reducing a democratic deficit is not sufficient to improve contact with the citizen.

This is why we have specifically committed ourselves to a better and institutionalised social dialogue with non-governmental organisations, since they look after many of the citizens' interests.

This is provided for in Amendment No 162.

Another subject which is close to our hearts is that of making closer cooperation more flexible.

It is clear that the de facto veto, currently inherent in this procedure, must go.

Once enlargement has taken place, closer cooperation could do a great service to a Union containing a still greater diversity of Member States within its borders.

In our opinion, the report does not go far enough regarding another point, namely that relating to individual responsibility which must be granted by Commissioners.

We firmly believe that it must be possible for Parliament to issue a strong warning to a Commissioner who loses the confidence of Parliament.

In our opinion, such a procedure does more justice to a democratic balance between the institutions than the Prodi procedure, but unfortunately, the majority of MEPs considered this step a bridge too far.

Madam President, with regard to our Euro-Commissioner, we would ideally like to have one Commissioner per country.

We would accept a rota system for all states at a pinch, because we support the compromise made by the socialist group.

We think that, ultimately, our compromise has struck a sound balance between small and large Member States.

We hope that this will receive support from this Parliament.

Madam President, enlargement is important for the people of Europe.

We must therefore find a way of cooperating throughout Europe.

The accession negotiations are now under way.

It is therefore important that it should be possible to conclude the Intergovernmental Conference before the end of the year.

Both large and small States must be able to exercise influence in the future EU.

This is necessary if our citizens are to have confidence in European cooperation.

If the composition of the European Parliament is to be adjusted, I therefore advocate a proportional, degressive reduction in the number of Members.

All present Member States must be included and make their contribution.

At the same time, the smallest States must be guaranteed a certain number of Members within the framework of the seven hundred seats we have set as a ceiling.

When it comes to votes in the Council, we must find a method of distributing votes which does not need to be renegotiated at each subsequent enlargement.

I therefore recommend a system which takes account of differences in the size of the population.

It is important that each country should have a Member in the Commission.

The Commissioners work for the whole of the Union and are, in fact, important if consensus is to be achieved between the Member States.

The Commission must therefore be able to draw upon knowledge and experience from all the Member States.

EU cooperation is, in the first place, a civil European project and ought to be distinguished from anything of a military nature.

The Member States do have different backgrounds where military alliances and neutrality are concerned.

In Cologne and Helsinki, great progress was made in terms of preparing ourselves for preventative crisis and conflict management.

It is therefore important that the Treaty should reflect the difference between civil and military cooperation.

A European military alliance should not, therefore, be created within the framework of the EU' s institutions but between individual States.

Military support of a kind which places States under an obligation to each other has no place in the EU' s Treaties.

Madam President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, enlargement is the most crucial European issue as far as we are concerned.

It is now also at the top of the agenda prior to the Swedish Presidency.

We do not, however, want to see European cooperation cease or degenerate into bickering, which would be a risk if 30 countries could constantly use their vetoes.

Development of the Union can only seriously be accorded priority through also, at the same time, welcoming qualified majority voting in the majority of areas but excluding, for example, the area of new treaties.

We also want to see majority decision-making in regard to Article 289, because it would then be possible, where the European Parliament' s headquarters and meetings are concerned, to establish rules which would prevent the waste of human resources and tax revenue.

Swedish taxpayers, who also pay net amounts into the European Union, are in fact at a loss to understand the madness of travelling backwards and forwards with thousands of cases every month.

Perhaps it would be more efficient to have the offices in a pan-European caravan than to waste all these man-months, as we now do, upon plane journeys.

We have every respect for symbols of peace, but the billions spent on gadding off to Strasbourg could, of course, be spent instead on our neighbours in the East, who perhaps have more use for these "peace billions" than we do.

Finally, I want to thank the rapporteurs for a very good report and to express my hope that the Citizens' Charter will usher in the new Treaty.

I also want to end by expressing special thanks to Commissioner Barnier for being present throughout the debate and for his commitment to these issues.

In fact, he gives me hope and inspiration on many occasions when I think that the Member States are being both negative and unreasonable on a whole range of issues with which, as European citizens, we really have problems.

I would thank you, Commissioner Barnier, for your efforts which in fact help me to take an optimistic view of Europe' s future development.

Madam President, we have a very challenging task before us.

We have to find answers to the challenge of enlargement, but the Union at its present size also needs to re-establish the rules of the game and the decision-making process.

We have to strike a balance between efficiency, democracy and Member State equality.

Above all, we have to be able to restore confidence of our citizens in decision making in the European Union.

This will come about by increasing genuine transparency and by developing the way administration actually serves the people.

The Commission must be given support while it puts the changes into effect, but the Council and Parliament must also themselves be able to work to strengthen confidence among our citizens.

Both an enlarged Union, and one that is the present size, must ensure that decision making is mainly in the form of qualified majority decisions.

We have seen that matters of taxation, for example, have become stumbling blocks.

It is hard to understand why we cannot introduce a reasonable tax on capital in Europe.

At present, capital is like a dog off its leash.

We all have a lot to gain and protect in a common Europe.

We also have to cling to the notion of European solidarity for as long as possible in changing circumstances.

I cannot accept the idea that closer cooperation can be achieved on the strength of the vote of one third of the Member States.

In my opinion, we need more than that.

The Commission should also be as thorough as possible in the way it drafts topics for debate, and this is why in future there should also be a Commission Member representing each Member State.

The balance between the small and the large Member States must also be preserved in the Council so that double majority voting can never be acceptable under any circumstances.

Madam President, the constitutional questions we are debating today are highly controversial, as the vote in committee clearly shows.

In fact 12 Members voted for and 12 voted against.

Of the latter, 8 voted against and 4 abstained.

That is not something to be proud of.

But I find it reassuring that so many Members agreed that the length of the shopping list of proposals contained in the report' s 52 paragraphs and 58 sub-paragraphs is exaggerated and that, as things stand, there is a risk that the Intergovernmental Conference will not take it seriously.

But unlike Talleyrand, I cannot console myself with the idea that what is exaggerated is by the same token insignificant.

I want to dissociate myself from demands such as that we should cut my country' s delegation in the European Parliament by one third.

I know that by head of population the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg has more representatives here than the large countries, but that is a primitive and premature method of calculation.

With 6 Members it is materially impossible to follow up all the dossiers that are crucial to our country.

Moreover, we cannot sit on all the committees.

It is easier to divide up the work and to specialise in a large delegation: even if the largest delegation, comprising 99 Members, was reduced by a third, they would still be able to share out the work.

For the time being, it is enough to propose that the seats in the European Parliament should be allotted on the basis of a degressive proportional system, with a minimum number of seats per Member State, while of course respecting Article 190 of the Treaty.

The idea of European lists is premature, if not hare-brained.

There can be no question of a majority of MEPs deciding the location of the seat of this Parliament here, against the views of the others: we must respect the Edinburgh compromise.

In the case of a qualified-majority Council decision, it is inconceivable to provide for a simple majority of Member States.

We must have a majority of two thirds of the Member States, even if that means providing at the same time for a simple majority of Member States representing a majority of the total EU population.

There can be no question of restricting unanimous Council voting to decisions of a constitutional nature.

We must also retain majority voting for fundamental questions, such as own resources, taxation and so forth.

I hope the idea of not allocating one Commissioner to each Member State is well and truly dead.

Finally, if we really need closer cooperation, it must involve at least half of the Member States, otherwise we risk ending up with something like the French Directory.

This document contains other incongruities too, especially in relation to the budget, which fortunately have no chance of success in the Council and even less chance of being ratified by national parliaments that have any self-respect.

I will not vote for this shopping list unless it is amended along the lines I have just set out.

Madam President, I wonder which of these is more serious: what the Council has done by means of an intergovernmental method, once again, to reform the Treaties and an extraordinarily limited agenda for this IGC, bearing in mind the challenges facing us, or the report that we are going to adopt tomorrow in this House.

I believe that our report is more serious.

How can it be argued that this report is less serious when it proposes exactly what we need? It speaks of constitutionalising the European Union, it proposes suitable changes for its institutions, it requests an extension of policies and, above all, through its proposals, it tries to put the Union in a position to confront such important challenges as, firstly, globalisation and, secondly, the new economy which we have just discussed in Lisbon.

I do not believe that the proposals which we make in this report are extravagant.

They are consistent with what this Parliament has always demanded: more democracy and efficiency for the European Union.

Furthermore, in this respect, I believe that the effort of the rapporteurs in drawing up the original draft and seeking a compromise through the amendments will lead to a position which should be taken into account by this Parliament and by the national governments.

Madam President, I would also like to welcome the efforts of the Portuguese Presidency at the moment, and ask certain governments - I am not going to say which ones - to be a little bit more generous when it comes to European construction.

Madam President, enlargement and its strategic, political and economic consequences for the European Union cannot remain issues undiscussed by the public or viewed exclusively from the national perspective.

This is why the debate caused by the presentation of the European Parliament' s position on this promising Intergovernmental Conference is vital in understanding this new phase of European construction which is both risky and open to question.

We are pleased that this contribution from Parliament stresses, as the main themes and guiding principles, the democratisation, efficiency and greater supervision of the European institutions, exactly where the respective deficits have been most felt and where the risks of disintegration, caused by the significant increase in the number of Member States, were greatest.

Although the majority of the proposals aim to enable and reinforce the joint progress and the integration process in this new and complex framework, and these are to be applauded, there are others which are not so great. I am specifically referring to the European lists for this Parliament or to the rules on decisions by qualified majority or on closer cooperation, for example, in which a fairer balance between the Member States, more in accordance with the representation and legitimacy of the respective bodies, could be attempted.

We fortunately have the opportunity to improve these points tomorrow in plenary.

As for the countries which were for years subjected to forced and authoritarian integration and which are now knocking on our door, attracted by the success of our joint experiment, we must receive them with our house in order and operating properly. There must also be no doubt about everyone' s participation in the search for the best solutions for all and about the primacy of the values of justice, democracy and solidarity within these countries.

I warmly congratulate the rapporteurs on their work.

President-in-Office, Commissioner Barnier, I must start my intervention with the same question as Mr Carnero González.

I wonder why, as a committed Europhile, I find myself disagreeing in this debate with many other committed Europhiles and specifically the rapporteurs.

In my opinion, the grounding of the European project in the dual legitimacy of a union of peoples and a union of States is not reflected in the end result of this report' s proposals.

At a time when the European Parliament should be achieving a consensus which could act as an important reference, politically speaking, for the Intergovernmental Conference, our position is cause for regret.

We hope that certain amendments will be approved tomorrow. These are essential to guarantee a balance between small and large Member States and even between the dual legitimacy of a union of peoples and a union of States.

We therefore hope to have reason to vote for this report tomorrow. We will if this House approves a set of just six or seven amendments which we feel are essential to ensure that this issue is considered not from a position of national egoism but from one which defends the coherence and solidarity of the European project.

My second point is directed at the President-in-Office.

We were puzzled about what Mr Gama said, in his initial intervention, on the current state of the work in the IGC.

We are well aware of the Portuguese presidency' s determination. I would therefore like to encourage the presidency to continue working to ensure that the Member States understand how vital it is that more questions are decided by qualified majority and that there is greater flexibility in EU decision-making.

I would also encourage you to ensure that the IGC agenda is extended to questions which we regard as essential, such as the Charter of Fundamental Rights.

We hope that this can be included in the Treaty as, if so, not only would we be making a significant contribution to the EU' s future but we would also bring ourselves closer to the people at this politically important time. We must now reaffirm once again the community of values which will be enshrined by this Charter of Fundamental Rights.

Madam President, with your permission I should like to use this brief opportunity at the end of this debate to respond to something which was raised in a point of order at the start of this sitting. I consider this to be the Council' s legitimate right.

Comments were made about the Council' s absence during the address by the Austrian President to this Parliament.

I must say firstly, to clarify matters, that the Council presidency was not supposed to be present nor was this Parliament' s understanding.

We did not have any indication from the President of this House that we should attend for what was purely a parliamentary matter.

Secondly, I must say that, on questions of political responsibility, the Council refuses to be given lessons and be subjected to pressure by something that has much more to do with the internal chicanery of Portuguese national politics than properly with matters of substance.

In my opinion, this House has ended up being used as a kind of platform for political provocation and we will not accept this situation.

There is a clear boundary around the work of the Portuguese presidency with regard to the functioning of the institutions and the role of Austria in these institutions.

This was totally obvious from my intervention in this House when this issue was first debated.

Within the European Union we have met all the requirements allowing Austria to act and participate fully in the European institutions and in their own functioning as a country.

We are therefore not confusing any of our positions and we refuse, due to a mere internal political provocation, to consider in this debate issues which have nothing to do with the European Parliament and the European institutions.

Moving on now to the Dimitrakopoulos-Leinen report, I must say firstly that I have the greatest respect for the work carried out by the two rapporteurs. This is a report of great depth and vision but, conceivably, it might not be the subject of consensus in Council, which would allow it to represent a step forward in the enlargement of the Union.

However, I must repeat that I have great respect for the work carried out as it provides a certain vision of Europe and of what European ambition must be. I wonder, like everyone else - and we will probably have the opportunity to consider this in more detail during the debate within the IGC - whether the conditions exist within this framework to achieve the ambition expressed in this report, particularly by the deadline.

I wonder whether we can close an IGC such as we all want, by the end of this year, with such a high level of ambition in terms of reform.

This House must also consider, in voting on this report, whether or not the set of proposals which it contains is sufficiently realistic about what can be approved by the end of this Conference. This is regardless of the excellent quality of the proposals, as I have said, and the vision of the future which they provide.

We must realise that the European Union, being governed as it is by rules of efficiency, democracy and transparency, must always consider, as stated by Mr Poos, the problem of whether public opinion will systematically accept all the reforms to be made.

There are fifteen parliaments to which we must answer and which must ratify this Conference. If one of these fifteen does not ratify the IGC, then we will be faced with a European crisis.

I hope that the people will realise that the work we are doing in the IGC is serious, realistic and responsible. We do not want this to become a fatuous exercise which may tomorrow have a negative effect on the whole reason for its existence, namely the expectation that the EU will modernise and reform in order to make it compatible with the future enlargement which may know no bounds.

Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, at the end of this debate, after listening to each and every parliamentary speaker with the attention they deserved and before the extremely important votes you will be holding tomorrow on the various proposals, I want once again to thank the two rapporteurs, Jo Leinen, who is present here, and Mr Dimitrakopoulos, for the extremely thorough and useful job they have done. As I pointed out this morning, they have sought the greatest possible convergence between the Commission and the European Parliament, in order to imbue these negotiations with the political impetus they need.

Following on from what Mr Seixas da Costa said, let me also say, and I can testify to this, that these negotiations conducted under the Portuguese Presidency have indeed, as the Portuguese Minister just said, been conducted with great authority, realism and pragmatism.

From that point of view, as I had hoped, the Portuguese Presidency has proved itself to be in no way an interim or secondary presidency.

It has an extremely important role to play and it really is playing it, in order to make the necessary progress before handing over to the French Presidency.

And from that point of view, I want to thank the Council.

Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, I just want to make three comments at the conclusion of this debate.

Firstly, many speakers discussed the question of the equilibrium between what are termed the large and the small states.

We are well aware that this equilibrium is both necessary and difficult to achieve.

It is necessary because, since 1957, all the states are recognised as equal, as having equal sovereignty; but at the same time it is difficult to achieve because they do not all have the same size of population and because, out of respect for democracy, we must by one means or another take account of the fact that the number of citizens differs from country to country.

What I mean to say is that for its part the Commission has sought to establish this equilibrium in the proposals it put forward on 26 January, and which it has defended week after week, as indeed it did on the double majority question.

One way of achieving an equilibrium is for qualified-majority voting always to secure the support of at least a majority of states and half the population.

We even went a little further on an issue which has given rise to much comment and at times to anxiety, namely the Commission.

We have gone beyond the search for an equilibrium and proposed an egalitarian solution in relation to the composition of the Commission.

And to those who are worried, let me say again that I have seen no sign of any proposal that any Member State should not have a Commissioner.

What we proposed, let me repeat, is one Commissioner per Member State, but with two options. I would like you to consider these options carefully, and indeed we have the time to carefully consider the consequences of these options between now and the end of the year.

The first option is one Commissioner per Member State on a permanent basis, all sitting at the same time, but with a Commission which will one day have 30 or 35 Commissioners, which will inevitably mean a hierarchy within the College.

The second option is a Commission with one Commissioner per Member State, but not all sitting at the same time, which would mean the Commission would remain more collegiate by nature.

That, ladies and gentlemen, remains our aim: to establish an equilibrium between the small and the large states.

In that regard, I share the concerns expressed by a number of speakers.

Second concern: the role of the European Parliament as the driving force, as referred to by Jo Leinen.

As I said this morning, I really believe that we, and you, ladies and gentlemen, during your term of office, must spend some time explaining these European issues not just in your constituencies, your countries, but everywhere else too, to all the citizens, and as often as possible.

Opportunities must also be created to convince and speak to the national parliaments.

President Napolitano proposed the idea of an interparliamentary conference.

At his invitation I myself took part in a meeting between the national parliaments and the European Parliament, where I found a great deal of interest expressed. The Commission will be prepared to take part in any exercise aimed at enhancing this dialogue and this mutual understanding between the national parliaments, which we need in order to ratify a genuine reform, and the European Parliament.

Lastly, I heard Mr Poos say earlier that this IGC 2000 was not the end of the story.

Of course we know that history will not stop at the end of the year 2000 and that there will be further institutional changes.

But let me state quite emphatically and formally that, after the end of the year, we will not be returning to some of the important issues under consideration during these negotiations. These issues are: the composition of the Commission, the scope of qualified-majority voting, the composition of the Court of Auditors and the Court of Justice and the voting system.

One way or another, these questions will be settled at the end of the year and they will be settled for the long term, the very long term.

So we must take the time to reflect carefully about what we are doing.

There is no way that later, when we have 20, 25 or 30 Member States, we will be able to do what we did not manage to do either in Amsterdam or today, this year, for lack of political will.

So I hope that together, working with the Council, we will manage to give a sufficiently strong political impetus so that in the final analysis, at the end of this year, we succeed with these negotiations, rather than merely concluding them, and that together we demonstrate a collective political courage that goes beyond considerations based merely on caution or national interests.

The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.

The next item is the statements by the Council and the Commission on the famine in Ethiopia.

Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, we can all remember the pictures of the famine in Ethiopia in the 1980s. We can also remember the drought in Africa in the 1990s, which affected around ten countries.

Yet we must also remember that we managed to get nearly four million tonnes of food to sub-Saharan Africa thanks to action by the international community. This was partly in response to media coverage, which is playing an increasingly important role.

We must realise that, notwithstanding the crisis situations which now exist, the international community has taken objective action in response.

This has probably not been adequate and not what we would have liked it to be, but at least the international community has adopted an objective attitude.

Within the international community, either individually or through the European Union as a whole, the European countries have made an important contribution.

We must remember this, now that the crisis in Ethiopia is occurring again due to drought.

The European Union is keen to ensure that this situation does not worsen and is trying to mobilise all possible means to lessen its effects.

Certain instruments are currently working effectively at both EU level and in the role played by the EU within international organisations.

This intervention is very important in tackling the problem of nearly 16 million people currently at risk throughout this area.

Commissioner Patten will explain, at the appropriate moment in this debate, the actions which the Commission has planned or has been developing.

These actions are very important and have been implemented in time. The decisions were also taken at the right time.

Both the Directorate-General for Development and ECHO have already sent enough food to satisfy the most urgent needs.

At this precise moment, the Executive Director of the World Food Programme is in Addis Ababa for discussions with the Ethiopian Government on this issue, which involves technical and practical problems in transporting the food.

We cannot separate from this issue the current political and military position in Ethiopia.

We must be aware that this situation, which is in itself extremely serious due to the drought, is currently being made worse precisely because of political and military circumstances which are hindering the distribution of aid.

In particular, means of transport may be lacking because they are being used for purposes other than those for which they are intended.

As I said, the European Union has been monitoring this situation. In the General Affairs Council the day before yesterday the Commission presented a report on the current situation in the Horn of Africa and specifically tackled one point of the humanitarian situation.

However, these concerns are the centre of attention not only for the Commission but also for the Council.

A meeting was held yesterday in Brussels of a group of experts specifically to analyse the best ways of tackling this situation.

There were representatives from ECHO, the Directorate-General for Development and the Member States of the European Union. This meeting was preceded by one with the Ethiopian Ambassador to ensure the most effective coordination of the aid and support which the European Union can mobilise, both overall and in terms of that from individual Member States.

To conclude, the situation in the Horn of Africa, in both political and humanitarian terms, is at the centre of our concerns.

On Monday in the General Affairs Council we had a debate on this subject at which the Council' s Special Envoy was present. He gave a presentation on the situation and its gravity.

The European Union approved in this same Council a set of recommendations which are to be added to all the political actions which the Union has been developing, particularly since last year, following the severest onslaught in the conflict between Eritrea and Ethiopia.

Unfortunately, sometimes we cannot react as rapidly as we would like to the various situations of humanitarian need and shortage.

However, we are watching this issue and we hope that the attention raised by this debate may itself also help to mobilise public opinion on such a serious problem.

I am grateful for the opportunity to speak in this debate - grateful but sad that the debate is necessary at all.

I am standing in for my colleague, Commissioner Nielson, who would have liked to have been able to respond himself.

For me there is an awful sense of déja vu - or perhaps I should say déja entendu - about this debate today.

Over a decade ago, from 1986 to 1989, I was my country' s development minister.

I know that there are a number of honourable Members in this House who have done the same job for their own countries.

I was speaking in similar debates then, tackling similar crises in the Horn of Africa.

I am afraid the story is grimly familiar: there are military conflicts, there is environmental degradation, there is drought, and sometimes there have been - and this was especially true in the past - extremely ill-judged policies.

It is capable of producing hunger and misery on a massive scale.

We face the same old frustrations, as I said in the Chamber yesterday.

Despite all the problems we will, in the end get help to the starving, never quite as fast as we would like, but faster than used to be the case.

So we improve our capacity to deal with the humanitarian problems in spite of the difficulties.

But alas we are still incapable of preventing the humanitarian problems arising in the first place - very often problems with largely political causes.

Let me set out for honourable Members what we are doing to alleviate the present crisis.

There are currently two Commission teams in Ethiopia: one from ECHO and one from the Food Security Unit of our Directorate-General for Development.

They will be making recommendations on our future efforts.

The Ethiopian Government has asked for 821 000 tonnes of food aid, 25% more than in recent years.

This amount is nearly covered by existing pledges by the international community.

The Commission has programmed the delivery of 283 000 tonnes and we are about to take decisions on delivering an additional quantity of up to 260 000 tonnes.

Let me also correct an inaccuracy that is circulating as a result of an Oxfam statement which claimed that the Commission provided only 50 000 tonnes to Ethiopia last year.

The real figure is more than three times that.

The deliveries this year come on top of a quarter of a century in which the Commission has been involved in providing food assistance to Ethiopia.

During that time nearly 40% of our total aid to Ethiopia has been in food assistance or food security programmes: some EUR 875 million' s worth, EUR 250 million in the last four years alone.

It is important to be aware of it.

There have been a number of allegations about an inadequate European response to the crisis.

There is an admirable letter in the London newspaper, The Independent, by the honourable Member, Mrs Kinnock, who knows a very great deal about the Horn of Africa, in which she sets out the real facts.

I hope that letter gets wider circulation.

One of the things that she said in her letter - and I guess she speaks with almost more authority on this subject than anyone else - is: "The European Union, together with Member States, remains the biggest donor of food aid to Ethiopia" .

She then argues: "This is not 'visible' since it is directed through the government, the World Food Programme, the Red Cross, NGOs and others."

It is important to remember that point.

What matters most is not to rake over these old controversies.

What matters most is what we are doing right now to get help to the starving.

I want to remind Parliament that total Commission food aid, now being off-loaded, shipped or procured, amounts to over 282 million metric tonnes.

An EC food aid shipment of 30 000 tonnes channelled through the World Food Programme arrived in Djibouti port last weekend.

A further shipment of over 16 000 tonnes through EuronAid is due to arrive on Sunday.

This will be followed by further shipments through Djibouti and Berbera in view of the limited port-handling capacity.

Total shipments from all donors expected to be offloaded between now and July amount to 504 000 metric tonnes.

This quantity should be sufficient to meet immediate needs.

Total donor pledges, as I said earlier, are over 800 000 metric tonnes.

So that is what we are doing.

We will continue to devote our full attention to this crisis until it is over, and our people in ECHO on the ground will continue to work tirelessly to get help to where it is needed.

We are facing a major problem posed by the lack of adequate port facilities for food-aid deliveries, not least because of the non-availability of the Eritrean ports at Assab and Massawa, which means that only Djibouti and to a lesser extent Berbera can be used.

Djibouti is expected to be congested with the arrival of 600 000 metric tonnes over the next three months.

We are looking urgently for alternatives, including better use of the Port of Berbera through rapid improvements to the road from Berbera into Ethiopia.

We are also considering using the Port of Sudan.

Road improvements are under way on the Sudanese side and roads on the Ethiopian side are reported to be quite good.

As my friend said in opening this debate, of course there are problems because of the conflict zone and I just want to repeat what I said at the outset.

I have had to speak in too many debates like this dealing with the consequences of crises like this, in the Great Lakes, in Ethiopia, in the Sudan and now in Ethiopia again.

I repeat, we are better at delivering assistance now than we were a decade ago, but it is intensely frustrating that all the assistance should be required in the first place.

It is intensely frustrating that as millions starve, governments spend small fortunes on guns and weaponry to wage war against each other when the only war they should be waging is a war against starvation, a war for food security, a war against poverty and environmental degradation, a war in which we are morally bound to help them.

It follows therefore that as we combat the hunger, we should also lend our full support to those who fight for peace.

We give our whole-hearted backing to the efforts of all of those, including the OAU and the European Presidency' s Special Envoy, Ambassador Serri, who worked for a peaceful settlement to regional conflicts.

They will have our unstinting assistance.

I am afraid that I should add that experience suggests that they need our prayers as well.

Madam President, I wish to begin by welcoming Commissioner Patten' s statement, which sets out the truth about our European assistance.

Once again, we see the scenes on our TV screens of starving children in Ethiopia and we remember the horrors of the last famine in the Horn of Africa.

Once again, we have pop stars and celebrities criticising the institutions of Europe and national governments for doing too little too late.

It is amazing how quickly some people become experts when a situation like this arises and they can see some publicity, without knowing more of the background to the overall position.

Somalia is war-torn into small fiefdoms, which makes it extremely difficult for anyone - institutions or NGOs - to deliver food aid to the starving people.

Who does one negotiate with in such a situation?

Ethiopia is engaged in a border dispute with Eritrea, which means most of the manpower is tied up on a war front and much-needed food is being diverted in both countries to feed soldiers rather than starving children.

Of course we must do everything in our power to alleviate famine.

However, where countries are at war, all our aid must be humanitarian and channelled through NGO organisations to ensure that aid goes to the starving people and not to the war front.

We must watch the situation in Eritrea and balance humanitarian aid there, if required.

We desperately want these two countries to sign a peace agreement through the efforts of the OAU so that we can resume full development aid to both countries.

I recently spent a week in both Ethiopia and Eritrea.

I visited refugee camps in both countries and saw for myself the hardship and the poverty people are suffering.

It is not true to say that Ethiopia has not been crying for help for food aid over the past two years, but the war situation has blurred the vision of many looking on.

When I was there they were pleading for help.

I saw children with serious malnutrition and in need of health care, as well as food and proper shelter.

I saw families living in caves, the walls running with water, and listened to the hacking coughs of children racked with fever.

It looks bad on TV; it is a hundred times worse when you stand amongst it, when people are in such dire situations.

However, I saw food aid being delivered in Eritrea by German NGOs to a camp of 16 000 people, spread over 7 kilometres in case of bombing raids.

I watched two strong men lifting 50-kg bags on to women' s backs and saw them stagger off to their plastic shelters kilometres away.

I saw children aged eight walking eight kilometres out and eight kilometres back to get water.

They were the lucky ones: they were the ones with food.

We never seem to learn a lesson from the past.

It should not be TV cameras and pop stars who alert us to starvation and drought: there should be a proper monitoring system in the sensitive areas of the African continent.

Perhaps this could be built into Commissioner Patten' s rapid reaction unit we heard of yesterday.

We must have action and we must have action decisively and urgently.

Madam President, I gladly concur with the previous speakers, Mr Patten and Mr Corrie.

We all witnessed the fight against hunger ten years ago.

We subsequently visited many projects and saw many things, such as very expert local farmers who were involved in reconstruction projects both in Eritrea and Ethiopia.

I find Ethiopia' s criticism hard to take: Europe undertakes too little, you need to send food. Meanwhile the logistical capacity, such as lorries, roads and money, is used to wage a regional war.

The least both parties could do is to impose an absolute freeze on military activity.

If we talk about distributing food fast to the right places, then these lorries are needed, and these lorries were the force behind the movement which now leads Ethiopia and the movement which leads Eritrea.

Both have a great deal of logistical experience, expertise and know-how.

If they really channel their energies - and want to channel their energies - into what is available at this stage, if they want to make their ports and roads available, their capacity would be enormous.

According to them, we are entirely to blame.

But there is huge responsibility on the part of Ethiopia and Eritrea, and they should not try to throw it back at us using a cheap marketing trick.

Put a freeze on the military trade, try to reach a peace agreement and meanwhile, deploy your military lorry capacity and manpower where they are needed.

There is enormous pressure to send food fast, and I mean fast.

Experience has taught us that things can go very far wrong depending on how food is distributed, and it could well end up sitting in the warehouses.

I would suggest looking at all the options - this will certainly be done by the monitoring clubs of the EU now in Ethiopia.

Is there anything for sale locally in the region?

We were right to turn our food aid policy round. We should not send our surpluses there but examine whether anything can be bought locally.

After all, anything we can get and arrange there will help their economy and will prevent the local situation from being distorted.

Because, ultimately, that is what causes the structural hardship which accompanies these wars.

I hope that the early warning facility, which involved a great many experts, will also be built into our ability to receive signals at an earlier stage.

Everyone knows that, but it could be an enormous bonus in removing the image of inadequacy when we handle such situations.

Ethiopia and Eritrea bear the ultimate responsibility.

I give my full backing to any action undertaken by the Commission on this score.

Mr President, Commissioner Patten wonders why Africa' s fateful history keeps repeating itself - with good reason.

Millions of people are again threatened with starvation.

This is not just caused by extreme drought.

The blame lies mainly with the unusually irresponsible leaders who prioritise the fight for a dry piece of land over the suffering of their own people.

Surely it is absolutely appalling that the governments of poverty-stricken countries such as Ethiopia and Eritrea buy arms on a massive scale instead of building up sufficient food reserves.

The blinkered Ethiopian government, in particular, contributes through its obstinacy to the suffering of its own people.

How else can you explain the fact that Ethiopia rejected the offer to use the ports of Massawa and Assab?

As a result, aid is now unable to reach a large part of its own population.

The Organisation of African Unity and the European Union must exert maximum pressure on the governments of Ethiopia and Eritrea to settle their dispute in Algiers, and aid workers must gain safe access to the population without delay.

An Ethiopian Minister has said that the international community does not spring into action until the skeletons appear on television.

He failed to mention that these macabre images are not only due to a lack of rain but mainly to a lack of proper leadership.

I am pleased that Commissioner Patten has addressed the criticism to the effect that European aid is inadequate.

Despite this, I would like to ask him what lessons he has learnt from how Europe responded this time round.

It is difficult not to despair in the face of the misery in the Horn of Africa.

We should nonetheless not lose hope.

Nature can only destroy where people fail.

After all, war and mismanagement are down to people.

Africa' s fateful history does not have to repeat itself, provided that people' s lives take priority over the feuds among its shameless leaders.

Mr President, Commissioner, it is terrible and disappointing for mankind that every now and again we hear these cries of pain from Africa begging for food and water, in the 21st century.

Why do we still allow this to happen?

Do we not have a conscience?

Every day the European Union provides less funding, less aid, in global terms, to the poor countries of Africa.

So how can we be surprised at this situation?

How can it be that we have warehouses full of surplus food which we are obliged to destroy when it rots away pointlessly or when it does not meet the conditions for consumption which we demand?

There are reasons to justify this, but none of them justifies the death of a single person from starvation.

It is not true that we show solidarity.

All we do is try to put the fire out with occasional aid, without a clear or decisive policy for prevention although we know perfectly well that famine in Africa, and in the third world in general, happens periodically.

I hope that these thousands of tonnes of food aid provided do not silence the media and that they continue to report on the tragedy in Africa.

I am not saying anything new.

It has been said a million times and it will be said again, but today I am speaking from the heart and I feel Africa' s pain as if it were my own.

When will we have a Marshall Plan for Africa?

To this end, I propose that there be set up a prestigious and independent committee of international experts to assess the situation together with the international organisations and to implement a series of urgent proposals and initiatives for food and health aid, acting immediately, planning for the future and putting all our humanitarian weaponry into the hands of the non-governmental organisations.

Mr President, the situation in the Horn of Africa, and particularly in Ethiopia, is reaching a level of drama rarely exceeded. It requires from the international community, and particularly the European Union, a corresponding level of attention and aid in order to prevent an unparalleled human catastrophe.

Action is already being taken, like the food aid which the European Union is providing, as mentioned just now by Commissioner Patten.

We also have to overcome all the difficulties on the ground in getting food and medicine to the starving and dying people and children, and as quickly as possible.

We must therefore firmly stress to the governments in the region, bearing in mind the political and military situation, that they must allow and ensure rapid movement and access by the international organisations to the areas where these people are gathered. They must also guarantee that this aid reaches those for whom it is really intended.

It is essential that these international organisations, such as the World Health Organisation, UNICEF and the FAO in particular, act together and with all the speed and efficiency which the situation demands. They must deliver the food and medical aid but they must also take steps to re-establish the primary sector which is decisive in this type of economy, in order to guarantee a sustainable and medium-term solution.

This may be achieved by sending technicians and experts who can set up projects in this area.

The gravity of the situation and the need for our solidarity with these people to result in exceptional and priority action lead me finally to ask the Commission, and particularly Commissioners Patten and Nielson, to keep us regularly and closely informed about how the situation is developing and especially the measures which they intend to use or are developing to ease this situation.

Mr President, the Ethiopian government has blamed the international community for not being sufficiently alert in its aid efforts to feed its hungry population.

The donors, including the European Union, are said not to have kept their promises.

I share the Commissioner' s view that the reproach made by Addis Ababa is misplaced to say the least.

Misplaced because this statement is made by a government which has been embroiled in an absurd war over borders with its neighbour, Eritrea, for two years now.

Hundreds of millions of dollars, desperately needed for social provisions and increasing food production, have already been pumped into the war machine and, at the time when the Ethiopian Minister for Foreign Affairs was heaping abuse on the international community, reports were circulating that his government had bought a military aircraft from the Russian Republic. It is high time that the Ethiopian government faced up to its responsibility and made every effort to end the war with Eritrea.

It could then focus its attention on the economic and social development of the country and so be able to prevent famines such as these. But also, and I would like to make this quite clear, the aid industry should stop blaming the international community unilaterally and, in this way, stop providing the local regime with an alibi.

Emergency aid is absolutely necessary and must be increased, but development aid to both warring governments must be combined with accepting and implementing the OAU peace agreement.

As a token of goodwill, the Ethiopian leader could in the meantime begin by accepting the offer of a humanitarian corridor from his Eritrean colleague, or could the pride and ego of one man get in the way once again of the interests of millions of his people?

Mr President, famine and Ethiopia: these are two words sadly etched in our memories.

In the Horn of Africa, which has become the site of every conceivable scourge, 16 million victims of famine, of which 8 million are in Ethiopia, are awaiting aid.

In Ogaden, the most hard-hit region in south-east Ethiopia, there has been no rain for three years, to the point that the notion of dry seasons and wet seasons is now devoid of all meaning.

So of course we have to react, and do so quickly, and unfortunately we know all too well that the price of our procrastination and delays is paid in human lives.

At the same time, let me thank the Council and the Commission for what they have already done and for the information they gave us a short while ago.

Of course the 800 000 tonnes of emergency aid promised by the international community must be delivered as soon as possible.

But at the same time, the countries in the region must do their utmost to facilitate this delivery: by opening up the ports, supply routes and infrastructures.

Nonetheless, in a region torn apart by a rearguard conflict, this crisis leaves a particularly bitter taste, because every penny paid to buy a gun, to buy ammunition, aggravates an already precarious economic, social and nutritional situation.

We must demand that Eritrea and Ethiopia freeze their military activities so that all the assets, all the logistical and human capabilities of these countries are put at the service of their peoples.

The sound of guns has for far too long drowned out the cries of the hungry.

That is why we must appeal to the reason of the Ethiopian and Eritrean leaders and call on them to put an end to the conflict, to reach rapid agreement on the technical arrangements for a ceasefire under the OAU peace plan.

But at this moment, of course, we must simply listen to the appeals of the suffering people.

Mr President, misery and death in Ethiopia were on our screens four years ago.

The cameramen left but misery and death did not leave Ethiopia.

The population of Ethiopia pray for rain.

Sadly they see only a rain of bullets.

People crave water, food and medicine.

Sadly all they see is their land and their homes blown to pieces by the tanks and planes our governments supply to the Ethiopian and Eritrean politicians.

These politicians are hungry for power: politicians who argue over territorial boundaries whilst their people die.

These politicians fly their national flags on their parliaments and presidential palaces, but sadly the only flag their people see is the flag of death.

Famine, disease and death remain the hallmarks of these countries.

Hunger for power must not be allowed to override the hunger for life.

Mr Patten has listed a number of measures the EU has taken to help.

Such help has been received with gratitude, but let us put it into perspective.

Sixteen million people are starving today; 15 000 tonnes have been delivered.

I accept the difficulties of the logistics but that means less than a kilo per person.

No time limit is given, in other words it is a kilo that has to last forever.

They only relieve the symptoms; they do not cure the disease.

The EU must take the lead in curing this serious problem and the only way to do it is firstly to stop arms reaching all the warring parties and make sure we use our influence with those who supply them; and secondly teach these people how to grow food and harvest, store, package and process it so that they can be independent and self-reliant, not beggars for life.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, today' s debate was very important as a way of demonstrating the commitment and attention which this House gives to humanitarian issues, particularly the one discussed today.

Commissioner Patten' s words made clear not only an objective awareness of the work already carried out but also an absolute awareness that this situation is intolerable and that the European Commission will be determined on this issue, that it will take specific action and also closely monitor future developments.

As for the Council, I should like to say that there is great interest in ensuring that situations of this kind can be permanently followed and monitored in close coordination with the Commission.

It is important that an objective awareness is created within the European Union that humanitarian issues must be dealt with in an increasingly committed manner and that the European Union and its Member States must, within the relevant international organisations, ensure priority attention for these issues.

The summit between the European Union and the African countries was held just a few days ago.

Its extensive agenda offered an opportunity for what we hope is the first in a series of organised dialogues between Europe and the African countries. Specifically we want to try and establish a more integrated and coordinated vision of all the issues now affecting the African continent about which we are concerned.

These issues do matter to the European continent for a whole range of reasons, even ones which relate to the very safety and stability desired for the European continent.

Dialogue with the African authorities is essential, as is dialogue with the sub-regional authorities.

It is vital to guarantee coherent action in preventing conflicts and creating rapid intervention mechanisms for these situations. Without this collective and organised dialogue, there can be no hope.

The problems cannot be solved through ad hoc actions and one-off interventions.

If we cannot organise the international community within the global international organisations and within the more regional organisations, we will not have any response to all the crises which are systematically affecting the weakest countries in particular.

The European Union has, in this respect, a particular responsibility the tradition addressing this type of problem could almost be said to be part of its civilisation. The EU has an awareness and a responsibility which today' s debate has clearly demonstrated.

I would like to inform you that pursuant to Rule 37 (2) of the Rules of Procedure, I have received five motions for resolutions.

The vote will take place on Thursday.

Stabilisation and association process for countries of South-Eastern Europe

The next item is the report (A5-0069/2000) by Mr Lagendijk, on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy, on the communication from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament on the stabilisation and association process for countries of South-Eastern Europe (COM(1999) 235 - C5-0124/1999/2126(COS))

Mr President, in the time allocated to me, I would mainly like to focus on the Funding Conference of the Stability Pact which has just been held, because it is more beneficial, in my view, to focus attention on this than on the text of my report which, of course, was written for the Conference.

I would like to make a general comment regarding the Conference.

It is safe to say that it was a huge success, not only in financial terms but also due to the fact that the emphasis was most definitely on projects which link up the different regions. In fact, this was one of the central themes of the report and the main thrust of the Stability Pact.

Indeed, regional development is one of the Stability Pact' s key points.

It was good to see all-round commitment most definitely present at all the desks at the Conference.

It was also a success - and I do not simply say this to flatter the Commissioner - because it was clear that the European Union or the European Commission took the lead at long last. In my opinion, it had been taking a back seat for a little too long.

This concludes my general comments on the Funding Conference.

Further to this Conference, I would like to single out five key points from my report.

Everyone was waiting with bated breath for the moment when the Commissioner would produce the amount.

He finally came up with EUR 530 million. That was very smart creative accounting, I must say, because, of that EUR 530 million, 50% was old, pre-2000 money from the Obnova and Phare programmes and 30% was taken from the same programmes for the year 2000.

In the final analysis, therefore, there was little new money in it.

This is not a reproach to the Commission but an observation, and one which will, of course, create even more bad feeling, bearing in mind that another EUR 5.5 billion is still to be found. This is an amount which was quoted by the European Investment Bank at one time, which was later taken over by Commission President Prodi and in respect of which it is still completely unclear, to me in any case, how this is to be raised in the coming year.

I would, therefore, like to ask the Commissioner how the first year, the year 2001, is likely to take shape?

How are the preparations for the Stability Pact budget coming along?

What is his reaction to the ever increasing protests, both in terms of loudness and number, coming, for example, from the Council or the Member States, to the effect that those 5.5 billion intended for the western Balkans, by way of pre-accession aid for Bulgaria and Romania, have been pitched far too high and that, in terms of absorption capacity, for example, a much lower amount would be far more realistic?

I am in favour of retaining the figure of 5.5 billion for the time being.

I am only very curious as to how the Commission hopes to raise all this money.

A request had also been made to spread the projects and planning for this Conference over all the desks: democracy, reconstruction and safety, in the knowledge that, at the end of the day, a bridge is more expensive than a training centre or mine-clearance programme.

Unfortunately, I have to note that, looking at all the figures after the Conference, the emphasis has been shifted quite considerably towards reconstruction.

Of 4.2 billion, 80% has been set aside for reconstruction, 17% for democracy and only 3% for safety.

I would call on the Commission, and Europe has more or less pledged to use the same scale, to take the 3 to 4% really seriously and expand it.

I would just remind you of a tragic report in the paper this morning about three children who stepped onto a mine near Sarajevo yesterday and were killed.

A mine-clearance programme is part of safety, is of key importance and should not be overlooked.

Thirdly, I would like to comment on the appeal in the report, backed by the General Affairs Council, to lift trade restrictions for the countries asymmetrically and, if necessary, unilaterally, the underlying idea being that, in time, trade will be just as important as subsidies.

What does the Commission intend to do to lift these unilateral trade restrictions in the short term?

Regrettably, very little attention has been paid to the role of NGOs, especially the local NGOs, both in terms of preparation and implementation. This is all the more unfortunate if one considers the level of knowledge regarding the Stability Pact in the region.

I am convinced that it is vital to introduce local NGOs in order to improve the quality of the programmes but also to raise the awareness of the Stability Pact, and the exact plans, in that region.

Who will ensure that all these tasks are carried out promptly and efficiently?

I would like to give the Commissioner a word of advice.

Last week, he was accused of wanting to saw the legs from under Commission President Prodi' s chair.

If you are having a go at chair legs, could you take those of Mr Solana' s chair?

In my view, he has been given a leading role in the Balkans for no good reason.

It would seem far more logical to give this leading role to the European Commission, notably Commissioner Patten, to implement this Stability Pact promptly and efficiently.

(PT) Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I must start by congratulating the rapporteur, Mr Lagendijk, on his excellent and important report. The debate caused by this could not have come at a better time.

As you know, the Special European Council held in Lisbon reiterated the strategic priority for the European Union of ensuring peace and stability in South-Eastern Europe and, as such, this is an issue which is on the EU' s immediate agenda and permanently on our political agenda.

The European Union is by far the body which has contributed the most aid to this region.

Between 1991 and 1999, the total aid from the EU to South-Eastern Europe, including that from the EU as a whole and the Member States individually, was in excess of EUR 19.3 billion.

The EU is furthermore the main trading partner of all the countries in this region. It has allowed valuable trade concessions and, as you know, several thousand soldiers, police officers and civilian workers from the EU are active in the region, particularly in Kosovo.

We read with great interest the rapporteur' s conclusions on the stabilisation and association process for South-Eastern Europe.

The assessment of the solidity and possible deficiencies of this process certainly provides points for discussion and I will try to comment on some of these.

The Lisbon European Council confirmed that our overall objective remains the greatest possible integration of the countries in the region within Europe' s political and economic system.

The Stabilisation and Association Agreements constitute a central point of this policy.

As the rapporteur quite rightly notes, these new agreements will not enter into force immediately as we firstly have to prepare, negotiate and conclude each one.

As a result, the rapporteur concludes that it will be necessary to create a type of medium-term stabilisation and regional development programme.

I am not necessarily convinced that this is the most appropriate way of tackling the problem.

The general stabilisation process for the area cannot, by any stretch of the imagination, be reduced to just agreements.

Clearly these are, shall we say, the most visible and most well-known feature of this process, but other important instruments are required such as preferential trade agreements, direct aid from the European Union and political dialogue.

Most of the countries already benefit from trade preferences and the Lisbon Special European Council confirmed that the Stabilisation and Association Agreements should be preceded by greater asymmetric trade liberalisation thereby specifically favouring these countries in their bilateral trade with EU countries.

The idea underlying the stabilisation and association process is sufficiently broad and flexible to ensure a constant project in this area.

With regard to the agreements, the fact that it is taking some time to prepare these should not, in our opinion, jeopardise the whole stabilisation process.

This has not been the EU' s experience in equivalent regional processes in the past.

As with other comprehensive agreements, we therefore hope to be able to establish interim agreements covering the period between the signature and ratification of these agreements, bearing in mind that normally almost twenty months pass between these two events.

It is also worthwhile to remember that we already have contractual relations in the form of trade and cooperation agreements with Albania and the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.

The new agreements, which will be more comprehensive and also more demanding on our partners given that they include elements of political conditionality which obviously form part of the Union' s current approach in this area, will specifically replace the existing agreements in these two cases. They will concentrate much more on regional cooperation than the current agreements and will include provisions on cooperation in the area of justice and home affairs, an area which is of great importance to the Europe of the future.

Negotiations have already begun with the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia on the Stabilisation and Association Agreement.

The Albanian Government recently indicated its reaction to the viability study on the opening of negotiations, which was prepared by the European Commission, and the Council will very shortly analyse this report.

Following internal political changes, the European Commission is also to prepare a viability study for Croatia which the Council hopes to be able to analyse immediately before or after the summer.

Bearing in mind the request made by the local authorities, Bosnia-Herzegovina was sent a guide whose use will help towards preparing a viability study on negotiations for an agreement of the same type.

This work is moving forward at a good pace given, of course, that in this specific case, we must be careful and not create excessive expectations, as the reality of the situation there does not allow us to be overly optimistic in this respect.

I should like to refer briefly to the new regulation.

As we agree with the European Parliament about the need to create a uniform legal basis for support to the region, the Council is waiting for a Commission proposal on a Council regulation which will replace the support granted to the region by the Phare and Obnova programmes.

The recommendations to be made will form a valuable contribution to the debates which we will start within the Council on this issue. I note in particular that the report highlights that the reconstruction of the region must not be regarded as merely physical and economic but must also be aimed at the social infrastructure, civil society and the public institutions.

These are the main objectives of our reconstruction strategy for the area which does not just involve a merely physical dimension but also an overall stabilisation dimension.

The rapporteur also refers briefly to the Stability Pact on which we have been cooperating with these five countries and with the countries involved in the enlargement process.

The recent regional financing conference which was organised jointly by the European Commission and the World Bank, in close cooperation with the Special Coordinator for the Stability Pact, gave significant impetus to the Pact' s objective of reviving the reform processes and stimulating regional cooperation. It proved that the Stability Pact mechanism has already gained a certain maturity and can and must advance.

We believe that reciprocal commitment is the key to the Pact' s success and I feel that this point was made very clear in the recent discussions at the Commission and World Bank conference.

The commitment of the countries in the region to implement institutional policy reforms and to create an environment allowing economic progress is a fundamental element in this Pact.

In return, the international community is supporting the reform commitments and the donors and financial institutions have promised or mobilised a total of EUR 2.4 billion.

Of this amount, the European Union alone, that is, the Commission and Member States combined, have promised or mobilised EUR 1.08 billion.

The international community has financed in particular a quick-start package of EUR 1.8 billion announced at the conference and has made available the necessary financing to accelerate the preparation and implementation of projects and initiatives in the short-term package.

However, the conference was only one initial step in a long process.

The European Union is committed to acting as leader and guaranteeing the coherent management of this whole support process.

It has also pledged to closely monitor and support the regional reform processes in a way which corresponds to the efforts made by each country so that these can be rewarded with advances in the development of new instruments. This will allow economic and social development and progress in line with European standards.

With the exception of Belgrade, all the governments in the region have stated that they will start on the road to reform.

I must clarify, however, that the Council considers that, without Serbia, our common efforts will be incomplete.

A democratic and cooperative Serbia, at peace with its neighbours, will be welcomed within the European family. We must be aware that overall stability in this region can never be complete when one country in the region represents a factor of instability.

This message about Serbia must be received by the respective civil society. Our support for Montenegro and for the stabilisation efforts being made in this country by the respective government must also be reconfirmed.

To conclude, we also note that the rapporteur intends that the mandate of the European Reconstruction Agency should not be limited to Kosovo.

In the meeting of 20 March, the Council invited the Commission to work on a proposal and to present this to the Council with a view to including Montenegro in the Agency' s mandate.

Discussions are also ongoing about the possible extension of the EIB' s activities.

Finally, the Council has invited the Secretary-General and High Representative, under the authority of the Council presidency and in full cooperation with the Commission, to ensure the coherence of the policies for the Western Balkans.

At the last General Affairs Council, an initial commentary was given on these ideas which specifically stem from the presentation given by Commissioner Patten and Mr Solana. We are sure that in future meetings of the General Affairs Council this issue will be followed with close attention and by effective steps towards its realisation.

Mr President, the report on the stabilisation and association process for the countries in eastern Europe we are debating today attempts, and I believe successfully so, to formulate a stable political framework with which to address the Balkan tragedy.

Now is not the time to pass judgement past events and situations.

Today, let us take it that with this report we are taking a step towards the future and creating the platform for a first successful substantive European Union policy, in a way the first successful action of the CFSP.

Here, however, we must pay attention to certain issues.

It is an open secret that interests are being expressed in the Balkans by many sides and many people, who often do not have common strategic aims.

In all circumstances this must be stopped by non-negotiable political answers given in every direction.

Firstly: absolute compliance with the UN' s decisions on the area.

Secondly: the boundaries of the states in the area are non-negotiable, even if it proves necessary in critical cases to adopt flexible forms of administrative autonomy and greater decentralisation.

I note that if there are some who think solutions will emerge either by creating new states or by redistribution between states, they are making a tragic mistake.

That would lead to continued and lasting tension with no foreseeable end.

Without exaggeration, at the beginning of the 21st century we would have a new thirty-year war, 10 years of which, in any case, we have unfortunately lived through.

Thirdly: our policy must concern the peoples, and only them.

That is what is also in Europe' s interests.

Fourthly: the issue of economic and institutional reconstruction is an urgent priority.

Positive results will emerge through development, democracy and prosperity.

For the first time you are passing judgement on a complex problem at the very periphery of the European Union.

The EU' s political credibility and competence must prove successful.

It is a bet which must be won.

I hope that the strong convergence of support for the Lagendijk report achieved in the Committee on Foreign Affairs will find the same response in Parliament, and thereby express the desire of us all for a positive and stable outcome.

Mr President, I would thank the rapporteur for a report that the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party can fully support.

I should like to take up a subject mentioned neither in the Commission' s announcement nor in the report and so run the risk of its being said that I am operating at too low a level.

The subject I want to bring up is that of women' s involvement in the reconstruction programme, and I wish to do so because women and children have always been the major victims when it comes to conflicts, civil wars and wars generally.

Assaults upon women, rape, killing and torture are daily fare and have been so for many years recently in the countries of south-eastern Europe.

I think it is absolutely crucial, if cultural understanding is to be promoted and a proper reconstruction programme prepared, that women should be involved - and involved very centrally - in the processes concerned.

I am taking up this matter because not enough - although, fortunately, a little - has in actual fact been done in this area.

It is in fact the case that a gender task force has been established under working party 1, but this has not happened because of any initiative from above but because of an initiative from below when a number of women have - if I may put it like this - approached the conference table and asked if it were not unreasonable for them, in one way or another, to have a central place in the whole of the reconstruction work.

It is a number of quite concrete, down-to-earth things these women have proposed, such as developing a proper programme for women and involving women in the general development plans. The initiative is also, of course, about getting women to stand at elections at local, regional and national levels.

If, however, the initiative is to succeed, these women also need to receive money for the projects concerned. Otherwise, these will not happen.

Moreover, the amount of money involved is small in relation to the other money which, hopefully, will eventually be paid out in this area. I would therefore ask both the Commissioner and the President-in-Office of the Council to take care to ensure that, where future work is concerned, women are involved in the reconstruction processes.

I do not, in fact, believe that the project will succeed if that does not happen.

Mr President, whatever its positive points, this report is flawed by the demands and requirements set out in the Stability Pact.

In other words, it essentially accepts that the wolf can guard the sheep.

By its very nature, the Stability Pact in Eastern Europe is intrusive, on the pretext that human rights and democracy are being protected.

I will not yet again refer to how the European Union is reacting to the flagrant violations of human rights in Turkey and elsewhere or the strident violations of those rights inside the European Union, i.e. the double standards policy.

For the moment, I will just note that the Pact' s real aim is to ensure the political and economic dependence of the countries in the area, to plunder their wealth and to overexploit their workforce.

As is also stressed in the report, it is particularly worrying that in the area there will be a test of the European Union' s - I quote - 'ability to develop an effective civil and military crisis management strategy aimed at conflict prevention' .

In other words, new interventions are being prepared, even military ones, with the aim of converting the area into a protectorate.

The tragic situation brought on by the criminal intervention of NATO and the European Union in Kosovo and particularly in Yugoslavia is indicative of what is likely to happen.

Besides, respect for borders is not a matter of generalised declarations and wishes, as they occur in the report, but practical respect for the territorial sovereignty and integrity of these countries, in other words precisely the opposite of what the European Union and the USA are doing.

It is clear that those who support this Stability Pact want to frustrate any resistance to their plans, especially when it involves conflict.

They try, either by force or by economic blackmail, to terrorise peoples and subjugate them to the new order.

And the question is this: what principle of international law are they basing their actions on?

Convinced, then, that the Stability Pact will bring new strife to peoples in the area and reinforce the dominance of the USA and the European Union, we will vote against the report and step up our fight against the Pact and on behalf of peace, friendship and solidarity between the peoples.

Mr President, I would like to make three observations regarding Mr Lagendijk' s inspiring and excellent report.

Firstly, the Stability Pact for South-Eastern Europe focuses on regional cooperation in the Balkans.

It is precisely this cooperation which the European Union wishes to promote in the best possible way.

Well, this regional cooperation still leaves too much to be desired.

The basic pursuit of common interests is being undermined by a longing for prestige and rivalry among the various nations. In this way, the swift implementation of the innovative Stability Pact is being hampered.

What is needed here is a powerful response from the European Union.

This should go hand in hand with a selfless and more balanced selection of regional aid projects.

Secondly, I consider Paragraph 26 in the Lagendijk report to be a fine idea.

Indeed, the Stability Pact applies just as much across the borders of the region.

As such, the Republic Moldavia definitely deserves the opportunity of being directly involved in the Pact.

After all, the alternative would be that Moldavia would be in danger of finding itself in a kind of political no man' s land.

What is more: Moldavia is linked with neighbouring Romania both culturally and politically. If Romania falls under the scope of the Stability Pact, so does Moldavia, therefore.

Thirdly, the success of this Stability Pact may well set a positive precedent for the East, with the Pact extended in the direction of the currently very unstable Caucasus.

Am I right in thinking that Russia already subscribes to the Stability Pact for South-Eastern Europe?

Mr President, I will make three points.

The first is that Mr Lagendijk' s report has interesting ideas, positive proposals, but I very much fear that it is a naïve report which cannot be implemented in the Balkans by the European Union' s policy.

When basic factors such as respect of the Balkan borders are missing, when we play games with Montenegro and Kosovo, when this is coupled with the antagonism being shown towards the Milosevic regime, I think we are already undermining every positive effort we should be making.

The European Union must conclude that it should respect the frontiers in the Balkans, and that is something quite different from its attitude towards Milosevic.

The second point I want to stress is that financing part of the reconstruction plans by reducing agricultural expenditure must finally stop.

I think that the donor conference makes this possible, or seems to at least.

The third point I would like to make here is that there are parts of Greece, yes, unfortunately Greece, for example the Prefecture of Pieria, a tourist province in Central Macedonia, which has suffered enormous economic damage because tourists no longer come to that area.

Such issues should be considered by the European Union as well.

Mr President, I am not about to start arguing the toss with Mr Swoboda over where the Balkans begin.

In fact, it was once said that the Balkans begin at the Rennweg in Vienna.

But leaving that aside, the fact remains that this Stability Pact is of course adversely affected by the heterogeneity of its States.

We have first and second wave candidate countries. We have countries such as Croatia and Macedonia that are about to overtake candidate countries.

We have States such as Bosnia-Herzegovina and Albania in which the State is scarcely functioning, and then the two decisive challenges, namely Yugoslavia, or Serbia, where it is a question of doing everything we can to foster democratisation and develop a long-term strategy for the Europeanisation of Serbia.

Secondly, Kosovo, where we will never achieve success unless elected political structures come into being there, along with a long-term vision of what is to happen to this region, which will never again be a Serbian province.

We cannot afford to hang about over this issue any longer; otherwise all we will be doing is tinkering about at the edges, as it were.

But that is not the only factor adversely affecting the Stability Pact, it is also suffering from a lack of credibility on the part of the international organisations and also the European Union, which owing to a confusion of competences, wastage, and mismanagement, are displaying traits that would be dismissed as being typical of the Balkans, were it not for the fact that this is happening in our own organisations.

We are losing a great deal in the way of credit and respect in this region, and this respect and credibility are fundamentally even more important than the promises of funding that are made and then not kept.

I truly believe we must put this situation in order in the European Union, primarily by strengthening the Commission' s role in the matter.

Commissioner, I have a great deal of faith in your work, but I must say that we as a Parliament must also ensure that you are able to give this work more in-depth attention than you have been able to hitherto.

What we need here is cooperation between our two institutions, so as to strengthen the EU and its credibility.

Mr President, I, too, consider this to be a satisfactory, significant report.

I would, however, stress certain points.

We know that the countries of the South-East are a priority, but we must be careful not to give ourselves more priorities than we can handle and not to establish conflicting priorities or we will lose credibility.

I refer to the Mediterranean policy and the Middle East peace process, which are also priorities.

We must be consistent, as I will remind the Council when we come to discuss the budgetary issues.

Secondly, it should be borne in mind that the regional approach is appropriate and important, and that it is important for the European Union to play a guiding role throughout this matter.

I therefore call upon the Commission and the Council to ensure, in the management of this extremely complex process, that the balance is maintained between the regional dimension of the Pact and the bilateral Association and Stabilisation Agreements, or we may end up sending contradictory signals to these countries.

Finally, I would like to mention two other points: the former Yugoslavia and crime.

With regard to the former Yugoslavia, I feel that we must follow the recommendations of the report and gradually reduce the embargo on the civil community until it has been lifted completely, because to continue to enforce it will only serve to postpone the fall of Milosevic.

The sooner we do this, the better. Apart from anything else, the embargo is affecting other countries in the region, including several candidate countries.

And who can lift it if Europe does not?

It appears that even the United States are expecting us to lift the embargo. We must find the courage to take this step.

Lastly, as other Members have reminded us, we must deal with society as well as infrastructures.

It might be interesting to meet with the chairmen of the three Working Tables to discuss these projects; maybe the Committee on Foreign Affairs could see to this.

Society is important, and that is why we must continue with information and culture projects.

For example, my city, Rome, is organising the young artists' biannual event in Sarajevo and funding the Sarajevo Concert Hall, precisely to give a sense of the reconstruction of a society within which there is dialogue, but which has dialogue with us as well.

Then there is the issue of crime.

My country, Italy, has a very high organised crime rate.

Puglia, for example, is a region which has to tackle crime organisations with a base in our country as well as elsewhere.

I would include this among the priorities I mentioned before, because investments will also be affected if this level of organised crime is maintained.

Mr President, I arrived in the Chamber this afternoon with an extremely good speech, which I would like to thank my cabinet for most warmly; but perhaps I can deliver it on another occasion because I would actually like to respond informally to this debate.

Members of the House will have noticed that the High Representative and I produced a report for the Lisbon Council, and I suspect that Mr Lagendijk might have noticed that it bore a striking similarity to his own report.

I am not sure which was chicken and egg, but I feel that in complimenting Mr Lagendijk on the report he will not take it amiss and think that I am really congratulating Mr Solana and myself.

Yet there was a great deal of similarity.

It is fair to say that our work for the Lisbon Council was very much motivated by the strong feeling that unless we can make a success of our efforts in the Balkans, the whole credibility of our attempts to construct a common foreign and security policy will be shattered.

It is enormously important that we rise to the challenge in the Balkans.

A point we made to the heads of government in Lisbon in our report - which was very much reflected in the week that I spent recently in the region - is that the stabilisation and association process has to be at the heart of our strategy.

To put it in a rather more demotic way, in the phrase used by my honourable friend Ms Pack, what it means is designing, helping countries along the road to Europe.

They want to be integrated with the Euro-Atlantic structures; they want that as an alternative to the traumatic disintegration of the last few years.

We have to make that a real process for them.

There were a lot of references to the Stability Pact conference the other day, which as several people have said was a considerable success.

The offers made by donors exceeded by a comfortable margin the expectations at the beginning of the conference.

There are a couple of points I want to make about it.

One, in response to Mr Lagendijk, it is true that some of the money going into the quick-start projects supported by the European Union was money from the 1998 and 1999 budgets.

There is a simple reason for that, which is that in some cases we had already carried out feasibility studies and made preparations for these quick-start projects.

In my book, new money is money you have not spent already.

Unfortunately, given the fact that our budget is based on commitments and payments, and not just payments unlike the budgets in almost all the Member States, that is a particularly important factor.

Committing money does not always mean spending it, the next year or the year after or even in the next decade.

It is important to be clear about that.

This follows up the point made by Mr Swoboda and it is a point with which I strongly agree.

We are not just talking about infrastructure in terms of hardware, we must also talk about infrastructure in terms of software.

That includes the rule of law, democratisation, the sort of civil society projects to which the honourable gentleman was referring; and it includes education - a point I will come back to in a moment.

I want to make one or two other points which arose at Lisbon and which we are following up.

First of all, we were charged in the Commission at Lisbon to bring forward a package of proposals on asymmetric trade concessions for the region.

It is worth remembering that the total exports from the Balkans to the European Union represent about 0.6% of our total imports.

For agricultural products the figure is about 0.16%.

So this is an area where we could afford to be a little generous.

We are also trying speed up our assistance and make it more effective.

I announced yesterday agreement in the Commission on a rapid reaction facility.

We will be coming forward to Parliament in the next few months with our new regulation for assistance to the West Balkans, which I hope will make it more rapid, more flexible and will, of course, have to include sufficient funding for projects supporting gender issues.

I can think of no single model of successful economic or political development which does not include at its heart sensible programmes to ensure that women can develop their full potential and play a full role in their communities.

One point on education: last winter, despite all the cynicism, our energy for democracy programme in Serbia was extraordinarily successful.

Alas, there are not many occasions when people cheer the European Union in the streets - all too few occasions in the country I know best.

But that happened in some of those cities last winter.

The Mayor of Nis has just written a letter saying that Energy for Democracy was a model of the sort of political support we should be providing in his country.

The winter is over, so there is not the same urgent necessity for oil at the moment.

We are looking at ways to extend that sort of scheme.

What we have been thinking of, among other ideas, is education for democracy: providing schools with equipment, school-books and other facilities, cash to carry out small improvements to classrooms and so on, and with sports equipment - all those sorts of things which can make for a better life for the kids in those towns while they have to wait with their families for the departure - sooner rather than later, I hope - of Mr Milosevic.

I hope we are at last going to see more progress on the cleaning up of the Danube, which is crucial for the region.

We had useful meetings with the Danube Commission last week and I hope that the annual meeting of the Danube Commission this week will see us managing to set all that in motion, with the European Union meeting about 85% of the cost of the clean-up.

I have spoken before of my concerns about Montenegro.

Following my visit there about a month ago, we have doubled our Obnova support for Montenegro from EUR 10 to 20m.

We are also providing a good deal there in terms of food security and so on.

I very much hope that the European Investment Bank will lend some money within reasonable limits to Montenegro before too long.

Finally, the honourable Member asked about the scale of our financial commitments to the Balkans.

There will be other occasions when I can follow this up in greater detail.

For me one of the real tests is whether all those yards of Council communiqués and all those promises about Marshall plans and so on for the Balkans actually amount to a row of beans!

This year we will be spending about EUR 540m in the western Balkans.

Because of the front-loading of our commitments in Kosovo, next year we will need to spend about EUR 800m in the Balkans.

About EUR 350m of that will go to Kosovo.

It must be said that it does not involve huge increases in expenditure elsewhere but we have to provide support in a country like Croatia where there is a good and decent government trying to do a difficult job in extremely problematic circumstances.

We have to spend money with those stabilisation and association countries which are negotiating seriously with us on the road to Europe.

For me, in public-spending terms, the crucial year is always year one - you are lucky if you get to year two or three.

Year one is actually the big year of expenditure for us.

Overall, at Istanbul, when we were asked how much we thought we could spend in the region, recognising that it was subject to the budgetary authority - I know all the theology of these matters now - we reckoned about EUR 5.5bn.

People say that is a crazy figure.

Well, I am keen that we should no longer be in the position we are in now where, despite the interinstitutional agreement, we are told by a lot of people that we have to find the extra money for Kosovo within the financial envelope agreed before Kosovo became a necessity.

One thing I have insisted on is a realistic figure in our budgeting for reconstruction in Serbia, because I do not want to find myself in two or three years time having to find additional costs for Serbia out of that same budget.

We reckon that applying the same sort of figures applied in Kosovo, we would need about EUR 2.3bn for a serious reconstruction programme in Serbia.

That could only start once Milosevic has gone.

However, in my view it would be thoroughly irresponsible for us to suggest figures to this Parliament or Council which did not include an element of what we think would be realistic for Serbia.

That is based on economists' figures and our assessment that we need to meet the same sort of a proportion of expenditure on Serbia that we have met in Kosovo.

The rest - EUR 3.2bn - over seven years does not strike me as being outlandishly generous.

That is how we reached the figure of EUR 5.5bn and I have slightly resented the implication in some newspapers that this is a figure we have plucked out of the air and does not make any sense.

I should be delighted to explain it not just in more detail to Parliament but I am looking forward in due course to explaining it in more detail to the General Affairs Council.

Who knows, if I was lucky enough one day, I might even be able to explain it to finance ministers.

I respond to the honourable Member' s well-intentioned question in that way.

This is not a figure plucked out of the air: it is an attempt to provide an honest assessment of what our rhetoric actually means.

People cannot resent the fact that they do it: they asked us to do it in relation to the Middle East - to give some idea of what the cost of a peace settlement would be for the European Union' s programmes.

So let us see the cost of it in the Balkans.

If we are going to have an argument about the relationship between rhetoric and reality, let us start here.

My final point: we are clearly talking in the Balkans about building peace and security, not just in our backyard but in our front yard too.

We are talking about building peace and security in an integral part of our European common home.

I hope we can do so in practice with the rhetoric, with the promises, with the optimism that we show in all those rhetorical communiqués.

The vote will take place on Thursday at 11.30 a.m.

The next item is Question Time (B5-0216/2000).

We will examine questions to the Council.

As they deal with the same subject, Questions Nos 1, 2 and 3 will be taken together.

Subject: Flagrant violation by Turkey of the rule of law and human rights The leader of the People' s Democracy Party of Turkey, together with 17 other members of the party' s leadership, has been sentenced to a three-year and nine months' term of imprisonment for supporting the hunger strike that took place in solidarity with Abdullah Öcalan when he was handed over to the Turkish secret services in Kenya.

Three mayors of towns in S.E. Turkey, who are supporters of the same party, were also arrested on charges of collaborating with the PKK.

Other Turkish parties besides HADEP have voiced their opposition to the arrests and sentences, arguing that they are a flagrant breach of democracy, freedom of expression and the basic principles of the rule of law.

Will the Council raise the matter of the arrest and conviction of democrats for their opinions, and call for unhindered freedom of expression in Turkey together with freedom of formation and operation for all political parties?

Subject: Human rights violations by Turkey In December 1999 Turkey became a candidate country for accession to the European Union.

Article 10 of the conclusions of the Helsinki Council Presidency states that Turkey must fulfil the general accession criteria, and in particular the Copenhagen criteria, if it is to become a Member of the European Union.

In February of this year three Kurdish mayors (of the towns of Diyarbakir, Siirt and Bingöl) were arrested on their return to Turkey after they had signed the Aalborg Charter in Hanover in Germany together with 4 colleagues making their towns members of the 'European Sustainable Cities and Towns Campaign' ; they are still being held in prison.

Since Turkey is guilty of continuous and repeated human rights violations, what does the Council intend to do prevail upon Turkey to meet the EU accession criteria?

Subject: Continued muzzling of freedom of expression and violation of the rule of law by Turkey The leader of the People' s Democracy Party (HADEP) of Turkey and 17 other members of the party leadership have been sentenced to prison terms of three years and nine months on charges of supporting the hunger strike organised in support of Abdullah Öcalan when he was handed over to the Turkish secret services in Kenya.

Three mayors of towns in south-eastern Turkey who are close to this party have also been arrested on charges of collaborating with the PKK.

Other Turkish parties apart from HADEP have expressed their opposition to these arrests and sentences, arguing that this move is totally incompatible with democracy, freedom of expression and the basic principles of the rule of law.

Will the Council say whether it intends to raise with the Turkish government the issue of the arrest and sentencing of democrats merely for making statements and to demand, as part of the pre-accession procedure, that Turkey give guarantees regarding unrestricted freedom of expression and allow all political parties to be founded and function without hindrance?

Mr President, the Council has already raised with the Turkish authorities the issue of the democratic rights of Turks of Kurdish origin, including those mentioned in the question. It will continue to monitor this situation in Turkey as it develops and to act accordingly.

An Association Council meeting was held yesterday between the European Union and Turkey in which this issue was mentioned again. The Turkish authorities were told of the EU' s concern about this type of issue and of its hope that the Turkish authorities will end what is currently interpreted as a non-compliance with certain basic criteria of respect for human and democratic rights and the protection of minorities.

Turkey was named by the Helsinki European Council as a candidate country for accession to the European Union.

This status places Turkey in absolutely the same position as any other candidate country in terms of both obligations and benefits.

Therefore, Turkey is subject to the same requirements as those imposed on any other candidate country but also naturally has the same rights.

The European Union cannot make a special case of Turkey which must be treated exactly the same as any other candidate country.

Turkey is therefore currently involved in a process in which its situation must be assessed in light of the criteria of the Copenhagen European Council. These criteria are clear enough with regard to respect for the rule of law, democratic guarantees, fundamental freedoms and the protection of minorities.

These are a prerequisite for the opening of any negotiating process.

On the road towards this, a pre-accession strategy must be established between the Commission, on the EU' s behalf, and Turkey. The preparation of this strategy involves non-governmental organisations, the Member States and the Turkish Government.

This accession partnership will define the priority areas for reform on which the European Union considers that Turkey must concentrate its efforts in order to comply, hopefully in a progressive, capable and complete manner, with the Copenhagen criteria.

Clearly it is in this context that the issues mentioned in the questions will be considered.

Yesterday we heard Mr Verheugen and today the Council' s representative acknowledging, even in small measure, some of the problems related to respect for human rights in Turkey concerning which, indeed, they expressed their sorrow.

Yet, both yesterday and today they underlined the supposed progress made by the Turkish regime in that area.

And we heard the representative of the Council telling us the same thing today.

The truth, however, is that contrary to what some people are claiming even in Greece, the Helsinki decisions on Turkey have emboldened the Turkish regime.

It is no mere chance that on the next day Turkey' s leaders declared that Turkey has become a candidate for accession without attached conditions.

It is not by chance that, while they have not complied with any of their commitments, they protest that they have not been given the appropriations provided for under customs union.

They also told us that Turkey intends to take steps.

But we have been hearing that in the Council of Europe for very many years, perhaps more than ten, without anything happening.

The campaigner for democracy and human rights who was shot was sent to prison again instead of his attackers being punished.

My question, then, is: specifically when does the Turkish regime intend to progress with democratising that country' s constitution and criminal code, to set free the leaders of HADEP and the Members of Parliament as well as all the political prisoners?

Will the Kurdish issue ever be resolved, will all the political parties be allowed freedom of formation and operation and finally, will Turkey ever withdraw its troops from Cyprus?

With regard to the comment that Mr Korakas' question was not a new one, I must say that Turkey' s application for accession to the European Union subjects it to closer scrutiny of its responsibilities in complying with the basic criteria for accession. I believe that the Turkish authorities are well aware of this.

With regard to defining the pre-accession strategy and the accession partnership, Turkey' s problems will certainly be paid close attention, particularly in terms of respect for the basic criteria of acting in accordance with European standards.

In the past Turkey was a country in which we regularly and systematically undertook certain ad hoc initiatives according to the development of its internal situation.

The internal situation is now becoming a strategic element in the progress made by Turkey towards approximation with the European Union.

In the specific case of Mr Birdal, I was able to meet him in Turkey in January of this year and I told him during this meeting of the EU' s solidarity with his situation. It is clear in this respect that the EU has already indicated its concern to the Turkish authorities, through the appropriate channels, about his status and in particular his return to prison.

For a long time we have adopted a foreign policy which we allege is based on moral rules.

We have come to believe it ourselves and we claim to represent the world-wide moral conscience.

Already, however, we have reached an impasse, and not just in Turkey.

You see, morality must be applied towards everyone equally, regardless of risks and interests.

You see, Belgrade can be bombed, but not Moscow, Beijing or Ankara.

Let us therefore acknowledge the obvious and return to tried and tested prescriptions.

In other words, let us speak of interests, the balance of powers and policy as the art of the possible.

If we do that we will certainly not be more moral, we will be more sincere and in that case we can all put our time to better use instead of play-acting as we are all doing now.

I am not sure that you have asked a question.

If there is no question, the Council is not obliged to answer, only to listen, as you know, Mr Seixas da Costa.

Mr Theonas wishes to rephrase his question.

I recommend to all of you that you begin with the question before making a declaration.

I have a comment and a specific question: would it not be better for the Council to give more specific answers when it asks for specific questions?

Now, the question: if the pre-accession process for Turkey were to last twenty years, would all those who are imprisoned today have to wait those twenty years for the European Union to express interest?

Secondly, would the Council be prepared, in this whole process, to suspend or cancel obligations of the European Union relating to the pre-accession process as long as the people we are talking about remain in prison?

And finally, could some action ever be demanded from Turkey which would help resolve the Cyprus issue, granted that this is one of the issues which should be addressed as part of the pre-accession process?

Firstly, Mr Theonas, I do not agree with the comment that the Council presidency is not explicitly answering the questions raised by Members. In fact, quite the contrary is true.

The ongoing process of Turkey' s approximation towards the European Union, which was started with its designation as a candidate in Helsinki, is one of progressive approximation. The Member should realise that this process of progressive approximation is resulting in greater attention being paid than in the past by the European Union to Turkey' s internal situation and to the way in which this country acts with regard to the requirements imposed by the international community.

It is this point which really must be borne in mind.

Turkey is currently, on its own initiative and therefore as a result of its own political decision, the subject of close scrutiny in terms of compliance with the basic criteria.

This is not to be assessed over the next ten years but rather on a daily basis, usually within the pre-accession strategy process.

If there were a lack of progress on the fundamental issues under observation, the pre-accession process would suffer the respective consequences.

This is very clear to me.

Furthermore, the Helsinki conclusions, regardless of how they may be read, place the issue of Turkey and its relationship with Cyprus in a new perspective, which was in fact welcomed by the Cypriot authorities.

We must draw from this the appropriate conclusions about how the development in the Turkish position on the Cypriot issue may also affect the development of the Turkish position in its approximation towards the European Union.

A comment and question to the Council' s representative: is the answer he just gave us specific?

Mr Korakas, I must make a confession. In political life, people are used to reading between the lines.

On such a delicate issue as the interpretation of a serious situation, like the development in the Cypriot situation and Turkey' s approximation towards the European Union, we must be very careful in our choice of words.

However, I feel that I made it clear that there is a direct link between Turkey' s approximation process and its position on the Cypriot issue.

I cannot make this any clearer.

Subject: Blatant persecution and violation of the rights of the Assyrian-Chaldeans in Turkey Tens of thousands of Assyrian-Chaldeans in Turkey living in the south-east of the country have found refuge in Member States of the EU after being persecuted by the Turkish Government which has destroyed many of their homes, closed and raised to the ground their churches and banned the use of their language and teaching in this language.

There is a danger that, owing to the use of force, the remaining places of worship and even the traces of the existence of this minority will be lost for ever.

Will the Council say whether it intends to raise this matter as part of the pre-accession procedure, to call on the Turkish Government to respect the rights of the Assyrian-Chaldean minority in Turkey and, more particularly, to ensure that the Mar Gabriel monastery in Midyat and the Dayr Zafaran monastery in Mardin can continue to operate without hindrance?

Very briefly, what I said about the development of the situation in Turkey and the necessary changes in terms of respect for the rights of minorities also applies in this case which specifically involves the protection of Christian minorities.

The reinforcement of the political dialogue agreed in Helsinki requires progress to be made towards compliance with these political criteria, particularly on issues of human rights. All the situations which have been brought to the Council' s attention during the pre-accession process will be tackled.

This particular question involves the problem of non-recognition by the Turkish authorities of the Assyrian-Chaldean community under the terms of the Lausanne Treaty of 1923.

Under this Treaty, the Turkish Government undertook to ensure full protection for the churches, synagogues, cemeteries and other places of worship of non-Muslim minorities. At this point in time, the claims of the Assyrian-Chaldean community basically relate to the problem of restoring monasteries and the official teaching of Aramaic and the problem connected with the free movement of citizens from this ethnic group who live outside Turkey.

They do have a human rights dimension which obviously must be tackled - and we will be vigilant in this respect - but they are essentially administrative.

The Council will be vigilant and the Commission will also raise these issues during the pre-accession negotiations.

Mr President-in-Office, I cannot say your answer is satisfactory.

If the Council were truly concerned about human rights one would have expected a more specific answer.

We are talking here about two very ancient peoples who have been subjected to systematic genocide by the Turkish regime, a genocide perhaps not so impressive as in Armenia, but just as effective.

Several thousand people have become refugees or immigrants to the European Union and only a few tens of thousands remain in the area where they have lived since ancient times.

I would like to ask whether you can be more specific.

Of course, your reference to the Treaty of Lausanne is apt, but beyond that, the European Union also has a responsibility to stress certain things to the Turkish regime concerning the need to respect human rights, whether they stem from the Treaty of Lausanne or in a broader sense.

Is the Council going to take any specific action along those lines?

Mr Alyssandrakis says that my answer was not positive enough.

It would be useful to remind him of his question.

He asked whether the Council intends to raise this issue during the pre-accession process and to ask the Turkish Government to respect the rights of the Assyrian-Chaldean minority in Turkey and, in particular, to ensure the operation without hindrance of their monasteries. He specifically referred to two monasteries.

I have no idea what more positive answer I could give him than to simply say yes.

It is the Council' s and the EU' s intention to raise this issue with the Turkish authorities during the pre-accession process.

Once again, if this is not a clear answer, I have no idea what is.

Subject: Renewed tension in Kosovo The results of the 'peaceful' intervention by NATO forces in Kosovo are generally acknowledged to be deplorable.

Instead of the 'multi-ethnic' Kosovo which had been the UN' s objective, we have a situation in which the refugees have failed to return, ethnic cleansing has continued, but now directed at the Serb population, partition has taken root and the dispatch of increasing numbers of new military and police forces is considered 'indispensable' .

The current increase in tension is being fuelled by statements by NATO officials and major new military exercises by NATO forces.

Will the Council say what measures it intends to take to safeguard a 'multi-ethnic' Kosovo as part of the Yugoslav Federation?

What action will it take to defuse the crisis and tension in the region?

- (PT) Mr President, the European Union' s objective, in accordance with Security Council Resolution 1244, continues to be the establishment of a democratic and multi-ethnic Kosovo within the internationally recognised borders of the Former Yugoslavia.

The Council accepts the urgent need to find a solution to the continued outbreaks of ethnic violence, particularly against the Serbs, gypsies and other non-Albanian communities in Kosovo.

The Council has been consistently supporting the efforts made by UNMIK and KFOR to prevent further expulsions and to allow the safe return of all those who abandoned their homes.

In response to an urgent appeal from the UN Secretary-General' s Special Representative, Doctor Bernard Kouchner, and from the High Representative, Mr Solana, the Member States have significantly increased their contributions to the UN' s international police forces with both financial and technical support and human resources.

Several Member States have also reinforced their own contingents in KFOR.

In the past in this House, we have deeply regretted the failure to meet these commitments, which has clearly hindered the action of the international authorities in Kosovo. There are now new elements involved and some of these commitments are now being met.

This is allowing this issue to be handled differently and more effectively, although we are clearly still a long way from achieving a minimally acceptable solution.

The Council has urged all the political leaders in Kosovo to adopt urgent measures to combat the escalation of violence, to reject expressions of extremism and to support UNMIK and KFOR.

It is very important that the Council manages to further develop the progress already made in the reconciliation between the ethnic groups and that Resolution 1244 can be put into practice.

We are committed to the process of democratisation and coexistence in Kosovo.

Only responsibility-sharing by representatives of the minorities can lead to the construction of a multi-ethnic Kosovo.

We should all ask ourselves whether everyone, particularly within Kosovo itself, is interested in the existence of a multi-ethnic Kosovo.

In this context, the Council repeats its appeal to the Serbian leaders to participate in the joint interim administrative structures.

The Council places great importance on the careful preparation by UNMIK and the OSCE of local elections to be held this year, including the provisions on voting by absentees and the participation of minorities.

We believe it is important to start creating legitimate structures with local authority in Kosovo. This is the only way we can guarantee that the political forces which are currently working in an unorganised manner, outside any institutions, will return to normal political life and end up working in Kosovo within a democratic society.

In terms of supporting this process of democratisation and coexistence, the European Union has been working together with other international partners to re-establish daily life for the whole of Kosovo' s population, whatever their ethnic background.

In addition to the important bilateral assistance given by the Member States, the European Community has allocated humanitarian aid for 1999 to 2000 to the amount of EUR 429 million for the Kosovar refugees, displaced persons within the country and those returning home.

The aid for reconstruction and the special financial assistance, including the support for UNMIK, will total EUR 437 million between 1999 and 2000.

This set of actions and the commitment shown by the EU in this respect have been recognised by the international community.

Unfortunately, at times the practical efficiency of these actions is not sufficient to end an unstable situation beset by tensions which we hope will decrease in the future.

Let me first comment that the President-in-Office of the Council is besieged by questions from Greek Members.

I think that expresses the great insecurity felt by a Member State, but I would also say the inadequacy of Community policy to address serious issues.

I want to thank him for his answer.

I take note of that position, which I find particularly positive and which we do not often see, namely that the European Union' s objective is a multi-ethnic and democratic Kosovo within the framework of the internationally recognised borders of the Yugoslav Federation.

I think that is a positive thing and I have taken note of it. I would like to ask a supplementary question regarding in particular those minorities suffering persecution today in a situation of ethnic cleansing in Kosovo, whether they be Serbians, of Turkish origin or gypsies, who are, on the one hand, under such pressure from Albanian extremists and, on the other hand, living in a Serbia still subject to embargo.

Are there any special support and aid programmes planned by the European Union specifically for these people who are living in such misery and desperation?

Mr Alavanos, I believe it was clear from what I said and in fact you recognised yourself that the general objective of the European Union and the international community is to respect the terms of Security Council Resolution 1244, particularly on the establishment of a democratic and multi-ethnic Kosovo.

I am not ignoring the major difficulties present on the ground in applying these decisions.

There is no point on this issue using euphemisms or diplomatic language.

The mass return of the Albanians expelled from Kosovo and the tension which has arisen in the meantime, particularly involving Serbian, gypsy and other minorities, have ended up creating a new and different situation. However, we should not only look at the present.

We must consider what happened in the past which was the cause of all this.

Perhaps by looking at the causes of this situation, rather than fixing on the present, we will have a fairer and more objective view of the partial responsibility of the Belgrade Government, particularly with regard to what happened to it subsequently due to its actions in Kosovo.

However, it is true that, for the Serbian minorities who have had to leave the country since the return of the Kosovo Albanians, the conditions have not yet been established to allow them to return. Those still living in Kosovo are having problems coexisting with the Albanian majority.

However, the Member must recognise the clear efforts being made by the international community to protect these minorities and to achieve a safe situation allowing them to coexist with the Albanians.

We cannot ignore the fact that this joint effort also needs the Serbian authorities to be involved in the consultative structures.

This would be one way of making its own actions in Kosovo credible.

Our only objective is to guarantee the continuation of multi-ethnic integration.

We realise that there is a long way to go and probably the situation of the Serbs living outside Kosovo, and who cannot return because it is unsafe, is unfair.

There is no point beating about the bush on this. This situation is unfair.

However, we must realise that the international community is doing its best.

Furthermore, we should always remember what happened before, in order to justify what is happening now.

Mr Alavanos said that until now all the questions we have heard have been Greek.

I would like to say that the Spanish and the Portuguese, as well as other Mediterranean people, are accustomed to speaking with the Greeks.

I believe that Lisbon, the ancient Olisipo, was founded by Ulysses.

The President-in-Office of the Council therefore comes from a country with a long tradition of Greek presence.

Mr President, could I ask the President-in-Office of the Council - all of whose good intentions for a multi-ethnic Kosovo I accept - whether he would not admit that the international community' s policy there in all its facets - the European Union, the United Nations, KFOR, NATO et al - is really an unmitigated and disastrous failure and getting worse by the day.

What is being done to get the KLA and the Albanian bully-boys, who clearly have no interest in a multi-ethnic Kosovo, under control?

There just seems to be an ineffectual permissiveness of the situation despite all these wonderful, pious good intentions.

Firstly, to comment on what the President said, I must say that I am very happy to be grilled by the Greek Members. I have some great friends in Greece where I have spent several holidays.

As for the situation you describe, Mr Purvis, I do not believe that the policy is disastrous. This is the only possible policy, as you know, and it is a result of everything that has happened in the region in the last few years and even in the last few decades.

We must realise that the international community' s position, which is not brilliant in terms of the practical application of these measures, is the only one which can resolve a conflict on which the international community was only called to act due to the total inability to find a solution within the Former Yugoslavia.

It was precisely the situation created in the Former Yugoslavia which caused this reaction.

Remember that the KLA only exists because the Albanian community in Kosovo was systematically persecuted and totally besieged.

Clearly the need to organise themselves militarily to respond to this threat led to the KLA' s action.

The problem now facing us is to try and ensure that the structures created outside the democratic process, simply because this did not exist in the Former Yugoslavia, allow an approach of solely political action to be adopted in a democratic Kosovo.

We are still a long way off from finding such an approach, but I believe that the international community' s action is very positive in this respect.

Mr President, if a mark between 1 and 10 were now to be given for success in pursuing the two objectives of the action programme, namely that Kosovo should be multi-ethnic and that it should remain a part of Yugoslavia, I believe that the President-in-Office of the Council and I can probably agree that the mark concerned would be fairly low. We agree, however, that this is the result of a policy which has been pursued up until now, that is to say a result of what has happened.

My question is this: is the Council giving any consideration to how this policy can be changed in the future, or is the intention to go on using the same tools, that is to say military action and initiatives against troublesome areas in the region?

What is the basic idea behind setting up a 60 000-strong rapid reaction force when we all agree that a number of other initiatives are presumably required if there is a desire to solve conflicts in Europe and in neighbouring countries?

Firstly, I regret not having the opportunity to put questions to the Members. If I did I would ask them what other solution they propose.

As a specific example of what military forces can do, I would refer you to the case of Bosnia-Herzegovina. Just think what the situation was like there for several years.

Just think about the international community' s failure to act faced with this problem and then just look at the situation today.

This is clearly unstable but it is one of peace due to the presence of the military forces. It is clear that there are certain situations in which attempts to deflect ethnic tensions can only be successful by using mechanisms which involve the protection and separation of the waters.

This is very probably what is needed in Kosovo, who knows for how long, but hopefully for the shortest time possible. We should also bear in mind that the international community and particularly the Member States have no specific interest in intervening in Kosovo and in mobilising human and physical resources for an action of this kind.

In fact quite the contrary. The international community and the European Union in particular were aware that it was their duty and responsibility to react to a totally disgraceful situation in terms of international standards of behaviour.

It was the genocide and siege behaviour of Mr Milosevic with regard to the Albanian community in Kosovo which led to our intervention. You say that the practical result of this action is not what was wanted.

I would point out, however, that the practical result is that today, with a few exceptions and despite everything, this situation is under control in terms of security.

We have made and are making efforts to achieve greater integration of the minority communities.

A more effective result has not been possible. We will try to continue exerting pressure in this respect and we believe that renewing in some way the institutional organisation of civil society through independent elections may contribute significantly to this stability.

Subject: Protection of European undertakings in Kosovo Despite the fact that the Council is unaware of this (answer to Question E-2425/99), the above undertakings have indeed appealed to the EU to protect their interests, as this matter falls within the Council' s remit.

Given that UNMIK and its head, Bernard Kouchner, do not act of their own accord, but under international supervision in which the Council is also involved, the latter should scrutinise their actions more closely where they affect the interests of European undertakings, if it wishes to avoid raising doubts about its intentions though the answers it gives.

Furthermore, the proper management of the fourth Pillar entails a number of additional obligations for the EU institutions.

Since the Commission, which is unfortunately taking an unconscionable amount of time to reply, is well aware of the actions of the undertakings concerned, and in order to avoid any doubts about whether the Council is responsible for failing to act, will the latter say to what extent it is prepared to act in accordance with the obligations imposed on it by the Treaties and to support the interests of the undertakings in question?

(PT) Security Council Resolution 1244 gave UNMIK, the interim administration in Kosovo, authority over the territory, including full legislative and executive powers, and control over the legal system. The aim was to establish a transitional administration whose mandate was described in the resolution itself.

This mandate also includes the development of a phased economic recovery plan.

This means that the individual cases mentioned in the Member' s question should be dealt with directly by the UN Secretary-General' s Special Representative for Kosovo, who is responsible for the territorial administration of Kosovo, or by the Foreign Minister of the Member State in which the undertakings are established.

The Council assumes general political responsibility for the EU' s participation in UNMIK which is focussed on reconstruction and economic rehabilitation.

However, neither the European Union as such nor the Council has any competence or direct responsibility with regard to the administration of the territory and the protection of the individual interests of undertakings in the region. These elements are, on the one hand, the responsibility of the United Nations, as the administrator of the territory, and on the other, of the governments of each Member State which may act to protect these undertakings.

I have been waiting about six months for an answer on this.

There is a whole raft of questions and answers and we are becoming schizophrenic over the substance and content of the answers.

What is hiding behind all that?

Either the services are not doing their job properly and are giving you wrong information, or there is something rotten in the Kingdom of Denmark and there are many who say that there is something peculiar about Mr Kouchner' s administration.

My question is this: if the services are not doing their job properly, what are you going to do when they leave you high and dry?

If Mr Kouchner is not doing his job properly, what are you going to do about it?

And the third question: how can it be that the citizens of the European Union are being called upon to pay for the Stability Pact even though European undertakings established there cannot be protected by the European Union?

That does not happen anywhere, it is unreasonable.

We should therefore see things as they are, because my impression is that Mr Kouchner is not playing his part properly there.

That is where the problem lies and that is what we should all realise, as European citizens and people interested in developments in the Balkans.

The question raised has never been submitted to the Council of the European Union, particularly by the undertakings which are complaining.

The Council presidency has no knowledge of this issue.

Complaints are submitted to the Member States whose Foreign Ministries are responsible for dealing with this type of question.

It should be borne in mind that the administration in Kosovo does not come under the EU' s competence but under that of the UN. There is a specific body responsible for this administration.

Each country is normally obliged to protect the actions of its undertakings within the international sphere.

Each country has structures to protect its citizens and undertakings internationally and for this reason there are specific mechanisms which we all use every day in our international action.

The European Union is not a country.

I do not know under what circumstances the European Union would have to have a global and specific action plan in this respect or why, as a Union, it would have to deal with this issue.

That is unless we reach a point at which national governments prove to be incompetent in protecting their own undertakings.

Mr President, an essential element in the reconstruction of post-war society is always that recovery of the local economy should be as rapid as possible, so that it becomes viable once more.

Local businesses in Kosovo now, however, have one substantial problem: a dearth of qualified and linguistically competent labour, as all those who can speak English, or nearly all, were recruited for reconstruction projects in Kosovo, and local businesses cannot compete with the high salaries being paid.

Many entrepreneurs are naturally very bitter about this consequent stagnation in activity.

Mr President-in-Office, I do not know if you have come up against this problem, but I would nonetheless ask you what you think can be done about it at EU level.

Doctor Bernard Kouchner has at times referred to the difficulty he has in recruiting staff, not only for the country' s administration but also for the normal structures of economic reconstruction.

It is clear that the cost of recruiting staff is high.

We consider that this type of question comes within the framework of Doctor Kouchner' s work which, as I have said, is outside the control of the European Union, although we are cooperating on this issue.

The Union as such does not therefore have a specific and direct response to this type of question.

We are ready to listen to and consider the requests made to us by Doctor Kouchner and to give him any possible answer within the commitments assumed by the European Union with regard to the extremely high costs involved in the region.

Mr President, my question is quite specific and is, I believe, of direct concern to the EU.

Is the Council aware that the Serbian government is planning to sell mines and mineral resources in Kosovo to EU companies and to portray this as privatisation?

Does the Council know that there are problems here associated with ethnic cleansing in one part of Kosovo, in that Serbs are being settled in one area, which is the area that is richest in raw materials, and there is a risk of the area being partitioned in order to safeguard these raw materials?

Mr Posselt, I have no knowledge of this issue. However, we will consider the information you have given us.

Subject: Joint efforts to coordinate IT development The Portuguese Presidency has commendably highlighted the need for development of the IT sector in order to promote competitiveness and employment.

Coordination at European level would be conducive to the further development of the IT sector.

What is the Council' s view of the need for coordination at European level to develop the IT sector and, in that context, of the need to set up a European IT agency?

Mr Andersson, to answer your question I should like to start by confirming that a coordinated approach at European level to the information technology and telecommunications sectors is essential for the future development of the European Union.

We have already discussed in this House the Special Meeting, which was held in Lisbon on 23, and 24 March. At this it was clear that improving the Information Society policy is central to achieving the objectives which this meeting set and which involve the issues of employment, social cohesion and reinforcement of Europe' s competitiveness at world level.

In particular the Special Meeting invited the Council and Commission to prepare an action plan on e-Europe, which will be presented, to the European Council in June.

The idea of launching an agency devoted to information technology was presented at the Lisbon European Council in the document provided by the Swedish Government.

This idea was not followed up but it responds to our concerns and will definitely be considered and developed in the future.

It was discussed, however, particularly in terms of possibly being added to the existing Community mechanisms, which include the Information Society Project Office. This has been producing a range of initiatives during the Portuguese presidency.

On the issue of a possible European telecommunications regulation agency, I would remind you that a study carried out for the Commission in October 1999 concluded that there was no immediate need for such a body. At the same time the Council concluded that regulation should be applied at the closest possible level to that at which the activities to be regulated are carried out.

This too involves the principle of subsidiarity.

I want to thank the Council for its answer.

I was pleased to see that the issue of information technology and its link to growth and employment were so high on the agenda in Lisbon.

What happens in the future is important.

The political task is not, of course, to set up IT companies but to build an infrastructure which stimulates development in this area.

We do, of course, have shortcomings within the EU.

Moreover, there are major differences between the EU' s Member States and also between different regions within the EU.

Different population groups have varying opportunities and knowledge when it comes to exploiting this technology, and this may lead to great inequality in the future.

I would therefore ask the question: how are we successfully to devise a form of coordination which enables information technology also to be used out in the peripheral areas so that we create greater equality between different regions and between different population groups?

Is there not a need for a joint authority to coordinate this work?

Mr Andersson, you have asked me two separate questions.

The first concerns the substantive issue of democratising the Information Society itself, which was at the root of the concerns of the Lisbon European Council. This involves the need to spread throughout European society, precisely in the area where it is less competitive and in order to give added value to the usual elements of its economy, all these new dimensions of the society of innovation and knowledge.

This effort is scheduled to use specific measures contained in the conclusions of the Lisbon European Council, particularly with regard to the Internet and methods of apprenticeship and vocational training. In our opinion, these may be able to form a future action plan, which will be assessed every year at special meetings of the European Council, which will always take place in the spring.

This is the answer to your first question.

Your other question concerns the need to have an organisational structure and an institution to supervise this process and to pay specific attention to the similarity between these types of question within the European Union.

You rightly make the point that on many occasions specifying these measures may create and worsen inequalities.

This is a danger and risk to which we are alert.

In the meantime, the governments have decided that the creation of a new structure and bureaucratic mechanism with high costs is not necessary.

They in fact consider that the structures which currently exist for monitoring this process are sufficient for this purpose.

Mr President, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, as an Austrian I am extremely proud of the fact that the Council Presidency has focussed on development in the IT sector.

I would be interested to know how the President-in-Office of the Council views the sale by auction of UMTS licences.

The proceeds from this sector could create a huge amount of impetus and, above all, boost the Portuguese programme accordingly, if, for example, we were to make the proceeds from the licences that are sold by auction available for research and development, education, training and further education, or for infrastructure.

What do you think to the idea of developing incentivisation programmes for the Member States, so as to enable the proceeds to actually be ploughed back into this sector?

The conclusions of the Lisbon European Council specify national actions which are therefore the responsibility of the national governments. These are objective commitments which the governments assumed in signing these conclusions and which involve the reorientation of the mechanisms and structures and action plans and programmes which exist within the European Union.

With the exception of the possibility of recourse to the European Investment Bank, there are no new elements in this respect for mobilising financial resources.

This was one of the objective concerns raised during discussions of this issue in Lisbon. It was decided to try and achieve greater coherence between the current instruments for the simple reason that we believe that, rather than creating new instruments, we should reorganise the current ones.

Having said this, it is necessary, as we have done in the employment and macroeconomic policies, to try and achieve greater coherence between the national actions on the society of innovation and knowledge and to ensure that these actions are subject to a specific plan which each Member State undertakes to implement internally. This will occur in accordance with a set timetable of objectives and using benchmarking processes which allow us to see which are the best practices and to try, based on these, to encourage similar practices in the other Member States.

This process has this national dimension of a commitment on objectives and it is therefore obvious that there are no financial resources for this other than those available in the budget of each country.

In the other dimension, in which recourse to the European Investment Bank is possible, there is a set of actions within the competence of the EU itself, which not only complements previous actions but also ensures greater coherence between the EU' s programmes and actions in this area.

The Commission has been extremely active in this field and the e-Europe programme presented by the Commission and whose action plan will be approved at the Feira European Council in June provides new guidelines for this area and a new reorientation of Community policies on this issue.

As the author is not present, Question No 8 lapses.

Subject: Women in the new CFSP decision-making bodies Has the Council provided for any measures for women to be adequately represented in the new CSFP decision-making bodies, or made any recommendations to this effect?

How many women will there be in the crisis management bodies and the security and conflict-prevention political committee?

Will the Council be taking due account of the specific contribution women can make to working for peace?

- (PT) The issue raised by the Member is of fundamental importance.

It concerns the involvement of women in the common foreign and security policy and the new crisis management structures, such as the security and conflict-prevention political committee. The Member has asked whether the Council will be taking due account of women' s particular skills in working for peace.

It is quite clear that the contribution of women in working for peace and in other similar respects, particularly in mobilising civil society, is well-known and unquestionable.

We all know, without bothering to be diplomatic about this, that the role and representation of women in the decision-making process, either within the CFSP or generally within other structures, is inadequate.

We all know the efforts made by the international community in this area and we remember the conclusions of the Beijing Declaration of 1995 on this issue.

Next June there will be a Special Session of the UN General Assembly to draw international attention to the need for women to be involved in actions implemented within the Beijing Declaration. In particular, specific measures will be taken to encourage this involvement.

It should be realised that pro-active policies do not work in some areas of the decision-making process.

Greater involvement is needed in political actions, in the training process and in the administrative process in general.

We believe it is impossible to implement just one specific action, for example introducing quotas in the common foreign and security policy structures.

In our opinion, this is not appropriate and the Council has made no proposal in this respect.

However, it is the responsibility of each national government to carry out the necessary reforms of its own system of representation in order to guarantee adequate participation by women.

These issues are now being regulated at European level and recommendations are being made as a result of the Treaty of Amsterdam.

We believe that, as all representation within the European Union is carried out by people from the Member States, it is the latter which are mainly responsible for mobilising as many women as possible who can rise within the decision-making process.

I would like to thank the President-in-Office of the Council, Mr Seixas da Costa, very much for his reply, which gives us hope since it demonstrates that the Council understands the problem, is responding politically and perhaps even sympathises with the idea.

Nevertheless, I consider his reply to be basically too retrograde.

The Helsinki and Cologne Summits specifically gave the Portuguese Presidency the job of strengthening this new protection policy.

You have said that you are against quotas but in favour of references.

I would like to ask the Portuguese Presidency: do you not think it would be highly appropriate to include a reference, in the form of a recommendation, in this respect?

I believe that the role of the European Union should not be to remain behind the United Nations or to be content merely with a reference to what Beijing was about.

The European Union must be progressive.

Women must clearly be involved in political decisions - also decisions with regard to peace - and I ask the Portuguese Presidency to make some reference in this respect.

Mrs Izquierdo Rojo, thank you for the hope which you have placed in the Portuguese presidency. However, I am sure you are aware of the limits of what we can do, particularly in an area such as this.

I have no hesitation in saying this because in my own departments 80% of the officials are women, even in managerial posts.

It is therefore clear that hope must always be the last resort of political action and that equal opportunities and equal representation of the sexes must be the practical and specific goal in our daily life and actions.

To be totally frank and at the risk of being considered behind the times, I do believe that there are limits to what can be achieved by pro-active political action in this area.

Bearing in mind these limits, it will be rather difficult, when we set out to assess the new common foreign and security policy structures in terms of defence, to say to the Military Committee or the Military Staff that half of their soldiers should be female.

This is because it is up to the Member States whether or not they have female generals or brigadiers.

Mrs Izquierdo Rojo, I cannot raise an issue like this just to appear politically correct. I must always be objectively honest.

Subject: Participation of research partners from the developing countries in environmental research programmes funded by the EU The key to the development of the developing countries is their ability to participate in development work themselves both as definers of problems and as seekers for solutions.

On the other hand, at EU level this approach is being poorly applied in relation to science and technology projects affecting developing countries.

The EU' s framework programmes do not extend to the developing countries. This means that North African partners, for example, are not able to be involved in science and technology projects relating to the environment.

In fact no-one is preventing them from carrying out the research, but there are no funding opportunities, and thus the developing countries have no access to consortia as partners entitled to apply for funding.

Why is this not the case, given that opportunities have been devised for even Russia, for example, to be involved?

Has the matter been considered from the point of view of the extent to which, for example, desertification in North Africa or the problems of the Mediterranean affect the EU?

Is the EU prepared to provide greater responsibility in the form of funding to local researchers, so that research activities can combine even after the funding bodies have left, and to ensure that projects can be carried out without the investment of local researchers?

In 1998, the European Parliament and the Council adopted the Fifth Framework Programme for Research and Technological Development to run from then until 2002.

One aspect of this Framework Programme is its four thematic programmes, which define priority areas for research, and its three horizontal programmes.

One of the latter is entitled 'Confirming the international role of Community research' and is intended to promote scientific and technological cooperation at international level and to help implement Community foreign policy in this area.

The general objectives of this international scientific cooperation are also set out in this Framework Programme and include support for the development of a Euro-Mediterranean partnership and a contribution to the economic, social and scientific development of developing countries.

In December 1998, the Council also adopted rules on participation by undertakings, research centres and universities and on disseminating research results in order to implement the Fifth Framework Programme.

With regard to the participation of legal entities of third countries and international organisations, all the indirect research activities under the thematic programmes are open to research bodies in Mediterranean non-Community countries and developing countries, in principle without Community financing. The only exception to this involves situations in which Community financing is regarded as absolutely vital to achieve the aims of the activity.

Article 6 of the Framework Programme authorises the participation by entities of third countries in specific research and technological development activities under the horizontal programme on the international role of Community research.

In January last year, the Council adopted the specific programmes for the Fifth Framework Programme which set out the objectives and activities for the various categories of third countries.

With regard to Mediterranean non-Community countries, an indicative allocation of EUR 55 million was established for research and development activities such as integrated coastal management in the Mediterranean, including environmental aspects, water management, natural resource management, conservation and restoration of the cultural heritage, socio-economic modernisation and so on.

With regard to developing countries, an indicative allocation of EUR 210 million was made available for specific activities such as those involving the adoption of innovations, the promotion of a sustainable relationship between population pressure, food safety and the use and management of ecosystems, the improvement of productivity and the prevention of damage to natural resources.

In addition, a grant system was created under a specific programme which allows graduates and doctoral students from developing countries and Mediterranean non-Community countries to work on European projects.

Funds were also allocated for coordination with Community technical assistance programmes, including the MEDA and EDF programmes, and also for Latin America and Asia.

The application of these three decisions is clearly the Commission' s responsibility, supported by the committees for the relevant programmes.

So far calls for specific proposals aimed at developing and Mediterranean countries have been made with a total budget of EUR 85.5 million.

Mr President-in-Office, I thank you for this reply.

I would, however, like a brief answer that is clearer and more precise.

Do we then have a situation where the developing countries may now apply for funds?

They were not able to before.

How is the situation different from, for example, that regarding the INTAS and Interreg programmes in Eastern Europe?

With regard to matters falling within the Commission' s specific competence, the only promise I can make, in answer to the Member' s supplementary question and her concerns, is that I will try to obtain a more concise answer which will probably have to be given in writing.

As the author is not present, Question No 11 lapses.

Subject: Common defence policy at the IGC There is a 'shortlist' of proposals for the IGC, according to which the Conference will confine itself largely to 'institutional' issues.

It is generally supposed that Portugal plans to expand the list at the June meeting.

Is this true, and will Portugal then bring the common defence policy onto the agenda for the IGC?

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the Helsinki European Council authorised the Portuguese presidency to establish the EU' s interim security and defence structures as from 1 March of this year.

These structures were established on this date. Their activities are currently being developed so that they can assume a more specific and practical form and in particular so that the definitive model which we believe could start to operate next year can be agreed.

In parallel with the work on these practical aspects, a discussion is ongoing within the European Union on determining the mechanisms for participation both by EU Member States which are not members of NATO and by NATO countries which are not EU Member States. This discussion is occurring within the overall context of action on the Petersberg tasks specified in the Treaty of Amsterdam.

The question which has arisen and which has also been raised by the Member - for which I thank you as it is my responsibility to chair the preparatory group of the Intergovernmental Conference - concerns the extent to which this issue may or may not fall within the scope of the IGC.

It will only be placed on the IGC' s agenda if and when it is confirmed that amendments need to be made to the Treaty on European Union in order to bring these structures into practical operation.

It is still not clear at this stage of our debate within the European Union whether or not amendments to the Treaty will be necessary.

As soon as this becomes clear, we will announce this.

The Portuguese Presidency will present a report to the Feira European Council in June giving an assessment of the state of progress and an opinion on whether or not these issues should be included within the IGC.

If these are to be included, this would only be confirmed during the French Presidency.

Mr President, Mr President-in-Office, European defence policy is at present being drafted, and different countries are involved in the task.

There are Member States in NATO and there are countries which are not in NATO.

Mr President-in-Office, do you believe that the European Union can frame a defence policy that would be independent of NATO, or will all the new arrangements be in harmony with NATO' s basic structures?

Mr Seppänen, your question indicates that you are clearly confused, unless there has been an interpreting error.

We are not talking about defence policy but about crisis management for which powers are now included within the Treaties. The issue in question is not therefore a European defence policy or the creation of a European army.

The issue is crisis management and humanitarian actions which are commonly referred to in Community parlance as the 'Petersberg tasks' .

All the EU countries, including yours, can make a valuable contribution to this area.

We are trying at the moment not to create a European defence policy but rather a common culture of security allowing us to participate in crisis management.

In this respect, I can see no major problems.

We hope to ensure that all the various cultures which exist within the Union are compatible.

I am nonetheless a little surprised at the answer.

I was under the impression that it was not possible to act if it was a national legal system which had pronounced judgement, because that would amount to interfering in national affairs.

In that way, Article 6 of the Treaty of Amsterdam would really, of course, be revoked, that is to say if action were to be taken on the basis of national legal systems.

It can hardly be intended that a Member State should be able to do whatever it likes as long as it does so via its own legal system.

I would also ask if the Council intends to look more closely into this issue and perhaps examine it in more specific terms.

The crisis management and humanitarian actions specified in the Petersberg tasks to which the Helsinki European Council referred are actions which may be carried out by the European Union. However, our intention is to guarantee that these actions are totally compatible with what currently exists in the relations between certain EU Member States and the NATO countries.

The reason for this is that the mechanisms and means which exist for managing these crises are not extensive.

In fact, most of the time, these means belong to NATO.

As it is the means for military and security action which currently exist within the EU and NATO which will be mobilised, it is therefore essential to guarantee effective cooperation with all the NATO countries, including non-Community countries and particularly the candidate countries such as Turkey, Norway and Iceland.

It is clear that at a much wider level and bearing in mind the dimension of the operations, these actions will also require the involvement of the United States of America and Canada.

We therefore need broad cooperation which aims to guarantee the sharing of responsibility among all those countries which currently have a similar security and defence culture and objective.

Subject: Violation of the right to freedom of expression The Court of First Instance of Thessaloniki, presided over by a single magistrate, recently banned from circulation a book by the author Mimis Androulakis, describing it as irreverent.

Article 6 of the Treaty of Amsterdam states that the European Union is founded on the principles of liberty, democracy, respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms. Furthermore, Greece is a contracting party to the European Convention on Human Rights, which guarantees the right to freedom of expression and religious freedom.

In view of these considerations and given that the cornerstone of a people' s Europe is the fundamental commitment to freedom, pluralism and human rights, what view does the Council take of such a measure and will it intercede with the competent Greek authorities to put an end to the persecution of the author and the ban on his book?

Mr Papayannakis is asking the Council how it interprets this judgement of the Court of First Instance of Thessaloniki banning from circulation a book by the author Mimis Androlakis which it describes as irreverent. He is also asking whether the Council intends to intercede with the Greek authorities.

I should like to explain that, under Article 6(1) of the Treaty on European Union, as amended by the Treaty of Amsterdam, the Union respects a set of basic principles by reference to the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms.

The underlying aim of this article is to establish a kind of political supervision over the actions of Member States and to ensure that democratic principles and values are respected.

It is intended to guarantee the sharing of common values.

However, Article 6 cannot be invoked for the purpose of any type of interference in the administration of the internal affairs of Member States, particularly at judicial level.

The Union has no competence to intercede in the exercise of legal power by the Member States.

Therefore, the Council cannot interfere in the decision-making of the authorities.

The judgement delivered by the Court of First Instance of Thessaloniki, which is a judgement of a legal body of a Member State on a specific case, may be subject within the Greek legal system to an appeal to the higher national courts.

Having exhausted this recourse to the Greek courts, there would always be recourse to the Court of Human Rights.

My follow-up question is about how the decision at the Helsinki Summit about military, peacekeeping and peace enforcement operations is to be interpreted.

The decision provides an opportunity for the Applicant States too to participate in the military structures to be established by the EU.

Does this also apply to Turkey which has, of course, applied for membership?

Does this mean that a door has been opened for military cooperation between Turkey' s and the European Union' s forces in, for example, peace enforcement operations?

Mr Sjöstedt, the Member States undertake to act within the framework determined by the Treaty.

This is why they signed the Treaty.

If a serious and persistent violation of citizens' rights were to be identified, according to the terms of these articles, then there would clearly be ways of interceding with the Member States.

The Union itself has ways of doing this but only in specific cases.

A case like this, in a democratic country like Greece, meets all the conditions to be judged and handled within the Greek legal system until the capacities for recourse within this system are exhausted.

If we were to intervene in a case like this, we would clearly be transposing to the Community dimension an issue for which there is a whole range of recourse in a country which fully respects human and citizens' rights.

Thank you very much, Mr Seixas da Costa.

Since the time allotted to Questions to the Council has elapsed, Questions Nos 14 to 31 will be replied to in writing.

That concludes Questions to the Council.

(The sitting was suspended at 7.00 p.m. and resumed at 9.00 p.m.)

Address by Mr Klestil, President of the Republic of Austria

The next item is the joint debate on the following reports:

A5-0059/2000 by Mr García-Margallo y Marfil, on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, on the Commission communication on implementing the framework for financial markets: Action Plan [COM(1999) 232 - C5-0114/1999 - 1999/2117(COS)];

A5-0053/2000 by Mr Kuckelkorn, on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, on the Commission communication "Towards a single market for supplementary pensions - Results of the consultations on the Green Paper on supplementary pensions in the single market" [COM(1999) 134 - C5-0135/1999 - 1999/2131(COS)].

Before we begin I would like to advise you that, since this is a night sitting and we have a lot of work to get through, I am going to be very strict in applying time limits.

I therefore also ask Members to show an appropriate degree of self-discipline so that we can finish at a reasonable time.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, Commissioner, if I had to point here and now to two complex issues in the economic field, I would no doubt choose the following: the consolidation of the financial markets and the approximation of the direct taxation regulations - specifically tax on savings - which is under discussion.

The debate which we held recently on the bodies for collective investment in transferable securities and the reactions to the report on pension funds, which we will hear shortly, demonstrate the complexity and importance of these issues.

These two issues, the liberalisation of the financial services market and taxation, are dealt with in the action plan which is the subject of my report.

It is therefore appropriate to thank all the groups for their cooperation and confirm once again to the Commission that it can rely on the active cooperation of the European Parliament in the implementation of this plan, and we will not disregard our duties, but exercise them responsibly.

The complexity of the action plan also reflects the ambitious nature of the report presented by the Commission, which contains 43 measures and involves all the sectors in the field (stock exchanges, banks, investment funds, insurance, etc.) and which applies to what has come to be called the 'new economy' , which is - according to the Lisbon Summit - one of the elements which will help to put an end to unemployment in Europe.

What is included in these measures?

What is intended through these measures?

In my judgement, to sum up, it is the following: the liberalisation of the financial sectors and the updating of the regulations on supervision and control in order to achieve a European financial market which is at least as competitive as the United States financial market.

In the explanatory statement, I offer a detailed comparison of the two types of market.

In order to achieve these two objectives, the Commission proposes a truly arguable and risky formula: the speeding up of the legal process, which, in turn, would involve three actions.

Firstly, a reduction in the standards which need to be included in a regulation or directive, that is to say, which require the participation of this Parliament.

Secondly, limiting those standards to the definition of the general approaches and basic principles which must be established in this field, allowing the Commission the possibility of implementing them.

Thirdly, granting the Commission broad powers of interpretation.

I do not doubt that we have to speed up the process, Commissioner, but this Parliament is not prepared to relinquish the powers which it has taken so long to acquire.

Therefore, one of the first tasks which we will have to undertake together is to find a model which will satisfy both objectives.

With regard to liberalisation, the first of the tasks which the Commission proposes, the Commission starts from one premise: the consolidation of the single market in financial services requires the removal of the barriers which hinder its operation.

The consequence is that, in order for the market to function, these barriers must be removed.

Again we agree, but we know that there are difficulties in this approach resulting from the need to reconcile the objective of liberalisation with the objective of protecting investors.

Firstly, the barriers are not identified.

Commissioner, it is not sufficient to be able to deduce what they are from the measures proposed by the Commission.

Personally, I would have liked to have seen a list of those national measures which, in accordance with the Directive on financial services, are hindering the operation of the market in each country.

Secondly, the solution proposed by the Commission still raises difficulties.

It is ridiculous that a financial company has to operate while being subject to, and having to have knowledge of, fifteen different legislations, but it is at least as ridiculous that an investor - especially a non-professional investor - should end up needing to contract services, bound by regulations which he or she does not know, from companies whose solvency is unknown, and, in the event of legal dispute, he or she has to take action in a foreign country, with foreign jurisdiction and procedures.

Liberalisation must therefore be implemented in parallel with the increase in measures relating to control and taxation.

With regard to control measures, we have a new problem: the need to adapt the competence and jurisdictions of authorities which are still national and which, on the whole, apply differing models, to a different world affected by globalisation, international competition and free movement of capital.

Finally, Mr President, my personal conviction is that, if we do not want liberalisation to give rise to distortions in competition and the flight of capital to more beneficial climates inside and outside the Union, the correct operation of the market in financial services will not be possible without a certain degree of approximation of the laws which regulate savings.

These are the concerns which are raised in my report. These concerns reflect a constructive attitude towards cooperation with the Commission, which I have always considered to be a loyal ally of this Parliament, in the development of an issue which is so very complex.

Mr President, I am referring, as you have said, on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market, to the Commission communication on the action plan for the implementation of the framework for the financial markets.

As the main rapporteur, Mr García-Margallo y Marfil, has pointed out, in this regard there are two questions which are, firstly, taxation - without fiscal harmonisation it would be very difficult to establish Community financial markets - and secondly, a legal framework.

With regard to the legal framework, I believe that there is a paradox in this sector.

The more liberalised an economy is, the more necessary it becomes to rigidly regulate the financial markets.

The American economy, which is probably one of the most liberalised economies in existence, is the economy which lays down the most detailed regulations for the financial markets.

The Commission, in its proposal, on page 18 of the Spanish version, after recognising the competence of Parliament by means of codecision, in accordance with Article 251 of the Treaty, tells us that we should move towards very flexible procedures by means of comitology.

Comitology in these cases usually means taking away with one hand what is given with the other.

In this respect, I am in total agreement with the conclusions of the rapporteur.

I believe that we need some very specific legislation and I am sure that the Commission can count on the support of Parliament in the drawing up of this legislation.

As the rapporteur said a moment ago, we cannot expect confidence on the part of investors, consumers and, ultimately, the financial markets, if they do not have a specific legal framework in which to operate.

The only way to do this is to replace the current rigid regulations with a set of specific Community regulations which will produce certainty in this very delicate sector of the economy.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, Commissioner, the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy deplores the fact that the action plan for the financial markets does not take into account the problems which industry, small and medium-sized businesses in particular, is facing with regard to financing cross-border activities.

Many businesses, ranging from small businesses in border areas to large multinationals, would like to treat their accounts as one national account.

For example, they would like to use funds in their euro account in country A to settle an account in debit in country B. In this way, they would pay less interest.

Existing legislation, however, prohibits or hinders this type of cash management technique.

The world of banking has already driven this problem home to you on numerous occasions.

On behalf of the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy, I would now like to ask the Commissioner whether it would be possible to set up a forum group which carries out market research into the legal and fiscal obstacles for businesses, SMBs, in particular, when they finance their cross-border transactions within the euro zone, in order to solve this problem.

I would appreciate a reply to this.

Mr President, in view of the Resolution of 3 December 1998, to which the Kuckelkorn report does not appear to contain a reference, Parliament once again is obliged to request that the Commission produce as soon as possible a directive or, as Mr Medina Ortega appropriately suggested, a Community law coordinating the various national laws.

The Commission appears to be somewhat apathetic in this regard, and seems to be concentrating rather on producing a directive on prudential rules for pension funds, which is easier to achieve but less effective in terms of decision-making in relation to the elimination of barriers to labour mobility and the coordination of taxation systems.

The legal bases are very important, and, clearly, different: in view of the various judgements delivered by the Court of Justice, pension funds could be governed by Article 47 and Article 55, the removal of barriers to labour mobility could be governed by Article 42 and the coordination of national tax systems by Article 94.

However, I would stress the need and the desirability to develop a single package, because this is the only way to achieve an overall framework which tones down the extreme positions contained in certain proposals for amendments.

I refer, in particular, to biometric risks, which are a very important factor but which should be dealt with on the basis of paragraphs 7 and 8 of the opinion drawn up by the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market.

Indeed, making cover for biometric risks obligatory would be likely to make the system very inflexible.

I therefore feel that funds which cover biometric risks should receive privileged treatment, and that any inflexibility of the system could, in effect, result in negative imbalances for the beneficiaries.

Mr President, we see the reality of the situation all around us.

If 23% of Europe' s population is over 65 years old today, this figure will have reached 40% by 2025, and the proportion of four working people to every retired person will have become two working people to every retired person by 2020.

This demonstrates the pressing need to allow the development of supplementary self-funded high return pension schemes in the European Union to usefully supplement state contributory pension schemes.

As we all know, our Member States are working towards ambitious structural reforms, but it is also up to the European Union to intervene in the area of pensions, particularly supplementary pensions, in order to facilitate the free movement of workers in the context of the single market, to establish a genuine single capital market and also to ensure that equality between men and women is respected.

With this in mind, the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs has been concerned to reconcile the security and efficiency of supplementary pensions for future pensioners as it is true that the guarantee of a high level of security for beneficiaries encourages healthy and desirable competition between European pension funds.

This is why our Committee feels that the proposal for a directive on Community prudential regulations applying to pension funds must be tabled and adopted as quickly as possible, bearing in mind our discussion today, with proper guarantees for the external and internal supervision of the funds concerned and for the calculation of their prudential commitment.

Furthermore, in order to encourage the free movement of workers, we felt it essential to quickly improve the transferability and the acquisition of pension rights from supplementary schemes from different European countries.

This is the opinion of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs.

(FR) Mr President, I would like to say first of all in this debate that we are expecting to see a proposal for a framework-directive very soon, which will guarantee the development of a genuine single market for supplementary pension funds under the second and third pillars, given that the first pillar, which covers all biometric risks, must remain the cornerstone of the European Union' s social protection system.

This directive must in particular establish a framework to remove obstacles to the free choice of a pension fund, to the free movement of people, to the free provision of services and to charging double taxes.

We recommend a solution based on the principle that contributions should be tax-deductible, and that supplementary invested income should be taxed in accordance with the income tax law in force in the country of residence.

On the controversial issue of whether supplementary pension schemes should cover biometric risks, I wish to state that from the point of view of taxation, pension funds that do not cover these risks will not be discriminated against in relation to those that do.

With regard to prudential regulation, this should not be disproportionate, so that the security of the fund is guaranteed.

I am grateful to the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs for having included all the relevant conclusions of the Committee on Women' s Rights and Equal Opportunities in the motion for a resolution.

I now come to the report by Mr García-Margallo y Marfil.

With regard to the action plan which seeks to deepen the internal financial services market, I would like to issue a warning about certain strategists who are attempting to hold the liberalisation of the financial services sector hostage, because the work that has been undertaken on the taxation of savings has not made the progress they would have wanted.

As matters currently stand, we should remember that a single market for capital and financial services can function perfectly well without tax harmonisation.

Faced with proposals that confuse ambition and reality, I wish to emphasise that establishing a European Committee for stock exchange operations is certainly not the number one priority and, as I have no speaking time left, Mr President, I will give an explanation of vote tomorrow to say the rest of what I still wanted to say, because as draftsperson of the Committee' s opinion and as a speaker on the second report, it is really impossible to say everything in two minutes.

Mr President, representatives of the Commission and the Council, Mr Kuckelkorn, ladies and gentlemen, firstly I would like to thank the Commission for the sterling work they have done.

The communication from the Commission is liberal-minded and forward-looking.

Why should Parliament now adopt a less liberal position and vote in favour of stagnating structures?

We should not define the form and scope of the directive too narrowly.

What we need to do instead is to view the issue openly and from a wider perspective.

It is essential that we do not define the nature and scope of the risk coverage in a restrictive way.

Instead, we should be open-minded and look at the issue from a wider perspective and encourage a framework which is based on liberal markets and vigorous competition between different types of pension schemes.

What we should promote is the freedom of choice of the employee and the employer to choose the kind of scheme that best suits their interests

The question of biometric risks has proved to be of a controversial nature.

My firm opinion is that all the different pension schemes should be covered by the same directive in order not to protect certain types of schemes from competition.

Consumers and employers must have the right to choose the most suitable form of pension scheme and, therefore, schemes covering biometric risks should be treated under the same directive as schemes not covering these risks.

Both form a pension scheme but focus on different competitive benefits.

Mr Kuckelkorn, no-one in this Parliament is of the opinion that supplementary pensions should not cover the longevity risk, through the purchase of an annuity or by some other tool.

It is not the task of the European Union to define the nature and scope of the risk coverage concerning other biometric risks.

But it should be determined individually by each employee, as the Commission proposes.

Leaving this kind of decision to the individual is consistent with the principle of subsidiarity.

Allowing supplementary pension scheme managers the freedom to invest in a diverse range of instruments increases the security of the overall investment portfolio.

Increased freedom promotes the functioning of the capital market and has a significant impact on the growth of venture capital in Europe.

I am committed to the idea that we, as the European Parliament, should encourage healthy competition and the freedom of choice of the individual.

This must not only mean a single market for supplementary pensions, but the whole package of legislation concerning the financial services.

Mr President, the Socialists support the Commission' s efforts to establish a transparent and fluid internal financial services market.

It is in the interest of economic operators and all consumers that the costs of capital and financial intermediation should be as low as possible.

European financial markets are currently suffering from compartmentalisation along national lines, even though, following the globalisation of the international financial system, we are seeing the widespread phenomenon of mergers and internationalisation.

The action plan aims to make the European market equal to the American market.

The success of the American market is basically due to 'king dollar' .

It is paradoxical in this context to note that some of the most ardent supporters of financial liberalisation at the same time oppose the euro.

The real introduction of the euro in 2002, however, will result in transparency and competition, which will force the national markets to adapt more quickly than they had anticipated.

The problem is that the legislative bodies, both national and European, are taking a long time to adapt the law to reality.

Personally, I would not be opposed to an accelerated legislative procedure, on condition that it does not end up as a mere exercise for non-accountable technocrats.

The Commission could make a useful contribution in the form of proposals simplifying and codifying the 11 or so directives that govern the banking sector, the 8 directives on investment funds, and the 21 directives dealing with the insurance sector.

There is not only a problem of coherence in the various legislations on the different sectors of the financial world, but in particular there is the problem of supervising and protecting the public interest.

John Kenneth Galbraith condemned the mistaken idea that there is any link between money and intelligence.

The lure of profit is such that the financial world tends to create a form of collective euphoria, which often leads to financial crisis.

The free movement of capital must be accompanied by an efficient regulatory and prudential framework, because supervision of the various markets is divided up according to country and sector, but at the same time, as a result of mergers, acquisitions and amalgamations, boundaries between banks, insurance companies, investment funds and pension funds are disappearing.

Finland and the United Kingdom have drawn conclusions from this and have established a single prudential authority for the whole sector.

Article 105(6) of the Treaty stipulates that the Council can entrust the ECB with specific tasks relating to policies on the prudential supervision of credit companies and other financial companies, with the exception of insurance companies.

Should the Council not use the Intergovernmental Conference to establish the necessary legal basis for the Council to be able to entrust the ECB with certain specific tasks relating to the prudential supervision of insurance companies too?

I must congratulate the rapporteur, Mr Kuckelkorn, for the tenacity with which he argues in favour of supplementary pensions and for these to become in effect a second pillar of insurance for old age.

I shall conclude, Mr President, by pointing out that it amounts to saying that whilst we should not discard insurance products we must favour products which cover biometric risks.

Mr President, Commissioner, if Europe is to grow, attract capital and create jobs, the single market for financial services must be turned into a reality.

Up until now, it has mostly been a matter of words and all too few concrete measures.

At present, the financial services market and, through this, Europe' s power to grow have been impeded by countless national regulations and administrative complications.

These are detrimental not only to companies but also, of course, to Europe' s citizens.

The development of the Internet is, and will be, of great importance to the provision of financial services across national borders.

Above all, it is consumers who will benefit from this development because they will have greater choice and access to lower prices.

We Liberals do not regard tax harmonisation as a prerequisite for bringing the single market for financial services to fruition, even if a degree of harmonisation may prove to be necessary to avoid harmful competition over taxes.

The euro has stabilised economic development and provided better opportunities to reduce the costs of acquiring capital, something which benefits both companies and private households.

It is my conviction that, if the EU is to be able to provide Europe' s citizens with growth and strength, then all Member States must participate fully in the EU project, that is to say, be members of EMU.

Mr Romano Prodi' s statement today in a Swedish newspaper to the effect that Sweden could stay outside EMU is therefore both surprising from an economic point of view and doubtful in terms of the Treaties.

The Commission' s Green Paper on liberalising complementary forms of pension protection is something we welcome.

It is nonetheless important to emphasise that pension cover in Europe is characterised by national diversity and that there is no need to harmonise the various systems in order to create a single market.

It is important that a large number of systems should exist side by side.

However, it is desirable, in order to avoid double taxation, to introduce a minimum degree of harmonisation in regard to the Member States' treatment of supplementary pensions for tax purposes.

I also consider that the Member States themselves should be able to determine what the system should look like, for example whether or not the care of relatives should be covered by pensions.

This is an issue which can be resolved better at national level.

In committee there was lively discussion on biometric risks.

Views were put forward to the effect that only those systems which cover risks of this kind are to be included under the directive.

We do not believe that this should be the case, especially in view of the need for small and medium-sized companies to be able to do business.

Freedom of choice is emphatically a good thing.

Finally, I want to congratulate Mr García-Margallo y Marfil and Mr Kuckelkorn for two important reports designed to create a competitive Europe.

Mr President, where supplementary pensions are concerned, the crucial issue is whether one wants to provide pensioners with security in their old age or to reinforce Europe' s capital markets.

These are not only two quite different goals, but it is also difficult to combine them in one and the same system.

The Commission' s proposal and both the reports we are debating today give priority to the needs of the capital market.

The hope is that the market-based pensions will then also prove to be good for pensioners in thirty or forty years' time.

How matters will turn out, however, we do not know.

If one considers how Europe has changed during the last thirty to forty years and acknowledges that circumstances are going to change just as much in the future, then one can see how uncertain such forecasts are.

There is a large deficit when it comes to security and solidarity in the pensions area because the risk is so great and because there can never be enough security and solidarity.

Supplementary assurances are therefore a problem.

They are, of course, much less secure than a system of basic pensions which has been financed on the basis of solidarity.

I also believe that supplementary assurances and supplementary pensions may be needed, but then their managers ought to be obliged to invest in such instruments as provide solid savings in the long term, instead of having short-term rates on the stock exchange and global financial capitalism determine how matters will stand for pensioners in the future.

I also believe it would have been commendable if these supplementary pension systems could have been run as pension funds on the basis of solidarity under the aegis of trade unions, as happens in certain Member States.

Even if these too are market-based, they offer much more in terms of stability and security than the privatised pension assurances.

It now looks as if we are to have a liberal arrangement in the pensions field in Europe, and I shall therefore advise my voters to invest their surplus funds in safer instruments than private pension assurances.

To young people I would say: pin your hopes on education and on developing your skills.

And to older people I would say: acquire a nice, inexpensive place to live in the autumn of your years.

We politicians ought to be putting our faith in a good, sound system of basic pensions.

Mr President, the European Commission' s Green Paper has caused many to reach for their pens, so much so that in the motion for a resolution, the objective of the Green Paper has been lost almost completely.

Similarly, the intention of the rapporteur, Mr Kuckelkorn, who has carried out a vast amount of work, for which I would like to thank him, is not expressed very well in the motion for a resolution.

It is now up to us to see that an acceptable document is produced tomorrow during the vote.

The principal aim is for workers, when they move to another Member State, to be able to transfer their supplementary pension schemes and continue to pay into them without forfeiting their pension rights and with a guarantee that their accumulated pension rights will retain their value.

Unfortunately, the Commission has not really made any headway towards fulfilling this wish.

We have a long way to go before the compulsory transfer of value between Member States will be a reality.

The first obstacle we need to negotiate is the mutual recognition of supervisory rules.

It is then important that an adequate distinction is drawn between pension funds and commercial insurance companies.

A pension fund has an obligation to be generally acceptable.

A full-value pension scheme covers biometric risks.

Insurance companies do offer their participants a choice, and their products do not cover biometric risks.

Since the risks covered are not identical, government inspection will also vary for pension funds and insurance companies.

On account of this supervision, complete freedom of investment is justified in both cases.

This leads on average to higher returns.

We need to avoid creating a situation where the individual is forced, on account of significantly lower returns on pension funds, to enter the wild investment woods in search of their supplementary pension schemes, where the big bad wolf is after their money.

The second obstacle is the levying of taxes within the Member States.

Taking into account the fast approaching ageing of the population, it is desirable for fiscal systems to promote the development of supplementary pensions.

The EET model, where premium payments are tax-free and the retirement payout is taxed, meets this requirement and is also common in most Member States.

I hope that Parliament and the Commission will make the internal market for supplementary pension schemes a reality along these lines.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, safeguarding pensions is an extremely important task facing our age.

We are conscious of the fact that numerous pension schemes in the various Member States, based on the intergeneration compact, are encountering ever-increasing difficulties.

That is why the issue of supplementary pensions has become so very important, and that is what we are discussing this evening.

When it comes to supplementary pensions and pension funds, our first priority in regulatory terms is to ensure that the rules governing the Common Market are upheld, and that no additional restrictions to the free movement of persons within the European Community are created, as is often the case.

We are aware that this is still the case today for many social security systems, and we must avoid the possibility of similar restrictions to the free movement of persons arising in this new sphere as well.

This is not going to be a piece of cake.

We all know that taxation is subject to the unanimity principle, but this is one of the fundamental demands we have to make.

I now come to the crunch question of this debate, namely what are pensions?

I have to say, we are still only halfway through the debate where this is concerned.

We have not reached a conclusive opinion within our Group either. There is only one thing I can say with certainty: biometric risks must play a part in this overall assessment in some respect.

In other words, if we do not take biometric risks into account, then it will not be possible to address the other issues I have mentioned. But we are quite deliberately proposing an open style of wording, as chosen by Mr Ferri for the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market in points 7 and 8.

I believe this kind of wording will attract the broadest consensus here, and therefore enable us to make progress, for what matters most is that the directives are now put forward to us. I believe it will not be possible to answer some of the questions we are discussing today until we can assess them in the light of the Commission' s proposals, the actual draft directives, that is.

Mr President, on behalf of the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance, I would like to express my opinion on the single market for supplementary pensions.

Firstly, I would like to express my agreement with the model based on the intergenerational solidarity of the basic state systems, to which are added the supplementary capitalisation systems.

On the other hand, I would also like to express my agreement with what Mr Kuckelkorn says in relation to the correlation established between pension systems which cover biometric risks.

We are not talking about systems for financial investment but about pension plans.

On the other hand, we are also in agreement with the participation of workers and the urgent harmonisation of the tax provisions.

Nevertheless, we have to clarify the basic concept of pensions in a way which includes the supplementary pension schemes which cover biometric risks.

It is necessary to clarify, on the other hand, that the single system applies to every type of worker in the European Union; there are not only workers who work for themselves in the European Union but also many cooperative workers, fortunately.

We must opt for collective systems, but not only company systems - something which is mentioned in the report - but also sectoral ones, taking particular account of SMBs, which have been mentioned by Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel.

We must take account of the great difficulties which exist within the Union with regard to the development of supplementary systems.

We therefore understand and support the regulatory and supervisory systems for the protection of the rights of participants, but we must put the emphasis on the areas where systems are still underdeveloped, in aspects such as providing information or implementing new plans.

Finally, I would like to underline our support for the creation of a European pension fund with the participation of the different economic sectors and the pension providers.

Mr President, the ageing of the population and the reduction in the numbers of people of working age, while real enough, have been put forward by the Commission and other Members as a reason to open up the way for pension funds for supplementary pension schemes.

The dynamic of growth and job creation has run its course.

The capitalisation mechanisms mean adapting retirement pensions to the single market and the introduction of the euro.

Moving in this direction entails the risk of a system based on private insurance, which would gradually replace social security.

Welfare and retirement pensions would no longer be rights but would be commodities subject to the laws of the market.

The set pension fund strategy essentially aims to drain savings away toward the financial markets.

A system of this type is very dangerous and deeply unfair as it benefits the richest people, those who can save money, and leaves the poorest with a pittance of a retirement pension.

Mr Kuckelkorn' s initial report considered the retirement pension primarily as social insurance against certain life risks, rather than a process of accumulating capital.

It has been radically changed, however, by the adoption of amendments unreservedly supporting the mechanisms of capitalisation.

I cannot, therefore, approve this report which makes the Commission' s approach even worse.

On the contrary, we think that a high level of social protection must be maintained, based on solidarity, regardless of financial profitability.

The contributory system guarantees the rights of the employed and provides them with a pension, in the framework of national solidarity between the working population and the retired population, between generations, between men and women, between the public and the private sectors.

The objective should be to obtain new resources and to upgrading the purchasing power of retirement pensions from contributions which could be raised from taxes on financial products at the same level as those which apply to wages.

Employers' contributions should be linked to companies' employment policies and taxes set up on those which make people redundant.

Mr President, as medical advances contribute to a steady ageing of our populations, the burden of pension provision throughout the Union becomes ever more costly.

In the UK, as in the US, Chile and Singapore and, to a lesser extent, the Netherlands, the burden on the state and succeeding generations has been significantly eased through the successful provision of supplementary second and third pillar private and occupational pension schemes, involving funds which grow to provide pension benefits following the retirement of the individuals.

Both pillars have the advantage of being resistant to demographic change, and third-pillar portable schemes, in particular, which are not restricted to single companies, enhance labour mobility and choice for the investors and are much more affordable to small and medium enterprises.

I welcome the fact that there is widespread recognition in this House to extend these supplementary schemes throughout Europe, even if there are disagreements over their precise nature and the way that the funds are to be invested.

The problem needs to be addressed urgently in my opinion, with demographic pressures in recent years already generating deficits in the pay-as-you-go schemes in France, Germany, Italy and Spain.

It is even predicted that if the current trend continues some countries will be facing costs of up to 20% of their GDP in the next ten years for their pension liabilities.

There are, of course, many risks with equity investments, but there are even greater risks to Europe with stagnant economies.

Growing pension funds will dynamise our economies by providing large additional capital funds for investment not only in the EU, but also in developing markets, with greater prospects for future growth and returns on investment for our pensioners.

In the case of defined contribution schemes, which give the investor a direct stake in the overall health of the national economy, there will also be a sense of participation in the country of that individual.

The state scheme will of course remain the primary mechanism for basic provision in old age.

But personal responsibility and choice will become the watchwords of success if the demographic challenges of the coming century are to be met successfully.

That is why we should not be too prescriptive regarding the issues of biometric risks or investment strategies.

We need a light-touch regulatory framework, with bilateral tax agreements, which will ensure the portability for those EU nationals wishing to work abroad throughout the Union, achieve a genuine single market in financial services and provide maximum choice to the European investor.

Mr President, this report seeks to harmonise supplementary pensions in Europe.

In fact, it seeks nothing less than to open up all European pension schemes to the financial markets.

Indeed, it recommends the development of a truly single pension fund market by referring to the inevitability of resorting to capitalisation.

It should be noted, by the way, that when the financial interests of the most powerful are involved, they are not slow to forget the principle of solidarity and to propose a single model.

This report puts forward cynical arguments and seeks to give credence to the idea that only capitalisation would ensure better protection of low incomes.

The truth is that it is not an attempt to supplement state pension schemes, but rather to gradually empty them of all substance.

Those who are employed know full well, however, that a pension is theirs by right.

They fought for this right, which is based on intergenerational solidarity.

That is why they do not, under any circumstances, want to see their pensions gambled on the stock exchange.

In several countries, powerful social movements have already opposed similar attempts.

Their threats have to this day prevented the French government, for example, from introducing pension funds.

This is in perfect harmony with past, present and future struggles, and it is in support of them that we shall be voting against a report that reduces this Parliament to the level of a lobby for high finance.

Retired people need an adequate, stable and safe pension.

Pension funds and the stock exchange will never be able to guarantee that.

On this issue, as on many others, a choice must be made between increasing the profits of a few or satisfying the needs of all.

Mr President, I would like to start by paying tribute to Mr Kuckelkorn, because he has drafted a courageous report in my opinion, given Germany' s rigid and inflexible pension situation.

He clearly wants to take steps towards developing a European internal market for supplementary pension schemes.

I think he deserves tribute for this.

I myself come from a country where a very extensive second pillar of supplementary pensions exists.

Almost 90% of the professional population in the private sector are in pension schemes which guarantee a wage-related pension.

This also includes small and medium-sized businesses.

With a capacity of over EUR 150 billion, the pension fund of Dutch civil servants is the largest institutional investor of its kind within the international capital market.

Pension funds in the Netherlands are daring to take increasing risks in their investments.

In 1999, nearly half of the pension money was invested in shares, albeit under strict prudential conditions.

But the average return over the past five years has been around 15%, instead of the usual 4%.

It has been shown that it is precisely the compulsory nature of participation in collective pension funds which encourages these excellent results.

The fact that funds are spread over generations and risks means that the funds can invest in shares to such a high level.

On balance, this yields a far better return for individual members, much better than they could ever achieve on their own via a savings plan or investment fund.

Therefore, I must open Mrs Kauppi' s eyes and disprove her reasoning that individual workers would be better off making their own choices, even if they belong to the fortunate ones who do not have any hereditary diseases, who are young and male, because, unfortunately, Mrs Kauppi, we women are even worse off under individual schemes as we live longer than men on average.

Consequently, I would strongly discourage you from formulating a principle of free choice at European level.

If I were you, I would leave this to the Member States and the free market.

As for biometric risks, other speakers have already talked enough about this.

I fully endorse Mr Kuckelkorn in this respect and would argue that such a definition is very important because we are expecting a number of additional directives from the European Commission.

Mr President, we are voting against this report advocating self-funded pension schemes.

This system restricts employees who want to guarantee a retirement pension for themselves that will give them enough to live on, to make their money available to investment funds, trusts, insurance companies or other private financial groups.

At the same time, it makes the value of pensions subordinate to the financial markets, in other words, to speculation.

What is more, all those whose salaries are too low for them to be able to pay into a pension fund will be entitled only to a very meagre pension.

Referring to demographic changes in order to justify this is a swindle.

Productivity has increased tenfold in the last fifty years and if company owners and shareholders had not transformed the fruits of this productivity into purely private profit, it would now enable salaries to be higher and would guarantee appropriate pensions for everyone.

If contributory pension schemes are having problems, it is only because there are fewer employed people in proportion to the number of retired people, because there are too many unemployed and because salaries are too low.

So, if there is a shortfall in pension funds, States should take over by deducting the necessary amounts from the profits of industrial and financial groups.

Mr President, the ageing of the European population means that we will have huge problems when it comes to footing the bill for our statutory pension schemes.

Member States where supplementary schemes are under-developed compared to statutory pension schemes will feel the pinch most.

Unfortunately, we are forced to note that this is the case for the majority of Member States.

A developed collective system of supplementary pensions, compulsory if so required by the relevant Member State, considerably reduces the dependence on demographic factors and enables the pension fund, in the role of investor, to derive maximum benefit from the possibilities which financial markets have to offer.

Needless to say, the objective of making employees more mobile and flexible within a large single European market and the euro zone will inevitably lead to interest in supplementary pension schemes.

One of the philosophies underlying the European Union and the Monetary Union requires that the internal market should be used to the full.

As such, you, as a worker, should be able to take your accumulated pension rights with you to another European country.

To this end, we need to develop a legal framework at European level at the earliest opportunity. Why should a German employee, for example, have to wait ten years before he has built up a pension and a Dutch person only one year?

As such, this German person suffers a considerable handicap with regard to mobility.

What is more, the fiscal treatment of pensions at the time when contributions are made and at the time of payout should be brought into line.

Commissioner, you deal with taxes, what is the latest on this score?

I have to say that this parliamentary discussion seems to be more about a complete harmonisation than coordination.

This, unfortunately, is at the expense of Member States which already have their house in order.

One such country is the Netherlands, initially presented as a role model for all other Member States and gradually relegated to curiosity status.

But the Dutch system is a worthy system which accepts old age, surviving dependants and vulnerable groups within the labour market as they are.

The supplementary pension scheme is based on collective feeling and solidarity.

This enables SMBs - and specifically SMBs with reference to the UK MEPs - to cover biometric risks at relatively low cost.

Top of the list are payability and security, which is not the case for the proposals submitted by some MEPs.

Mr Bolkestein, how do you intend to bring the discussion back to the crux of the matter, namely mobile pensions for mobile people?

Mr President, firstly can I say that the EMAC report is pretty good and I hope we do not amend it too much.

The key word is "supplementary" pensions.

We are not trying to relieve poverty or provide a basic income in retirement.

The second point is that it is important that we provide decent pensions to enable citizens to move around Europe.

So I welcome the emphasis on removing the restrictions on the investment of pension fund portfolios and support the objective of removing barriers to labour mobility.

The key is to keep it simple or it will not work, it will not remove the obstacles.

As Mr Tannock has said, there are demographic pressures upon us and it is in our interest to facilitate the development of supplementary pension schemes both around Europe and also in many countries within Europe.

On the issue of biometric risks, which we have heard a lot about, clearly a pension by definition has one biometric risk, which is longevity.

Once you start building on top of that, you are on dangerous ground if you make it a condition of a passport.

What we need is to have a very simple proposition, and then let the market sort the rest of it out because that is what the market is for.

The biometric risks problem means many different things to different people.

We must try and get a simple product which is marketable and can be moved around this market, because if we do not, we will end up with a product that does not work at all that the different Member States cannot make use of.

So the key is to keep it simple and make it work.

Mr President, for how long will workers be forced to sacrifice one-third of their salary to government and state pension funds, in the hope of receiving a pension in their old age, while those government and state funds are so designed that they make pensions vanish faster than Houdini himself could have done?

Mrs Laguiller, the people trusted the states and the governments, especially the pledges made by left-wing governments, but they have been left with peanuts.

Every day, thousands upon thousands of elderly people reach retirement age and ask their governments, "Where are our pensions?"

And the governments reply, "You are living too long and there is no more money left to give you" , concealing the truth.

The governments have squandered the funds and made off with the workers' salaries.

Shame on the Socialist governments for failing to provide for workers in their old age!

Despite the fact that there may now be a way of safeguarding this capital - the sweat of the brows of the workers - by capitalising pension funds, we are told that we must not do this, because the national governments want to get their hands on private pension funds as well.

It is time to change the tune. We must give to Caesar what is Caesar' s and to God what is God' s.

Mr President, we are facing a difficult issue, as evidenced by the large number of speakers.

I would like to extend warm thanks to Mr Kuckelkorn as rapporteur, for the huge effort he has made to achieve this report.

I am slightly less pleased with Mr Kuckelkorn' s tabling of amendments, because he has tabled a great many and they go beyond the requirements of the current objective.

I think that we should differentiate between the two Kuckelkorns.

I believe that the systems we should pursue in Europe should be based on two principles.

One of them is simply the statutory pay-as-you-go system and the other is the system of capital cover which is an extension of the former, it is just that the only problem we are facing is that all countries have very different starting positions.

It is true that a country such as the Netherlands has managed to strike a fine balance between the two. Other countries have managed to do this to a lesser extent.

Also, for example, countries where nearly all pensions are capital cover systems, such as Great Britain, do not meet expectations because, although the risks for the government are reasonably small, the cover for the retired is extremely modest.

In England, if there is a hard frost, for example, people are unable to pay their bills.

I do not think that this is the right way forward.

First and foremost, we need to remember that this is about people and based on this, we must develop a system which makes sound pension schemes possible, and we must, as far as we can, leave this task to the Member States.

We should keep intervention to a minimum.

We need to bear our starting point in mind, namely that if people move from one country to another to work or retire, it should be possible for them to take their pensions with them.

The Commission has always attempted to do this and I do believe that it has succeeded in its aim.

I think that two issues still need tackling.

Firstly, risks tied in with the second and third pillars should be sufficiently covered, because far too little has been said about this.

Secondly, the first pillar should at long last be defined, as the first pillar in one country is quite different from that in another country.

And if we could bring all of this a bit closer together, we would perhaps have far fewer problems than we have at the moment.

Mr President, may I start by extending warm thanks to both rapporteurs, Mr García-Margallo y Marfil and Mr Kuckelkorn, for the reports they have drafted and the efforts they have made.

In fact, could I also warmly thank all other speakers this evening - nearly thirty of them - for the comments they have made and questions they have asked.

This is an important matter, both the action plan for financial services and the pension issue, and it is heartening to see so many speakers take part in the exchange of opinions.

As far as Mr García-Margallo y Marfil' s report is concerned, I would like to note that, according to the Commission, it is an even-handed report which strikes the right balance between an important political vision and the technical measures required in order to make progress.

Perhaps you will allow me to make a few observations in this respect. I hope, at the same time, to comment on the amendments which have been tabled.

The Commission welcomes the attention which the report pays to the need for capital markets to function to optimum effect.

In this context, I would also refer to Parliament' s request for streamlined rules for stock market access, market manipulation and revision of the investment services directive.

The opening up of financial markets should, naturally, go hand in hand with an adequate level of consumer protection, and this was also requested this evening in this debate.

They are thus parallel processes, with liberalisation on one side and consumer protection on the other, and these are the two objectives which you will find wherever financial markets are at issue.

These are the European Commission' s twin objectives.

We also have a few specific proposals in this respect.

Firstly, we would propose the provision of better information on financial products for citizens.

Secondly, we would like to see better and clearer dispute procedures for citizens who are dissatisfied with foreign financial dealers.

Thirdly, we would propose better harmonisation for the present national consumer protection rules.

The fourth proposal concerns electronic commerce, or e-commerce for short.

Policy and legislation should make provision for e-commerce without creating unnecessary barriers.

Our citizens, on the other hand, must experience the same level of confidence and protection for transactions on-line as they do off-line.

Finally, an adequate supervisory structure is essential to guarantee the financial solvency of our institutions. Does this mean that the European Central Bank in Frankfurt will be given a central supervisory role?

The ECB itself is of the opinion that this is not necessary.

There is in fact an alternative, to wit, a coming together of supervisory systems.

At this juncture, Mr President, I would like to bring up a remark made by Mrs Randzio-Plath.

Mrs Randzio-Plath has picked up some noises from the OECD and mentioned the word mega-risk.

Indeed, I think she is right to indicate the risks which can be inherent in financial movements.

She has referred to large mergers which are taking place and, without necessarily sharing her view regarding these risks, I would also like to refer to statements made by Mr Lamfalussi, who is well-known within the European financial system, and who has also indicated the need to be able to cope adequately with the financial risks and system risks which are heading our way.

This is a very important matter.

I still believe that coordination, cooperation and harmonisation of supervisory systems are enough to withstand the risks, but, once again, in the interest of the case itself, I would like to draw the attention of Mrs Randzio-Plath and other members of this meeting to a report recently drafted by Mr Brouwer, second-in-command at the Central Bank in the Netherlands.

This report was commissioned by the Economic and Financial Committee, which, as you are aware, is the gateway to the ECOFIN Council, and the report deals with financial stability.

The report will be made available shortly. No doubt you will be able to find it on the Internet.

This report deals with the issue which is close to Mrs Randzio-Plath' s heart and once again, I would strongly recommend all members attending this meeting to read it.

Well, most of the points I mentioned a moment ago can be found in the draft report of the rapporteur, Mr García-Margallo y Marfil, and also in many of the tabled amendments.

In sum, I would like to say that we will undoubtedly continue to discuss the nuts and bolts but as far as the main points are concerned, I do consider Mr García-Margallo y Marfil' s report as welcome confirmation of the Commission' s vision.

I would now like to say a few words on the way in which a number of these measures need to be implemented, the need to take a close look at our legislative ethos and the way in which legislation is established.

Everyone is currently in agreement that we need to drop over-complicated, fossilised legislation, in other words, rules which cannot keep pace with fast market development.

Accordingly, the process by which the European Union, i.e. the concerted efforts of Commission, Parliament and Council, lays down rules should be quicker. But how exactly can this be done?

There are quite a few different ideas and quite a few misconceptions, because if Mr García-Margallo y Marfil tells me that the European Parliament does not want to give up any of the powers it has only recently acquired, then I naturally share his view.

I myself have been a Member of Parliament for a long time, so I fully understand where Mr García-Margallo y Marfil is coming from.

In fact, this is not the Commission' s intention, even if it was authorised to take decisions in this respect, which is not the case.

Nonetheless, we need to proceed faster in order to lay down the necessary rules.

I would invite the Members of this Parliament to come up with any ideas as to how we could speed up and enhance the process. Should we make more use of comitology procedures?

Should more weight be given to agreement reached between the institutions upon first reading?

At any rate, the Commission intends to keep Parliament and the competent committees informed of the agendas more quickly and more effectively, so that these agendas can be better harmonised and we can speed up the drafting of the required legislation.

In any event, I would like to keep this Parliament informed of all the developments regarding the action plan.

Every six months, we send a progress report to the ECOFIN Council and it seems to me that these reports could be used to exchange views with Parliament on this matter.

Mr President, most speakers have expressed their thoughts on the issue of pensions and I would like to say the following on this matter.

In its communication on pensions, the Commission has included proposals on three fronts.

The first area is prudential rules for pension funds, and protecting pension scheme members should take centre stage.

There is no question that rules could be introduced which could threaten the rights of future pensioners.

However, this does not detract from the fact that investment and management rules can also serve the interests of people other than pension scheme members.

In fact futile provisions that inhibit the results of investments, do pension scheme members no favours and must be repealed for this reason.

Secondly, the coordination of national tax systems is a condition for cross-border participation.

Mrs Peijs has asked me when we are getting mobile pensions for mobile people?

Other Members too, such as Mr von Wogau and others, have talked about the need to enhance the mobility of workers within the European Union.

As already stated, this does not require harmonisation (a word we need to use with discretion because it conjures up incorrect associations in certain Member States) so much as coordination.

So it requires the coordination of tax systems which differ in terms of tariffs.

This coordination is a precondition for cross-border labour mobility.

The Commission is in the process of drafting a proposal, a general framework, intended to facilitate the payment of contributions by occupational pension institutions which are located in other Member States.

This general framework has also been requested, of course, in this meeting by Mr Medina Ortega, for example, while Mrs Peijs has also indicated the need to set up this general framework.

Moreover, I would like to refer to the constant jurisprudence of the Court of Justice.

This jurisprudence has demonstrated that the restrictions which apply to cross-border contributions and premiums are at odds with the Treaty.

The Commission' s third objective is to remove the obstacles which migrant workers are faced with.

More than anything, and this is also underlined in the draft report - rightly so - we should facilitate the transferability of rights from one Member State to another, and this is also very much in the interests of employee mobility, of course.

Mr President, concerning the motion for a resolution, I would first of all like to remark that this Parliament' s support is crucially important if we want to translate these proposals into specific measures.

It was with great interest that I read the sterling report of the rapporteur, Mr Kuckelkorn, and the competent committees, a report that so far has covered an extensive and technically complex area.

I did not fail to notice that Parliament is backing the lines of policy proposed by the Commission.

With regard to the motion for a resolution, I would like to make the following brief comments.

The motion presses for the general introduction of the tax levy model that relies on the taxation of the pension payout whilst providing for tax exemption for contributions to the fund and returns on the fund.

The desirability of this model was once again underlined this evening by Mr Blokland, among others.

Mr Blokland pointed this out and I share his view on this.

This is also echoed in the motion for a resolution.

Agreement on this approach would solve the problems of either double taxation or no taxation, which is what citizens and Member States are struggling with at the moment.

However, I would like to point out that this issue, as is known, only and exclusively concerns the competences of the Member States and, as such, falls outside the scope of the European Commission.

The Commission should ensure, however, if different systems continue to coexist in future too, that this does not have any adverse effects on workers exercising their right to mobility within the Union.

Regarding the amendments tabled, I would like to stress one point in particular, namely the scope of the future proposal - as the directive is not yet finished - for a directive regulating the activities of occupational pension funds.

In other words, the question is, and many Members attending this evening' s meeting have spoken about this, Mrs Kauppi, in particular: should this proposal, which we are about to disclose, provide for all forms of pension schemes or should it simply be restricted to pension scheme products which cover the members against biometric risks?

My answer to this is as follows, I hope it is clear: we need European prudential standards for all forms of occupational pension schemes.

These standards will differ in certain aspects according to the risks actually covered by the institutions.

But there is not one single technical reason why these different types of savings schemes could not be combined in one and the same directive.

It would, in my view, be incorrect - and the European Union would impose artificial restrictions on itself - if the Commission were to restrict the directive to be proposed to pension schemes which only cover biometric risks and if it were to exclude other pension provisions which, although they are full pension provisions because they cannot be collected before pensionable age, should nonetheless still be excluded from the directive, according to a number of delegates.

I believe that this is not right.

I think that the European Union would not do itself any favours if the subject of the directive were to be limited to biometric risks and I can honestly see no reason why other forms of pension schemes could not be included in the same directive, as I pointed out a moment ago.

Well now, Member States are thus given every opportunity to give certain pension products preferential treatment by using tax incentive measures, for example.

They can also demand that the products offered on their market, even if the institutions offering the service are based in another Member State, meet certain social criteria.

Employees and employers within one company or one sector are free to choose, according to the benefits and drawbacks of the products available on their market.

In other words, there is still a large degree of freedom for the Member States to arrange the pension systems within their own country as they see fit.

The Commission' s ambition is to create, I repeat, one framework which liberalises the setting up and scope of pension funds for the benefit of all the members of such pension funds.

Accordingly, we need to set up this legal framework within the European Union which enables businesses and future pensioners to choose the products on offer within a transparent market by institutions which are adequately supervised.

Adequate supervision is crucial, as is liberalising the scope of pension funds.

It is not up to the Commission to specify a pension product in every detail. Indeed this is a matter which falls under the subsidiarity principle, and the European Commission would not wish to do anything which could compromise this principle.

Mr President, I would like to ask the Commissioner if he could also reply to my question.

I have been waiting for a reply for one and a half hours now.

I would, at long last, like to have a response to my question on cash management and the solution to this problem which is particularly hitting small and medium-sized businesses.

Mr President, I would prefer to address Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel' s issue when I respond to the report on the internal market.

This would, however, mean that Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel would have to stay even longer at this meeting.

This is not such a bad thing, in my opinion.

In the final analysis, many remarks made in this meeting will also be of interest to Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel, but since she has reminded me of this question, which, as I have already said, I would have addressed at a later stage, let me just say that this is of course an issue pertaining to the internal market.

It is true that small and medium-sized businesses are facing obstacles in their cross-border activities.

The Commission is acutely aware of this.

Needless to say, the scope of the internal market is intended to facilitate cross-border activities for small and medium-sized businesses.

The new strategy for the internal market comprises one hundred or so measures, many of which will be beneficial to small and medium-sized businesses.

But if Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel would like to approach me with specific problems relating to small and medium-sized businesses which are not covered in the new strategy for the internal market, I shall make every effort to address these points to her satisfaction.

The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.

Strategy for Europe' s Internal Market

The next item is the debate on the report (A5-0098/2000) by Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi, on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market, on the communication from the Commission to the European Parliament and the Council: The Strategy for Europe' s Internal Market [COM(1999) 464 - C5-0212/1999 - 1999/2167(COS)]

Mr President, Commissioner, the report which I have the honour to present is the result of an extraordinary collaboration - which I am grateful for - between people and committees.

Allow me to make two observations: the Committee on Legal Affairs has not accepted all the suggestions of the committee asked for an opinion.

We were in complete agreement with most of them and they seemed to us to be very interesting, but we consider that this resolution was not the right place for them and that, by incorporating them, its message would be less clearly expressed.

That has been my criterion for recommending a vote in favour of the amendments presented in this House.

I therefore insist - and the opinion of the Committee on Fisheries is a good example of this - that they have not been included in the resolution, not because I reject their content, but because the message in relation to the internal market strategy had to be clearly expressed.

That message stems from the position adopted by the Committee on Legal Affairs in our resolution of 4 November 1999.

If you will allow me, Mr President, I will concentrate on three ideas.

The first concern of the Committee on Legal Affairs -and I hope this House will ratify it tomorrow - is the concept of the situation of the internal market.

What does the internal market mean to European construction?

These days we hear the siren song of globalisation and together with that goes the idea that we are international.

The internal market appears to have become very small in this new globalised economy.

Nothing could be further from the truth.

This document on the strategy for the internal market expresses this very clearly.

The internal market is Europe' s platform in the world.

The internal market embodies the key principles of a globalised economy with advantages for Europe in terms of competition.

That is the first message of the Committee on Legal Affairs.

We need to put the emphasis on the principles of the internal market: the principle of proportionality, the principle of mutual recognition, the principle of control of origin.

These must be the great pillars upon which this strategy for the internal market is built.

We will not make the headlines with this, but it is important nonetheless.

The application and control of Community legislation is also important. The Member States must cooperate in this application.

We must oppose procedures which are used too frequently, such as 'gold plating' .

We need to strengthen our infringement procedure, we need to consolidate it, make it more transparent and more accessible.

We ask that decisions on the outcome of infringement proceedings be explained and that Parliament be informed of them.

We ask that infringement cases be processed more quickly and that they be more effectively presented to the citizen.

The second message of this resolution is that we need to make the present, rather disorganised laws, which the citizens see as a burden, into a genuine legislation, a coherent and clear framework of rules and regulations, without any overlapping or contradictions.

These contradictions are seen by the citizen and by industry as burdens, as a lack of clarity in the message regarding the direction we are taking.

Lastly, the third message is a change in the business culture in Europe.

We need businesspeople who are more willing to take risks.

To this end we will have to change certain laws, such as for example the European laws on insolvency in general, on the suspension of payments and bankruptcy.

We need to put the emphasis on the creation of a genuine capital risk market.

We need to convince young Europeans, as young Americans are already convinced, that the best option is not to join a large company, on a long-term basis, but to create new companies.

In all of this, electronic commerce, the Internet and new technologies must offer a good platform.

Finally, Mr President, to sum up, I hope that tomorrow, on voting for the resolution, Parliament will send a clear message.

We are behind the Commission in this initiative and of course we want to participate in the whole process, permanently, cooperating, offering ideas and monitoring the situation.

Mr President, once again the European Parliament must express its opinion on the Commission communication on the construction of the internal market, in this case, a new version of it.

A proportion of its content affects the competences of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs.

It is these points which I wish to discuss specifically.

Firstly, I would like to say that, in general, one of the criticisms levelled at previous versions of this documents no longer applies.

The European Parliament' s resolution of 4 November 1999 said that the document was rather unspecific, that it did not contain specific actions.

This new version does contain specific measures and proposals.

Let us then analyse the content of these proposals, albeit in general terms.

With regard to taxation, the opinion of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs is that the Communication is not ambitious enough, especially when compared to previous documents.

We are aware of the stumbling blocks encountered in relation to the tax package and that some of its chapters have been blocked, but in situations such as this large doses of political courage are necessary to push proposals forward.

We notice a lack of such political courage in this document since the chapter on tax simply reproduces previous Commission commitments, and even leaves aside some of the European Parliament' s proposals.

Secondly, in relation to the rules on competition, the Communication opts for deepening the process of reform underway, and this deserves our support.

Finally, in the chapter on financial services, it should be highlighted that up to now important progress has been made but, as indicated in the recent single market scoreboard, there is still a lot to be done.

Mr President, as draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs, it is natural that I should speak about the problems which the strategy for developing the internal market may pose from a social point of view.

We are starting with a European social model - which is a national model - and we are transforming the economic structure of that society.

In doing so, we are concerned that the effort to liberalise should not transform the essence of the current European social model.

An example of this can be found in an area as apparently banal as urban transport.

If urban transport is not subjected to political considerations and the intervention of local authorities, for example, straightforward liberalisation could make it practically impossible for us to reach our workplaces.

We have had examples such as the case of Venezuela where a strictly private system of public transport led to a profound social and political crisis in that country.

For example, when public services and public companies are privatised and those public companies come to be controlled by a private sector which in reality replaces the state monopoly with a private monopoly, liberalisation may not come about effectively at all.

Liberalisation by means of privatising public companies may end up consolidating dominant positions and private monopolies which in my opinion may offer fewer benefits than a monopoly conceived in the public interest.

Another aspect - which we referred to in the recent debate on the Kuckelkorn report - is the need to coordinate social protection.

Social protection in a single internal market cannot simply be left to subsidiarity.

Lastly, cohesion also seems to me to be important.

If there is no economic and social cohesion, if we do not balance the quality of life in the different regions of the Community, we may find ourselves in a situation where the European Union is an unfair European Union in which some regions will make more progress and others will be left behind.

This is the basis of the amendments which Mrs Berger and I are presenting, representing the views of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs.

- (ES) Mr President, Commissioner, firstly I would thank the rapporteur for explicitly mentioning the opinion of the Committee on Fisheries, although we regret that it has not been included in the report.

I say this especially, Commissioner, so that you can communicate to the Commission, and particularly to Mr Fischler, the fact that the common fisheries policy is one of the few areas of Community activity where until now very few steps have been taken in the creation of a genuine internal market.

The lack of action is related to the original conception of this policy.

The current Council Regulation No 3760/92 establishing a Community system for fisheries and aquaculture, provides for derogations in respect of the internal market, notably in Articles 6 and 7, which allow derogations from the principle of freedom of access to fishing grounds, so that Member States have the right of exclusive exploitation of their fisheries resources within a 12-mile coastal band, as well as a series of preferential fishing rights, through application of the 'relative stability' principle, which distributes national fishing quotas.

At the same time it lays down restrictions on exercising fishing activities in certain areas known as 'boxes' .

These restrictions on the principle of freedom of action, which were originally intended to be temporary restrictions, have been extended and will be in force until 1 January 2003 as a mechanism to allow certain Member States' fishing industries to adapt to the rules of free competition in an increasingly open and globalised market.

Over 20 years have passed and, as we are about to embark upon a general review of all aspects of the common fisheries policy which, for compelling legal reasons, must take place in 2002, it is now time, I believe, to examine whether the transitional period for adaptation to free competition provided for in the said regulation should be ended.

In my opinion, the fishing industry and the common fisheries policy should also be subject to derogations in respect of the internal market.

Therefore, the principles and fundamental freedoms enshrined in the Treaties should also be applied to fisheries, in other words, the framework of the common fisheries policy should be brought into line with the general legal framework of Community legislation.

Mr President, on behalf of our Group I should like to warmly welcome Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi' s excellent report.

As she said in her introduction, she has made the very wise decision to focus on what are the most critical issues for the creation of the single market.

I want to focus on a couple of the principal points that she makes.

The first one is the need to address, within the Union, the impact of legislation on business.

It is particularly important that we ask the Commission to reinforce its activities, to ensure proper compliance cost assessment and to assess the costs on businesses of the new legislation.

I say to the Commissioner that we do not expect this to be done as an after-thought, after all the departments in the Commission have developed legislation.

It needs to be an integral part of the policy and regulation process.

He must make sure that from now on that a central objective is to help the internal market to move forward.

We were delighted to see a second point on the agenda at Lisbon.

Our committee and, indeed, our Group has been emphasising, since this new Parliament started last year, the need to encourage the development of small- and medium-sized enterprises across the European Union.

Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi' s report emphasises a number of key points such as the need to make business formation cheaper and quicker and the need to remove some of the barriers preventing entrepreneurs from benefiting from the risks of putting capital into starting up new businesses.

I am disappointed to see that our Socialist colleagues are proposing that clause should be taken out of this resolution.

I can assure them that we will vigorously oppose that tomorrow.

I invite colleagues to reject that proposal.

I conclude by confirming that the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market will continue to press vigorously for the speedy completion of the internal market.

I give credit to all our colleagues, across all political groups, for the speed with which we have dealt with the electronic commerce directive this week.

I hope it will demonstrate that we are prepared to work with speed.

I hope that, together, we can really make the internal market work as quickly as possible.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I feel nothing but appreciation for Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi' s clear draft report.

It concisely outlines and highlights the key points from the Commission' s communication on the strategy to be followed for Europe' s internal market.

I would like to highlight some of these points.

The promised dialogue between the Commission on the one hand and business and citizens on the other is to be welcomed because the relationship between the Commission, the European Parliament and society should, after all, be interactive.

In order to keep pace with the present breakneck speed at which technology is developing, it is not only desirable but essential to keep the dialogue going.

So far, the average citizen has had insufficient insight into what drives the Union and what can be gained from European cooperation.

This is why information campaigns are essential. After all, Europe cannot afford to remain a remote spectacle.

Back to basics should be our motto.

The e-Europe initiative praises the use and expertise of Internet and multimedia.

This is very commendable indeed but, rather than just creating a frame, it is more important to give substance to education.

I would like to repeat the words of the French President spoken at the official opening of this Parliament building and I quote: "We must create a citizens' Europe in which each individual gradually comes to see that he or she has a role to play.

We have a duty to build this great common house in which each individual nevertheless feels at home. A house in which everyone lives together, in a spirit of solidarity, but in which each individual retains his or her identity" .

In order to meet these objectives, the residents need to get to know and get a feel for their house, or rather their home.

In order to build a genuine internal market, we should, more than anything, concentrate on promoting the interests of small and medium-sized businesses.

To this day, there are still too many obstacles.

Companies' competitiveness and dynamism depend directly on a regulating climate which is conducive to investment, innovation and entrepreneurship.

Finally, I can only echo the need for SLIM.

Legislation must become simpler and must be written in a clear language.

It would therefore be beneficial to draw up a scoreboard of laws which have been abolished.

Mr President, I would like to speak on a point of order.

During the debate, Mr Harbour referred to an amendment tabled on behalf of Mrs Berger and myself - Amendment No 2, paragraph 22(2).

If I am not mistaken, Mr Harbour said that he was opposed to our amendment.

I believe that there has been a little confusion.

In the Spanish version which I have there is no problem.

The amendment is based on the German text, which causes some concern because it refers to the issue of share options.

I imagine that in the English text which Mr Harbour has there is no problem either.

The Spanish text simply says "remove the barriers imposed on entrepreneurs capitalising on company value through the issue of share options on the stock exchange" .

If this is the correct text, there is really no problem, in which case I would withdraw that amendment and simply ask for the German version to be adapted to what is said in the Spanish text.

Mr President, many thanks for giving me the floor regarding an issue which is very dear to the Commission as a whole and myself, in particular, namely the new strategy for the internal market.

To begin with, I would like to extend my warm thanks to Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi for the ardent support she has shown for the set of measures proposed by the Commission.

The Commission feels confirmed in its intention thanks to this important vote of confidence coming from this Parliament.

Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi has mentioned three topics.

First of all, she stressed the importance of the internal market as a forum in the world, which is essential for the competitiveness of European industry and the European service industry, and she is absolutely right, of course.

This is, in fact, echoed in Mrs Berger' s remarks, who stated that the internal market is not an old hat one can simply take off, the internal market is and will remain essential to European competitiveness as a forum in the world.

Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi' s second remark highlights a number of inconsistencies.

According to her, sometimes one does not know where one stands.

This would be a serious shortcoming if it were true to this extent.

Needless to say, the Commission attempts to establish internal consistency between rules, but it is, of course, possible for rules to be in conflict with one another in certain areas. If this were the case, then the Commission would be more than happy to rectify this situation.

I would like to thank Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi and the other Members for their comments regarding specific inconsistencies between rules. This will enable the Commission to do something about this.

Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi' s third remark concerns the change in culture.

This is an important yet very difficult topic, which predominantly refers to the availability of risk capital, as Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi has also pointed out.

There happen to be bankers in the risk capital industry who believe that Europe has the money but lacks the entrepreneurs.

In other words, according to these bankers I spoke to recently, the bottleneck is not so much due to the availability of capital as to the availability of entrepreneurs. This is tied in with the economic culture.

I happen to disagree with these critics.

The bottleneck is the result of both the availability of risk capital, especially the cost of risk capital, but we are also, of course, lacking the sufficient entrepreneurship.

This is down to Europe' s economic culture which still instils in us the belief that bankruptcy will stay with a young entrepreneur for a long time, while in the United States, as everyone knows, bankruptcy is taken far more lightly.

I hence agree with Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi that something needs to be done to breathe new life into Europe' s entrepreneurial culture.

Moreover, I suspect that in the light of developments, which are termed the "new economy" , an increasing number of, mainly, young people, young entrepreneurs, will be encouraged to start up a business.

After having expressed my thanks once again to the rapporteur, Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi, I would now like to move on to remarks made by Mr Berenguer Fuster.

According to him, the Commission should have more political courage, especially in the fiscal domain.

My response to Mr Berenguer Fuster is: should the Commission have yet more political courage?

What the Commission is trying to bring about is already so hard to achieve.

That does not just pertain to the topic that was under discussion earlier this evening, namely the coordination of taxes and tax legislation regarding pension contributions.

It also concerns the taxation package formulated by my predecessor, Mr Monti.

Moreover, during the discussion of the previous topic, Mr Lipietz remarked that he, and probably his group too, is not prepared to further liberalise the provision of financial services if the package, also known as the Monti package, is not adopted.

I would like to oppose such reasoning which has no foundations in the real world.

It would be an example of cutting off your nose to spite your face, if Parliament or the Commission were to say that they refuse to make further attempts to integrate the financial services if no progress were made in terms of the taxation package.

This would not be the right attitude, in my opinion.

Although Mr Berenguer Fuster has not said this in so many words of course, I would still like to take the opportunity to stress this point.

I ask Mr Berenguer Fuster if he would like the Commission to have yet more political courage?

We are already struggling to achieve what we have proposed.

I would like to see the Commission achieve what it has proposed to do first and then take it from there.

Mr Berenguer Fuster has also said that a great deal still needs to be done in the field of financial services.

And he is right, of course.

Mr Berenguer Fuster is undoubtedly familiar with the action plan for financial services which was adopted on 13 May 1999 and which includes 43 objectives.

We are in the process of achieving these, at least we are in the process of achieving those objectives that need to be achieved this year.

I am hoping, on behalf of the Commission, to make certain proposals regarding pensions, for example - we discussed this topic a moment ago - but also regarding the opening up of markets for postal services, regarding the public provision of goods and services, public tendering etc., before the summer recess. We are truly active in the field which is dear to Mr Berenguer Fuster.

I would now like to comment on a remark made by Mr Medina Ortega.

He said that at present, there is a risk of state monopolies being replaced by private monopolies.

I would like to assure Mr Medina Ortega that this is, of course, by no means the intention.

Replacing a state monopoly by a private monopoly only makes matters worse.

This is certainly not the intention of this Commission.

What the Commission does intend to do, however, is to add substance to the decisions taken by the European Council at Lisbon, namely to free up the markets for gas, electricity, transport and postal services a lot faster.

The Commission is trying to flesh this out and this also means that those state monopolies need to allow for more competition in the fields I mentioned a moment ago.

But, I repeat, the prospect of replacing state monopolies by private monopolies is something which we do not exactly relish.

I would then like to come back to the remarks made by Mr Harbour, who, like Mr Beysen and Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel, was absolutely right to highlight the importance of small and medium-sized businesses and the costs related to running these businesses.

The Commission is aware that, for example, the costs involved in establishing a business or a small business over here far outstrip the costs in the United States.

To give you an idea of the cost difference, it takes an average of five days to set up a small or medium-sized business in the United States.

In Europe it takes far longer, even as long as five months, a ratio of 1 in 30.

This is, of course, directly reflected in the cost.

If we then talk about culture, and I am addressing Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi once again, we need to try to do something about these establishment costs of small businesses very quickly, because otherwise we will naturally come off second-best in the competitive battle with North America.

Finally, I would like to turn to Mrs Berger as I have already responded to Mr Beysen' s remarks concerning small and medium-sized businesses.

I have quoted what Mrs Berger said earlier about the hat which you cannot simply take off.

I like this metaphor because it is true that European citizens have the feeling that this internal market is already in place. They take it for granted and do not give it any further thought.

This could not be further from the truth.

The internal market is far from complete.

We must - and the Commission does, in fact - work on it week in week out and defend it, because the internal market is subject to constant pressure, and the Member States fall back into old, protectionist habits which we need to fight.

Mrs Berger was right to refer to directives which remain in the Council.

We are all familiar with examples of directives which remain in a vacuum for five, ten or even fifteen years because they are not adopted by the Council.

Let us hope that this will change.

If you will allow me to highlight one aspect of it: we all hope, of course, that the difference of opinion which is keeping Spain and the United Kingdom divided over a well-known rock in the Southern half of this continent, will now be resolved.

I read in an article in a Spanish newspaper that the issue is moving in the right direction. This would actually unblock half a dozen directives.

We are all waiting for this moment.

To sum up, on the subject of Echelon, I can assure Mrs Berger that this is completely unrelated to the internal market and does not form any threat to it whatsoever.

Mr President, this concludes my remarks.

Could I once again express my appreciation to the Members of Parliament and the rapporteur, in particular, for the important vote of confidence which we received from Parliament regarding the new strategy for the internal market?

The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.

The next item is the debate on the report (A5-0099/2000) by Mr Graça Moura, on behalf of the Committee on Culture, Youth, Education, the Media and Sport, on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council decision: European Year of Languages 2001 [COM(1999) 485 - C5-0278/1999 - 1999/0208(COD)]

Mr President, I should like to thank Mr Graça Moura for a splendid piece of work and for the energy he has put into drawing up this report. I should also like to thank the Council for being so accommodating and the Commission for the role it has played as mediator, especially just recently.

The Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party is very happy to support initiatives which may create greater awareness of the value of linguistic diversity in the European Union.

It is important that the EU' s citizens should be encouraged to learn foreign languages early on in school and also throughout their lives.

A knowledge of languages is important, for European languages are of great significance to European culture and civilisation, and people need good language skills in order to be able to find employment in EU countries other than their own.

The programme for the European Year of Languages offers a splendid basis for providing information about the many different opportunities there are for learning foreign languages, and it is important.

Mr Graça Moura' s proposal includes the 11 official EU languages, together with a number of other languages recognised by the Member States, including Irish and Luxembourgish.

The Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party also thinks that the programme should include other languages which are actually used in the various Member States, for instance Catalan in Spain and Frisian in the Netherlands.

Finally, in the programme for the European Year of Languages, consideration is also given to the forthcoming enlargement of the Union, something which we in the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party consider to be crucial to all EU programmes.

On behalf of the Group, I can recommend supporting this programme.

Mr President, needless to say, I too would like to thank the rapporteur for his excellent and exquisite work.

I would like to make a few minor observations regarding a European campaign which intends to teach Europeans languages from other communities.

We are all convinced of the usefulness of this exercise, of course.

But the thing that often goes wrong with European campaigns - and fortunately I have not been around long enough as a politician to be unaware how the ordinary citizen reacts to this - is that, very often, they are nothing but an attractive front, pretty to look at but insubstantial.

I would therefore like to think that this campaign will offer something different, and that, more importantly, consideration will be given to why it is so hard for people in Europe to learn languages, and at what stages in their lives they are able to learn languages.

I come from a bilingual country myself and I have met some people in that country who never learn the other language, despite the fact that they attend language classes, sometimes for twelve years, and are still unable to speak another language.

This is a terrible observation to have to make.

I therefore hope that in the course of this year of European languages, research will be carried out into the best language teaching methods and, more than anything, how Europeans can be encouraged to learn the language of the other Europeans using a modern and appealing method.

Mr President, after I too have congratulated the rapporteur, Mr Graça Moura, who has done such a good job that it won the unanimous support of the Committee on Culture, Youth, Education, the Media and Sport, I would like to focus my attention on just one point, namely that in addition to the human, cultural and political advantages, the need to learn more than one language is also of considerable economic benefit.

The report also highlights the findings of all the experts: having a good command of one' s mother tongue and learning classical languages, especially Latin and classical Greek, makes it easier to learn other languages.

I would also add our own mother tongue to the equation.

This great truth emerges from a fact rather unknown to most, that in the English language, for example, there are at least 75 000 words of Greek origin.

I repeat, 75 000 English words derive from classical Greek.

There are a similar number of words in the French language that derive from Greek, and the same is true of most other modern European languages.

It is also certain that Latin is just as important for most European languages.

The English sage, Francis Bacon, said that knowledge is power, so knowledge of the basic languages from which our modern European languages derive improves our general knowledge and reinforces European civilisation, which, besides its humanitarian value, is also a weapon for our survival and prosperity as Europeans in a globalised economy.

Besides, the contemporary German professors, August and Werner-Karl Heisenberg, have characterised both classical and modern Greek as the mother and nurturer of human civilisation.

I believe that revival of the teaching of Latin and classical Greek in middle education will also provide a cultural shield for the younger generations against the onslaught of the generally levelling effect of the American cultural message, so that only its positive elements are preserved.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I would like to thank the rapporteur.

The European Year of Languages is important and worthwhile.

All the languages of Europe are equally valuable and worthy of respect in terms of culture.

It could be said that the people who speak the same language share the same mentality.

The mother tongue is not merely a tool of communication, it is in fact more than anything else, it is thought itself.

Language is the most peaceful way of communicating.

Independence is language and language is independence.

The Kurds are a nation with no land or borders of their own, kept together only by language.

It is the most important bond for a nation.

Large countries, and many smaller ones too, often tyrannise others through language.

It is a means of occupation.

The legislation regarding language in my country is among the most liberal in the world.

We have seen how two different foreign languages have twice been proclaimed the official language; only at the beginning of last century did our language, Finnish, become the official one.

That is why we have guaranteed the important status of minority languages.

The multilingual nature of the European Union is thus a source of wealth.

At the same time it is also the right of each citizen in each Member State.

The multilingual nature of Europe must be preserved after enlargement too; there are no obstacles to this.

It is wrong to think that a multilingual environment is costly and ineffective.

Translation is not costly; it is the most effective practical instrument of peace.

Mr President, in addition to congratulating the rapporteur, I would like to highlight in this debate that the idea for this celebration originates from the Council of Europe, an institution with a particular sensitivity towards the cultural and social aspects of the old continent, which, with its initiative of increasing the knowledge and use of more languages by Europeans, hopes to promote understanding and tolerance and bring citizens closer together.

When we speak of European languages, let us not forget that this does not only mean the official languages of the Member States.

In Europe, many other languages are spoken, some of them thousands of years old such as Euskera in the Basque Country or Gaelic, whose origins have been lost in the mists of time, and others such as Catalan, Galician and Alsatian, which is spoken right here in Strasbourg.

This initiative should also benefit all these other regional and minority languages, and the bodies created by the Member States to organise participation in the European Year of Languages must also include representatives of these other languages, which are also European, and which are the essence and lifeblood of the wealth of our unity in diversity.

Furthermore, the learning of languages leads to an awareness of our cultural diversity and contributes to the eradication of xenophobia, racism and intolerance, which forms part of our Community objectives.

Mr President, I would like to thank the Commission and, at the same time, the rapporteur, Mr Graça Moura, for having permitted so many amendments, many of them open to broadening the scope of the Year and extending it to rural areas and the least favoured areas.

However, I would also like to express certain concerns with regard to the economic restrictions.

I would recommend that many projects be allowed since it is clear that cultural projects attract a lot of investment from Autonomous Regions and private initiatives which we cannot afford to lose.

I would also ask, in this era when emotions often take precedence over good sense, that we do not support projects which are aimed at exclusion and the use of language to support positions which often seek to cause divisions between people, when the objective of this programme is to unite people.

I would also like to see the European Union begin to take great care of languages which have no country, maternal languages which often have no school and no teachers; languages which are spoken throughout Europe, which no state accepts and which will never become official.

I am referring, for example, to Ladino and Yiddish.

These languages furthermore do not have any media of their own.

Of the 150 languages which are spoken in Europe, we should make a list of those which are only transmitted from mothers to their children, which are only spoken in a domestic setting and which, currently, with the invasion of the media and with the official use of languages in schools, will have very few years to live.

I would like this European Year of Languages to be opened up to them as well and that a space be made for them so that they may be considered in any other future programmes which may take place.

Mr President, I should like to address my remarks on languages to my fellow Members, of course, but also to our interpreters, who enable this Parliament to function, to the rapporteur, of course, not for his work as rapporteur but because he is also a poet in this Parliament and, moreover, as I have discovered, one who speaks my mother tongue perfectly.

What better rapporteur could there be?

When one is a new Member of the European Parliament, as I am, one finds oneself dealing with all sorts of things: chocolate, end-of-life vehicles, the qualified majority, dried beans, Spanish lentils, anything and everything.

Then, suddenly, one finds that one is going to have to deal with something that gives Europe its historic and cultural depth, namely its languages.

And when one looks back at the great periods in history, and I am thinking here of the Renaissance, that great age of trade and commerce, what remains of that era today are the cultural achievements, the artefacts of our heritage, and thus will it ever be.

In terms of languages, Europe has known times when a single language predominated: Latin, and also French.

Now it tends to be English.

So what are we to tell our fellow citizens for this year 2001.

Let me just briefly mention a few points.

Firstly, that European unity may not mean linguistic unity.

Next, that every language is deserving of respect and deserves to be promoted and defended.

This is applicable to any amount of things: monuments, objects, you name it. Why should it not be the case for mankind' s best and most lasting achievement, i.e. his method of communicating with his neighbour?

And then, all languages are learnt within the family first of all.

This is why we call them "mother tongues" , and no State, whatever it may be, may have the direct, indirect, explicit or implicit goal of destroying one of its mother tongues, or of allowing it to disappear.

Furthermore, finally, without linguistic diversity, there is no Europe, because this is also one of the few, and perhaps the only, parliament in the world which operates in eleven languages, to the extent that occasionally we speak in this House for the purpose of being interpreted and not to be heard in the original.

It is up to us to construct this dialectic of European unity and its linguistic diversity.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, it is a sound report, that much I can say.

I too would first like to thank Mr Graça Moura, but I would also like to highlight the excellent cooperation there has been between the Council, the Commission and Parliament on this issue, all in an effort to be able to take a speedy vote on this report.

This illustrates that everyone has recognised that there is an urgent need to develop EU citizens' knowledge of languages, and also to encourage them to learn new languages.

Languages reflect the diversity of the European Union.

Mastering these languages generally helps one to learn the others.

I come from the region of Trier - it borders Luxembourg and Belgium and France is not far away either - and it is in fact essential for us to speak the language spoken by our neighbours.

Many people work in Luxembourg, or do business with Belgium and France.

Knowledge of languages should not just be viewed as an aspect of interpersonal relations, for it has quite considerable economic potential, particularly in the context of the internal market and globalisation.

If I want to gain access to a particular market then I have to speak and understand the language of the market participants.

In some parts of our region, for example, children learn the languages of our neighbours as early as the kindergarten stage through play.

Children are fast learners and I believe we ought to be able to put this to good use.

In addition to a comprehensive information campaign, we must also propose concrete actions.

Educational measures must be improved, teachers must be given the right training and coaching, and it must not just be a matter of personal preference as to whether they take this step or not.

The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.

The next item is the debate on the report (A5-0100/2000) by Mrs Gröner, on behalf of the Parliament Delegation to the Conciliation Committee, on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a European Parliament and Council decision establishing the Community action programme for youth [C5-0116/2000 - 1998/0197(COD)]

Mr President, I am very pleased to add my support and my group' s support to this report.

This report had a long gestation period.

But the fact that we are still here so early in the morning is a tribute to the rapporteur' s work on this programme and, indeed, that of the Commissioner and the Portuguese presidency - which has shown itself to be committed to youth, to the voluntary service and to education in its broadest sense.

The report we have ended up with now is more closely targeted, with an emphasis on social protection and, as the rapporteur has said, a more flexible approach than in earlier reports.

We also have more money in the programme in recognition of its importance.

We will always ask for more money.

It is perhaps Parliament' s role to ask for more.

But we can be pleased with the outcome.

We can be sure that whatever money we have in this programme will be directed at youth and will, in the long-term, be money well spent.

I agree with the rapporteur that this money and this programme will ensure that the efforts are targeted not just at some small sections of society but, as the Commissioner said in a previous report, at all sections of society.

We must look to those who will benefit most and those who are in greatest need and who might otherwise be socially excluded.

We are delighted that some candidate countries of Central and Eastern Europe will benefit as well.

We can be pleased with our efforts and pleased with this report.

In seven years' time we will look back at the youth of today who will have benefited from this report and be pleased that this was the beginning of real progress.

Mr President, I should like to thank Mrs Gröner for her splendid work and for the personal, almost passionate commitment she has shown in preparing the present report.

I should also like to thank the Council and the Commission for contributing to our at long last achieving a good result.

The Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party is very happy to support those initiatives which give young people in Europe opportunities to acquire knowledge, skills and qualifications which will help form the basis of their future development.

The strength of the programme is, of course, that, by means of cross-national exchanges, it encourages young people to contribute actively to further European integration.

It will also lead to understanding of the cultural and linguistic diversity within the European Union.

I also think that the programme will ensure that the fundamental values upon which the European Union is founded will continue to be propagated.

Through increased communication between young people in Europe, the programme will indirectly help combat xenophobia and increase respect for human rights.

Finally, the Community' s action programme for youth also gives consideration to the forthcoming enlargement of the Union, something which we in the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party believe to be of crucial importance to all EU programmes.

I would recommend that we support this programme.

Mr President, I also commend the report and thank Mrs Gröner for the excellent effort she has made.

It is a very good report.

Youth is the sector in our Community that is so often ignored.

Indeed in the Committee on Culture, Youth, Education, the Media and Sport it is the "Cinderella" sector of funding, as with sport.

We hope that imbalance will be redressed.

The insufficient commitment to youth affairs from the Council, when the European Parliament was calling for EUR 980 million, shows, in my view, this grave disparity and the lack of commitment on the part of the Council to a very important sector.

The danger, in this regard, with the changes that are proposed, of combining two programmes - Youth for Europe and the European Voluntary Service - is that several good parts of both those programmes might be lost.

I hope that does not happen.

We should include the best parts of those excellent initiatives in whatever programme we formulate in future.

The new Youth Programme emphasises the developing links with the youth of entrant countries.

The bridges built between youth will be the bridges that eventually unite Europe.

The agreement to constantly review the situation is an initiative that I welcome.

When more funds are needed, budgets should not be cast in stone but be flexible so that they can be amended in the best interests of the deserving needs of youth.

What more deserving cause could there be than supporting youth in the European Union.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, As someone who has become involved in politics through student, youth and educational work, I am delighted that the "Youth" action programme is making an important contribution to fostering a knowledge-based culture within Europe.

We welcome the exchange programme because it reinforces mutual trust between the young people of different countries and encourages mutual tolerance, and a willingness to cooperate and show solidarity.

What goes on in the heads of young people of today has a special resonance for the future development and functioning of the European Union and European consciousness.

I am emphasising these two aspects because, as Mrs Pack has already said, the sanctions against Austria are having most impact on cultural organisations, and the educational and scientific spheres, as well as on scientific cooperation.

This contradiction illustrates how un-European and discriminatory these sanctions are, and how much they conflict with the Community of law and values.

We endorse the "Youth" action programme and reject the uncalled-for sanctions against Austria!

Mr President, I would like to join all those who have congratulated the rapporteur, Mrs Gröner, who has produced an excellent report, full of commitment, on behalf of young people.

In her task she has enjoyed the very strong support of the members of the Committee on Culture, Youth, Education, the Media and Sport.

I offer them my thanks for their work.

The Youth programme is crucial to the European Union, as you have all already said, because it is a unique programme, in which all young people, without distinction, can participate.

I would like to reassure all Members who have spoken about possible sanctions.

In the Youth programme and in the way it is implemented, there will be no sanctions against anyone, and that includes young Austrians, who will not be discriminated against.

The programme has ambitious objectives, which are essential to the development of the idea of European citizenship.

This programme will encourage and consolidate the continuation and development of innovative actions at Community level and will help to improve the quality of the action undertaken on behalf of young people.

It therefore represents a useful instrument in assisting a policy of cooperation and will contribute to the process of European integration.

In addition to ensuring that the programme is effectively implemented, I wish to make a commitment before this House that I will encourage a process of structured and regular cooperation with Member States, in order to work towards drawing up action plans that are up to the task of the challenges, and without which the programme would be less effective.

Mr President, I wish to take this opportunity to talk about the youth policy of the future.

In fact, I stood before you for the first time last September.

I spoke of the White Paper on the European Union' s youth policy, which is a priority.

I would now like to clarify the role of this White Paper and the role of political catalyst that youth policy must play in the future.

I hope to prepare the White Paper on the basis of broad consultation with the different parties concerned and when I say the parties involved I mean above all young people.

That is why, at the Youth Council on 23 November last year, I proposed to the Member States' Ministers for Youth that they hold national meetings of young people during the first half of 2000.

This proposal was very warmly received by all the Member States and these meetings are being organised at the moment.

Most Member States have already set dates for them and most of them have also assured me that these meetings will be open, with the participation of all possible parties including, of course, Members of the European Parliament.

These meetings must allow young people to play an active role and to assert their aspirations, their expectations and their opinions, but also their recommendations for political action in the areas that affect them.

The various national meetings will culminate in a huge European meeting which will be held at the beginning of October, under the French Presidency.

At the same time as consulting young people, the Commission hopes to consult those responsible for youth policy at national level.

The Commission hopes that these national authorities will be able to incorporate into their contributions the opinions and expectations of local administrations, which play a considerable role, I believe, in youth policy.

In order to achieve this, the Commission will be holding bilateral meetings with Member States, followed by a discussion seminar with youth leaders.

We will also rely on the various studies on young people, which will be financed under the Youth programme, and the study, already underway, on the status of young people and the situation of youth policy in Europe.

Lastly, I would like to include the European Parliament in this exercise.

The cooperation methods still have to be worked out, but I can assure you as of now that you will be invited to take part in the European meeting of young people and that I will keep you informed on a regular basis on progress in this matter.

To conclude, I would like to emphasise the fact that the consultation process, particularly with regard to young people, will not be a one-off exercise, because the publication of the White Paper will constitute the second stage of this dialogue with the parties involved, and this is a dialogue that I would like to see established on a more permanent basis.

Ladies and gentlemen, there is a considerable amount of work to be done, but it is exciting.

As many of you have pointed out, we are not working for politics here, but for the future of our Union, and I hope that the debate launched by the publication of the White Paper will enable us to strengthen our capacity for joint action in order to implement a genuine strategy for developing the talents of these 80 million young citizens in the European Union, towards whom we have a great responsibility.

The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.

Before the sitting is closed, I would like to thank the interpreters for their generous cooperation this evening, since we have exceeded the time allotted.

(The sitting was closed at 12.45 a.m.)

Principles for recording taxes and social contributions

The next item is the report (A5-0073/2000) by Mr Knörr Borràs, on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, on the Proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation clarifying Council Regulation (EC) No 2223/96 as concerns principles for recording taxes and social contributions (COM(1999) 488 - C5­0220/1999 - 1999/0200(COD)).

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, we are discussing here today a subject of an extremely technical nature, of the type which, at first sight, appears to refer purely to issues involving the adoption and transposal of procedures and terminology within the European Union, which is the political framework to which they are to be adapted, as is the case with certain instruments in the statistical field.

We are all aware, or at least I think we are, that it is important that statistical data is not only reliable, that is, obtained scientifically and rigorously, but also, above all, comparable.

This is particularly true with regard to the shaping of the European single market, a context in which we require statistical data which is comparable and equivalent between the different Member States.

I would even go so far as to say that this is even truer, if that is possible, in view of the enlargement of the European Union, a process in which the availability and comparability of information, particularly statistical and economic information, must be treated as absolutely crucial.

I do not intend to dwell on the qualities of ESA 95 - the European System of Integrated Economic Accounts - nor on the progress which it represented in relation to the previous 1979 system, an issue which I spoke about in the House at the time of my report on the proposed Council Regulation amending the Regulation on the application of the Protocol on the excessive deficit procedure.

What should really be underlined is that, in my view, we must firmly support a Commission proposal which, essentially with regard to an issue as serious as the budgets of the Member States, is inclined to give priority to the revenue actually collected rather than criteria such as the amounts due in the field of taxes and social contributions.

It is common knowledge, or should be common knowledge, that there are occasions when administrations may record, as due, amounts which they will never collect, however many analyses of collectability are made, and this therefore leads to what is tantamount to a concealed falsification of the public deficit.

This is a serious issue which has been debated.

We should remember that in the Parliament of a Member State there was also a great argument between one of the candidates for the presidency and his opponent, and current President, in which the candidate, Mr Borrell, rightly condemned widespread use of the criterion of income which, since it had not been duly corrected, in reality amounted to a concealment of the deficit in the public accounts.

Ending this type of practice requires clear principles, as the Commission proposes, which in addition allow, very correctly in my judgement, for the calculation of income with the option of using amounts collected or the amounts recorded in a tax document.

This course of action by the Commission, which some people attack because in short they believe it does not once and for all end the practices of concealing deficit, in no way intends to distort the assessment of the amounts in the national accounts but, on the contrary, to arrive at the same figure in two different ways.

One, in my view the more correct way, or at least the more academic way, is the criterion of income, with the corresponding provision concerning collectability, set out in paragraph (a) of Article 3 proposed by the Commission, and the other, set out in paragraph (b) of Article 3, is the criterion of cash receipts adjusted to take account of the time difference between the activity and the cash tax receipt at the end of the financial year.

Both calculation procedures should inevitably lead us to the same figure, which will be the outcome of the tax in that financial year.

I would also add that there is no other accounting method which would correctly record revenue in a budget.

On the other hand, it is obvious that the option to use either of the two methods offers the advantage of a speedier adaptation on the part of those who choose one or other of the systems.

Therefore, I consider that the Commission proposal regarding the treatment of taxes and social contributions in the accounts is both the most correct one and, from every point of view, is effective in view of the possibility that it can be applied immediately.

Nevertheless, we believe that, in order to encourage Member States to gather statistical data, even aggregated data, concerning taxes on products, Article 3 of the Commission proposal should deal with this issue by establishing a similar mechanism for recording and adjusting such taxation.

I therefore take a favourable view of the proposal and I congratulate the Commission.

I would like to repeat that the proposal rightly stresses that we should give priority to the revenue actually collected rather than the taxes and social contributions due in the Member States, and allows these two methods of calculation, which make it possible for the systems used by the Member States to be adapted.

A study of the Commission proposal shows that the treatment of taxes and social contributions should indeed follow the two proposed methods.

Finally, I would also like to stress that, consistent with our opinion that the Commission proposal is more an amendment than a clarification and that, moreover, it affects basic concepts, instead of using the procedures under Article 2(2) of Council Regulation 2236/96 of 25 June 1996, for the adoption of changes to the methodology intended to clarify and improve the content of ESA 95, use should instead be made of the introduction procedure set out in Annex A of that regulation.

Ladies and gentlemen, I would like to ask you, and also the Commission, for your help.

I would be grateful if you could please keep strictly to your speaking time, as our timetable is very tight.

Although Commissioners can, of course, talk for as long as they wish, I would ask them to help me in this regard as well, so that we can finish on time.

Mr President, a Europe that is functioning properly needs transparent and comparable statistical material on its Member States, not least with regard to recording taxes and social contributions.

We have rightly reached agreements in this respect in the European system of national and regional accounts, ESA 95.

On closer examination, it now appears that the information recorded on taxes and social contributions is not as precise as was hoped because it does not always correspond to the amounts actually collected or collectable for a particular assessment year.

The aim of the proposal under discussion is to refine the recording procedure by applying a correction factor both to cash data and data evidenced by assessments and assessment registers.

The PPE-DE Group agrees with the Commission proposal in this regard.

In view of the fact that the proposal effectively contains an amendment to the ESA 95 Regulation and that is implicitly acknowledged by the fact that we are applying the codecision procedure, it does seem logical to grant the Member States a transitional period.

The Member States also need time to adjust to new rules.

We have therefore tabled an amendment on behalf of the PPE-DE Group and would ask our colleagues in the House and the Commission as well to support this amendment.

A second question to the Commission concerns the amendments by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs regarding VAT as a basis for calculating the third source of own resources.

I should have liked to hear the Commissioner confirm whether the Commission is indeed drawing up a proposal to amend Article 8 of the ESA 95 Regulation to the effect that all the Member States will, in the future, have an adequate legal basis to use ESA 95 for the calculation of the third source of own resources, that is to say, VAT.

I should like a reply from the Commissioner and also, of course, a response from the Commissioner to our amendment.

Mr President, the Commission' s initiative on presenting this regulation intended to unify the principles for recording taxes and social contributions is very appropriate.

In order for the accounting methods of the different Member States to be homogenous, as the rapporteur has pointed out, they must use the same criteria.

It is true that, in accounting terms, both the cash receipt criterion and the income criterion can be allowed, but it is also true that the former allows for less juggling of the figures intended to distort the true accounts situation of a country.

In short, the cash receipt criterion makes it more difficult to indulge in that accounting trickery which used to be known euphemistically as 'creative accounting' .

It is true that the use of those systems has allowed, for example, certain countries to fulfil the Maastricht criteria, but it is also true that their abuse can distort the picture of a country' s true accounts.

As you know, accounts which do not offer a true picture can be called anything but accounts.

The income criterion, if it is not corrected, for example, by means of the obligation to make provision for non-payment, is an inadequate criterion.

The rapporteur mentioned a debate which occurred in Spain which, in short, resulted from the government claiming ESP 750 000 million in 1997 as social security income, which was theoretically owed but which was clearly never going to be collected.

Thanks to this manipulation of the accounts, to this 'creative accounting' , the deficit criteria for joining the first phase of economic and monetary union were complied with.

Obviously, this juggling of accounts will not be possible if the Commission' s proposal is approved.

It is perhaps for this reason that the Spanish Members from the PPE Group have presented certain amendments and have tried to delay the approval of this report.

It is not a question of revising now what was done in the past.

Ladies and gentlemen, what is done is done.

It is a question of demanding, from now on, greater rigour; it is a question of demanding that accounting figures reflect the true picture of a country' s accounts.

We therefore approve of the Commission' s proposal but we do not approve the PPE' s proposal, which is intended to delay the entry into force of this regulation, or the amendments of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, which, since it considers that the regulation amounts to an amendment rather than a mere clarification, in reality delays its entry into force.

Ladies and gentlemen, if rigour in accounting is demanded, it should be so from the outset.

Mr President, firstly I wish to thank Mrs Thyssen for her gesture and for her defence of the amendment we are presenting.

I also wish to thank and highlight the patriotism of Mr Berenguer and Mr Knörr.

This patriotism is consistent because ESA 95 was adopted by the Socialist government, to whose party the former belongs.

Having said this and leaving aside accusations which are truly libellous at the moment, I would like to defend the idea of an extended transition period of two years.

Anybody who knows anything about accounting and who looks at this text with open eyes will know that this implies a profound change in the basic concepts and the data on the resources of the institutional sectors which affect financial companies, non-financial sectors, public administrations and private individuals.

This change is a complicated change.

As any expert knows, the estimations in accordance with ESA 95 require breakdowns which affect no less than 60 accounting categories.

Secondly, this profound and complex change must be done in a gradual way.

As Mrs Thyssen has pointed out, changing and adapting the accounting rules requires a certain amount of time.

At the end of the day this would lead to a fair change because a sudden change would prejudice those States which have adopted the criterion of income, in other words, those which have, to a greater extent, complied with the regulation which entered into force in 1999.

We are being asked to change a regulation which entered into force a few months ago.

The PPE-DE' s amendment asks for the change to be introduced gradually.

Mr President, I think we would all agree that, if we are to run the Community properly, we need a high-quality statistical base within the Community and the applicant countries.

There has been a broad welcome in the House for this proposal and the apparent ability to give priority to the revenue actually collected rather than the more notional contributions which may be due.

This is certainly a step forward.

It seems logical to use the revenue collected as the basis for determining the actual percentage deficit.

So far as the transition period is concerned, many of us will have sympathy with the need for some form of transition because, clearly, if you amend the regulations in such a way that you move from a system which is being used over a long period of time to a completely new system some time will be required.

However, I hope that the countries of the Union will not use this as an excuse, if it is passed, but seek to implement the new system as rapidly as they can - in other words, two years should be regarded as an exception and as a maximum rather than as the normal ration for the job.

On the treatment of taxes and social contributions, I agree with the rapporteur that this is a relevant way of doing the calculations and that we should take a favourable view of the criteria which the Commission intends to set because of the way in which priority is given.

Overall, this is a useful step forward.

I welcome the commitment of the Commission.

I hope that we can work together and see this translated into Community law with suitable adjustments as soon as possible.

Mr President, this debate confirms the Commission' s opinion that we need to provide for the most comparable and transparent statistics possible, since they are essential for the definition of certain basic lines for our actions, and particularly that we need finance to be clarified with regard to its legal formula.

By proposing these amendments, the Commission intended for the recording of taxes and social contributions within the ESA to be carried out according to equivalent methods and, therefore, that there be no differences in approach between the different national public administrations.

This proposal is basically of a technical nature and is intended to fill the current legislative vacuum which allows for differing interpretations depending on the position adopted by each Member State.

The Commission is very happy that our proposal has received broad support and is happy with the report adopted by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, which I will comment on shortly.

However, I firstly wish to thank especially the rapporteur, Mr Knörr Borràs, for his work, which, on this complex and technical issue, has offered us great support.

The rapporteur stresses in his report that the objective of the proposal is to arrive at the same figure, regardless of the statistical sources used, and in reality this is our objective.

The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs has approved eight amendments and the Commission can accept Amendments Nos 1, 2, 3, 7 and 8 without any difficulty.

There is a ninth amendment, presented later, which I will also comment on.

The Commission would prefer not to maintain Amendments Nos 4, 5 and 6.

The aim of these amendments differs from that of the regulation.

I understand that, insofar as certain elements of the regulation are amended, we could also discuss the model for calculation of VAT used to determine own resources, but we are talking about a radically different problem.

In response to the concerns of the PPE, I would say that, when asking for the withdrawal of these amendments, logically the Commission must commit itself to presenting a proposal at some point to introduce that amendment, which is absolutely coherent, providing for more correct figures, which we hope will be used in the future to calculate the basis of the contribution to own resources.

We hope that this approach will lead to a resolution of the problem raised.

With regard to Amendment No 9, the issue has been studied by the directorate-general of ECOFIN and by Eurostat and, having analysed the problem in detail, I can tell you, Mr García-Margallo, that, in principle, exceptions, in statistical terms, must only be allowed where a Member State is not technically capable of providing data.

This has been the case, for example, with the exceptions allowed for certain Member States within the ESA 95 regulations.

We are therefore talking about a technical problem, of not having the capacity to provide data.

In the case in question, there are no technical difficulties to justify that exception, and the regulation has been substantially amended throughout its negotiation to give it more flexibility, in such a way that, in our opinion, all the difficulties raised by the different Member States can be resolved within the margins of flexibility which the regulation allows.

This is the reason why the Commission does not consider Amendment No 9 to be acceptable.

If everything that has been said here can facilitate a convergence of the positions of both Parliament and the Commission, and if Mr Knörr Borràs and the PPE can withdraw the amendments I have mentioned, we believe that this would allow us to make progress with the adoption of the text which will, without doubt, be positive in terms of clarifying future accounts.

The vote will take place at 11.30 a.m.

The next item is the report by Mr Dary (A5-0093/2000), on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development, on the Proposal for a Council regulation amending Regulation (EEC) No 404/93 on the common organisation of the market in bananas (COM(1999) 582 - C5­0277/1999 - 1999/0235(CNS)).

, rapporteur. (FR) Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, if the Commission' s proposed reform of the COM in bananas, seeking to replace the current system by 'tariff only' , were implemented as it stands, it would lead to the disappearance of ACP producers in the short term and Community producers in the medium term.

At the Seattle Summit and then at the Davos Summit, the people of Europe have been able to observe the inability of the WTO to reconcile financial priorities with their own priorities, which are living conditions, working conditions and the quality of the goods they consume. They would not appreciate it if their representatives not only called those values into question today, but actually went further and reneged, in passing, on the Union' s commitment to its ACP partners.

The banana issue is a perfect example of the difficulties the Union is experiencing in establishing the European model the institutions evoke so often.

In that connection the 1993 COM complied with four essential objectives: ensuring the free movement of bananas in the single market while maintaining reasonable prices for consumers, respecting the Union' s commitment to the ACP countries, maintaining Community preference for Union producers like Martinique, Guadeloupe, the Canaries, Madeira and Crete and, finally, respecting GATT obligations.

Under constant attack since its adoption, this regulation eventually led to several WTO rulings against us, the latest in April 1999.

Always quick on the draw, the United States immediately drew up retaliatory trade measures against Union countries.

To comply with the WTO, the Commission is proposing to go over to a 'tariff only' formula, that is, eliminating quotas and introducing a flat rate tariff at an unknown level.

As we know, this system has already been attacked by the majority of operators and producers from all geographic areas.

We are right to question the grounds for an approach which involves changing the rules of the game in midstream, forcing producers to rethink their production plans and marketing forecasts. That has led us to identify reforms complying with the rules of international trade, but not just dictated by it.

Since 1993, the position of the Community producers has been constantly deteriorating.

The same applies to many ACP countries, traditional suppliers.

It is impossible for these producers to maintain fair competition with the great producers and operators in the international network.

We should also remember that over 60% of the bananas consumed in the Union come from non-ACP third countries.

It is not a question of practising protectionism, but rather of protecting the permanence of a certain method of production.

It is not just the banana we are trying to defend, but a whole production network, which entire regions often depend on to survive.

The margin of manoeuvre is technically narrow, but the choice of a reform model is political.

We need to know what our objectives are.

As I see it, the first priority is to defend the European model at the international level.

That is certainly the position the members of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development unanimously adopted.

Here I would like to thank all my colleagues very warmly for their effective cooperation on this issue, and Mr Westendorp and Mr Fernández Martín for their excellent work too.

As there are no objective reasons for choosing 'tariff only' , I propose to retain the first option in the Commission' s proposal, the 'transitional' option, and implement it without moving on to 'tariff only' , but with a review of the operation of this reformed COM at the end of a ten year period.

The ACP/European Union Partnership Agreement for Development, which replaces the Lomé Convention, provides for a ten-year transition period for the ACP countries, to allow them to conform as closely as they can to WTO rules.

Why should it be any different for bananas?

I also propose ensuring that the level of quotas will not increase the oversupply already noted, and finally, aware that the third quota will henceforth be open to all, I propose increasing the minimum preferential access rate for ACP products to EUR 300.

In any case, accompanying measures are essential to ensure the permanence and viability of Community and ACP production.

I have some suggestions: regionalisation of aid, so as to correct the discrepancies observed between the various areas of Community production, establishment of a cyclone compensation measure, a marketing aid to re-establish the balance with the distribution network for dollar bananas, special support measures for organic production and finally, an acceleration of aid provision.

I hope Parliament will follow the line proposed by the Committee on Agriculture, but we also need the understanding of the Council and the Commission.

Of course, this is not a codecision procedure and the Commission, naturally, can reject all our amendments. At a time when a code of good conduct is being set up between Parliament and the Commission, is it judicious to fail to take account of our opinion, and is it reasonable for either the Commission or the Council to neglect the opinion of the people we represent?

Ladies and gentlemen, as we now have a new report before us and a new team here in the Chamber, I must repeat what I said at the beginning.

I would like to ask for your help in making sure that we finish by 11.30 a.m., as that is when voting time begins, and we cannot overrun.

So I would be grateful if honourable Members could please keep to their speaking time, and I would also ask the Commission to help out here, although they can of course talk for as long as they wish. That way we can finish on time.

, draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy.

(ES) Mr President, I will be very brief. I simply want to say that, when the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy received Mr Dary' s report, after a detailed examination of the problems facing the banana industry, we came to the conclusion in our committee that the solution proposed by Mr Dary met the absolutely fundamental conditions for its success.

Firstly, with regard to the international obligations of the European Union, not only towards the ACP countries, but also within the World Trade Organisation.

As you know, the European Union has been condemned for its regime of granting licences for this product, but has maintained the viability of the quota regime proposed by Mr Dary.

In fact, in the Commission' s current negotiations, it appears that the main suppliers would prefer this system.

On the other hand, this is the system which best defends the principle of multifunctionality of agriculture, protects the European Union producers, also protects the developing countries, with whom we have a very special relationship, is sensitive to the protection of fundamental social regulations and the protection of the environment and, lastly, it is the system which best obeys the principle of consumer protection.

For all these reasons, my committee voted in favour of Mr Dary' s draft report.

Mr President, we all want to see the end of the 'banana war' , but the immense complexity of the problem deceives no one.

Clearly the banana has become a political issue, with the dispute symbolising a certain conception of world trade, of a Europe which stands by and defends its decisions, its specific political nature and its commitment to the countries of the South.

So on this issue - I know - the Commission' s task is not an easy one.

It is torn between contradictory positions and I understand the difficulties encountered in trying to reconcile the various interests.

But while I share the desire to put an end to a trade war which is poisoning transatlantic relations, this cannot be done at any price, abandoning without compensation the principles of justice and solidarity which guide the action of the European Union.

I, for one - and there are many in this Parliament who feel the same - refuse to see Europe dictated to, even indirectly, by a handful of multinationals with colonialist attitudes and anachronistic social behaviour.

I am sorry, too, that we have not fought for the retention of a specific quota for the ACP countries which alone guaranteed them access to the market.

But the rapporteur' s proposal is satisfactory because it defends the quota system and rejects any automatic move to an exclusively tariff-based regime.

So I thank him and I also thank Mr Fernández Martín for putting the committee' s point of view.

Of course, the ACP countries know they must adapt to world trade.

But let us give them time.

Let us give them enough time, let us give them the means to produce their plants themselves, let us help them build their greenhouses.

Let us encourage organic farming and, in ten years, believe me, the price of African bananas will have fallen to the level of dollar bananas.

If we impose the brutality of an exclusively tariff-based regime too rapidly, bananas are going to taste incredibly bitter to thousands of small African producers.

Mr President, the Committee on Development and Cooperation, on whose behalf I speak, broadly supports the report by Mr Dary and, in general, rejects the Commission' s proposal.

The European Commission has made this proposal supposedly in a spirit of consensus but, frankly, having analysed it at length with the best will in the world, I cannot find a single reason to accept it.

I take comfort in the fact that I am not the only one.

The Commission' s proposal has not been well received by anyone, neither by the Community producers, nor by the ACP countries.

It seems that the Council cannot easily accept it.

Parliament does not like it either.

What is even more serious however is that not even the United States like it.

In this proposal, the Commission not only renounces the defence of Community interests and the interests of the ACP countries but has also, in my opinion, abandoned the minimum degree of neutrality required.

The World Trade Organisation condemned the system of licences in force, which must undoubtedly be modified.

However, the Commission proposes many other things.

It proposes removing any type of quota, and I would like to ask: does it intend in the future to remove the system of aid to producers?

Has the Commission decided to begin the reform of the common agricultural policy with a reform of the COM in bananas?

After bananas, will other sectors fall?

When will we stop protecting Austrian white wines, for example,?

This clearly remains an open question within the WTO.

However, after the experience of Seattle, I suppose that we should have learnt something from the point of view expressed by the developing countries and, especially, in this case, by the ACP countries, with whom we have commitments and obligations to fulfil.

It is in defence of our obligations and commitments to the ACP countries that the amendments have been presented on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I am speaking for our 'shadow' rapporteur, Mr Vatanen, and I would like to mention that this is now the fifth time since 1993 and the introduction of the common organisation of the market in bananas that the WTO has considered the Community rules to run counter to international trade regulations.

The banana controversy is a good example of how hard it is to reconcile the interests of the fifteen Member States, the Union, the ACP banana producing countries, European consumers and our trading partners.

I congratulate the Commission for striving to reach a compromise that has regard to the various interest groups.

It is right that the European Union should bear responsibility for seeing that European agricultural producers, including banana producers, earn a sufficient income.

It is not right, however, that the EU and businesses operating within its territory should suffer annual losses of around EUR 400 million because of trade sanctions by the USA and Ecuador, which are a result of our violating the GATT agreement with regard to banana imports.

I would like to express my concern regarding the consequences of Mr Dary' s report for trade policy.

To adopt the report as it is could result in a strong reaction from our trading partners, as it does not even include the possibility of talks to ease access to the market.

There is strong evidence that some Latin American countries will refuse to accept import quotas - at least not without the prospect of better access to EU markets.

For this reason, I would appeal to you to support Mr Chichester' s Amendment No 38, which states that if the EU does not abolish import quotas it will at least indicate its intention to start official WTO talks on the future distribution of import quotas.

The Union has lost the banana dispute in the WTO four times already and it cannot afford to lose a fifth time, for three reasons.

Firstly, the continuation, despite the bans by the WTO, of the EU' s import quota system, which has been found to be discriminatory will lead to the continuance of trade sanctions costing hundreds of millions of euros. Secondly, if our trading partners receive permission from the WTO to even disregard intellectual property rights, the costs of sanctions will be enormous and could cause long-term damage to EU businesses.

Thirdly, continued breaches of the regulations will hurt our image internationally in matters of trade, which might weaken the case for the European agricultural subsidy model.

This, meanwhile, would have very serious consequences for the whole of European agriculture. It is high time we showed ourselves to be credible and mature trading partners, as waking up to the realities of the present will accord with our real interests in the long term.

Mr President, the WTO has challenged our Community regulation on bananas several times and each time we have had to redefine the content of this COM and suffer the burden of the fines imposed on us as reparations for damage caused.

It is certainly not easy to find a balanced response which would satisfy our four objectives, which are: supplying consumers at reasonable prices, guaranteeing a future to our Community producers, honouring the Union' s commitments to ACP countries and, finally, at the same time, presenting a case which cannot be attacked by the WTO.

However, in the light of these four concerns, Mr Dary' s proposal is entirely apt, at least that was the feeling of Parliament' s Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development in unanimously supporting it, a quite exceptional occurrence for such a sensitive subject.

In fact it seems to us that the choice of maintaining the import quotas plus preferential tariffs for the ACP countries for ten years, instead of six, would make it possible to plan for the future of Community and ACP producers, who face a form of competition tantamount to social and environmental dumping.

That we are seeking elimination of any automatic movement to 'tariff only' should not be regarded as downright rejection of the measure.

Our intention is to let the situation develop in a way that is economically and socially tolerable for our producers and those of the ACP countries, without damaging the openness of our market.

So the European Union certainly has arguments to present to the WTO, so that this time our approach is recognised as valid.

Of course, the Union may have difficulty determining the quotas in the immediate future, but is that exercise any more difficult than agreeing on adjustments to the customs tariff in the 'tariff only' hypothesis?

For my part I am convinced that the approaching start of the next WTO cycle should mean we can handle this issue positively in a more global context and for that I am counting on the Commission' s determination.

Mr President, it is high time that we resolved this complex and long-standing issue once and for all.

As we all know, there are many competing claims - the claims of ACP banana producers, Community banana producers, EU businesses which have been hit hard by US sanctions, the EU's role and standing in the WTO and, of course, the rights and interests of European banana consumers.

It will not be possible to satisfy fully all these claims and therefore we have to accept a compromise.

The Commission's proposal is a compromise between those who demand an immediate move to a tariff only system and those who wish to ignore the WTO rulings and stick with the flawed regime as it is.

That is why the majority of the ELDR Group supports the Commission's proposal to continue a tariff-rate quota system for a transitional period before moving to a definitive tariff only system.

The Dary report, on the other hand, is premised on the somewhat unrealistic notion that we can ignore rulings from the WTO altogether.

It gives complete priority to the concerns of EU banana producers over the equally legitimate concerns of innocent EU businesses in other sectors suffering from arbitrary US sanctions. Most strange of all, it risks complicating matters so much further that the Commission, as stated in its proposal of November last year, will be obliged to move directly to a tariff only system.

This would be exactly the opposite of the objectives of those who support this report.

I have also heard that during the vote, which will take place either today or tomorrow, some may advocate referral back to committee.

This would be an undignified act of foot-dragging which would do nothing to address the long-term issues at stake.

We need stability for European and ACP banana producers and EU consumers.

That can be done by rejecting this report and supporting the Commission's compromise proposal.

Mr President, the common organisation of markets in the banana sector has allowed this sector, which is fundamental to the sometimes fragile economies of the ACP countries and the outermost regions of the European Union, to function.

Less than seven years have passed since the entry into force of the COM on bananas, and the Commission is now proposing a profound modification of its operation.

Furthermore, this has been preceded by disputes within the World Trade Organisation which have generated uncertainties and which have led to difficulties in its correct functioning for Community producers.

For us, a transitional period until 2006, as proposed by the Commission, is not acceptable, and we should wait at least until 2010 before deciding on possible reforms.

On the other hand, an exclusively tariff-based system is not coherent with the achievement of the objectives of the COM, given that it does not guarantee access to the market or the survival of the Community and ACP producers.

The Commission proposes a quota of 353 000 tonnes and a possible increase in the event of a rise in demand.

Given that the additional tariff quota is not consolidated, its quantity should be capable of being adapted to Community demand, not only in the event of an increase, but also in the event of a decrease.

In any event, we should safeguard the Community preference and prevent any marginalisation of Community production.

Lastly, special attention should be given to the development of the situation of the Community and ACP producers, who are already in a vulnerable position and will be even more so in a context of intense and open competition.

The Commission must carry out a report in advance assessing the consequences of the application of any modification of the system in order to provide the due compensation for its negative effects on prices and incomes as a result of the increase in the global income in question.

I would therefore, Mr President, like to offer my heartfelt congratulations to Mr Dary.

He has been generous with the amendments of the different political groups.

Furthermore, I hope that the Commission will send a clear political signal which will take account of his points of view.

Mr President, the reason we are having to express our opinion on a draft for the banana COM yet again, for the fifth time since 1993, is the relentless attacks on the Community regime by three large American multinationals. They dominate the world market in bananas and the WTO backed their interests after an appeal was lodged by the United States, which is also imposing very heavy unilateral sanctions on a series of our companies.

But, in fact, almost 60% of the 4 million tonnes of bananas consumed annually in the European Union are supplied not by Community or ACP producers, but by Latin American third countries where the American companies run vast plantations under production conditions characterised by scant regard for social and environmental concerns.

In traditional ACP countries and Union countries, which already have only a minority share of the European market, bananas are grown in small production units, usually family concerns, and in areas where there is no real possibility of alternative occupation.

So they represent an essential element in the balance of the economic and social fabric of these fragile territories.

After having driven the Ivory Coast to despair to allow five multinationals to lower their production costs to the detriment of cocoa producers, are we now going to grant three American multinationals the exclusive right to the world market for bananas, including the European market, ruining our own producers and those of our ACP partners into the bargain?

Are we willing to sacrifice production which means life or death to some of our territories for peace at the WTO?

Unfortunately, that certainly seems to be the route the Commission has chosen, with a short and dangerous transitional system and an exclusively tariff - and uncertain - formula as from 2006, which would imperil both ACP and European production and put the Community banana market under the control of a few large operators, able to set the profit margins through the commercialisation of dollar bananas.

So the Commission' s proposal is in line with neither the interests of Community and ACP producers, nor the long-term interests of European consumers, because it actually encourages the emergence of a far from competitive market situation.

That is why it has been unanimously rejected not only by our Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development, but also by the ACP-EU Joint Assembly and the French Parliament.

So I hope our Parliament will follow the Committee on Agriculture, and the European Commission will feel obliged to make new proposals to us, more in accordance with European interests and our cooperation with the ACP countries.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, seven out of every ten bananas eaten in Europe come from Central America via three multinationals, all with reduced customs duties of EUR 75 per tonne instead of EUR 850.

We are giving the United States a marvellous present there!

It wants the end of import licences, because the B licences give Community bananas and ACP bananas priority sales over dollar bananas.

But, most of all and politically, the United States actually wants the monopoly of the future Eastern European market for their multinationals.

What is Europe doing to face that challenge?

It is divided and getting bogged down.

We are divided from our German friends.

Indeed, because of the ancient links with the 1945 German diaspora to Latin America, Germany has eaten 100% dollar bananas since 1960 - though at first they were 'armband' bananas.

So much so - it is an open secret - that the three American banana multinationals put their banana butter on SPD and CDU parsnips.

But we are also getting bogged down in technical proposals.

Thus the Commission proposes, before surrendering totally to the United States, a six-year transition period when, in essence, there would be three quotas, including the ACP quota and the dollar quota.

From 2006, there would no longer be anything but a common customs tariff which would have equal impact on the bananas of the poor of Africa and the bananas of the rich, the multinationals.

We could undoubtedly challenge that, and our excellent rapporteur, Mr Dary, does challenge it.

He proposes that the respite of six years be extended to ten years.

Another four years, Mr American executioner!

And we have tabled amendments too.

We call for regionalisation of aid, because Guadeloupe is further away than the Canaries; quarterly payment; cyclone compensation; the maintenance of the ACP quota; historical guidelines for imports, instead of first come, first served.

Well, all that is very fine, but the battle is elsewhere.

The battle is for Community preference, first and foremost.

We have to choose: either the Canaries, Madeira and the Antilles - or Chiquita.

It is regional policy that is at stake.

Do we want the outermost regions which depend 100% on bananas, like the Canaries, to survive, or do we want Dole and Chiquita to accumulate more wealth?

It is cooperation policy that is at stake.

We have to choose: either Africa and the Lomé Convention, or the WTO.

We have to choose: either Europe' s social policy and human rights, or the multinational slave-drivers who produce with social costs totalling 8% instead of the 42% social costs in the Canaries, Madeira or the Antilles.

This is about protection of financial interests, because when OLAF disputes a few centimes of Members' taxi expenses yet is not interested in the annual present of two billion dollars from Chiquita, there is a problem.

The United States was found guilty of two billion dollars' worth of fiscal fraud and it has changed nothing.

When the United States alters its policy, we will discuss the mere 191 million for bananas.

When the United States stops cheating for the benefit of Boeing, Kodak, Cargil and Ford, we will discuss bananas.

In the meantime, we need long, global, political negotiations.

We must talk about Iraq, Echelon, Serbia; put everything on the table.

Sanction for sanction, retaliation for retaliation.

The banana is a moment of truth. Europe can either surrender or stand up and be counted.

There is a saying that bananas can be eaten from both ends.

Does Europe want to stand up or be eaten from both ends?

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, we must put an end to the tug of war over a system that complies with the WTO Agreement.

The EU has not exactly covered itself in glory in this almost endless debate.

I respect the Member States' efforts to protect their banana producers against a considerable loss of income, but such considerations cannot justify persistently refusing to comply with agreements under international law.

It should be our objective to create a market organisation consistent with the WTO dispute settlement body' s proposals as soon as possible, chiefly in the interests of companies which, because of the introduction of the COM in bananas, have been forced to accept financial losses which have threatened their very existence. This is also in the interests of those who have been hit by the punitive tariffs imposed by the United States.

No one should underestimate the adverse impact of export restrictions of this kind on the economies of export-oriented countries, and above all on related jobs.

This is an area where some Member States are indulging in protectionism at the expense of others.

We pay subsidies to banana producers, we have to grapple with punitive tariffs, and we have to pay excessive banana prices in our supermarkets.

Those Member States who want to continue with these restrictions have to recognise that they are partly to blame for the current situation, because they have quite simply forgotten to make structural changes in the field of banana production.

The lack of competitiveness of EU banana production cannot be allowed to justify a refusal to accept uniform and non-discriminatory access to the European market.

Mr President, Commissioner, it falls to me to summarise the problems of the COM in bananas in just a few minutes.

That is a considerable challenge and one which makes no sense unless we understand what is really at stake in this issue. It has been a source of conflict for at least a decade, both at the trading level - between the operators - and at the institutional and international level.

The reason for that is simple.

The banana is now one of the great basic human foodstuffs and control of the trade clearly has a geostrategic dimension.

This is a tropical fruit marketed in the Northern hemisphere and its distribution is also a fundamental part of North-South cooperation.

The real question we face is whether or not the European Union can succeed in organising, within its own market, a juxtaposition of flows from the producer regions of Europe, the ACP countries and Latin America.

Today we are debating a proposal from the European Commission which, by providing for an automatic swing towards tariffs, will lead to the ineluctable disappearance of production in European regions, which currently represents 25% of our market supply.

Such a development would be contrary to the actual purpose of regional policy and the common agricultural policy - the two pillars of the European Union - and we do not want that under any circumstances.

So we must resolutely set the prospect to one side by adopting the Dary report. I congratulate and thank Mr Dary.

For those fundamental reasons, and to protect the interests of consumers on the European market by maintaining a juxtaposition of flows from the Union, the ACP countries and third countries, in the context of genuine and sustained competition based on an adequate number of operators, we ask you to accept all the proposed amendments.

Failure on this sensitive banana issue would be an admission of weakness on the part of the European Union and would represent a very strong and rousing signal, exploited by all opponents of the common agricultural policy to oppose the social, family and multi-functional agricultural model.

It is our duty to preserve everything the Union stands for, especially on the eve of its enlargement.

Mr President, the defenders of the interests of the multinationals in this Parliament have not studied the subject of bananas properly.

They have not studied it properly because they talk about the multiple decisions of the World Trade Organisation and Community violations of international law.

In fact, so far the World Trade Organisation has only declared two extremes incompatible with international commercial law.

The first is the partnership system which linked the importing of non-Community bananas with that of Community bananas.

Community regulations on bananas were modified to comply with that decision.

The second refers to the incompatibility of the exemption in favour of ACP countries within the Community system.

In other respects, the Community system is wholly in accordance with community rules, international law and the rules of the World Trade Organisation.

The problem is that in this case the Commission has been more papist than the Pope and, as Mr Fernández Martín has pointed out, more in favour of free trade than the multinationals themselves.

In other words, at the moment the Commission wants to throw out the banana with everything else - it wants to throw out the baby with the bath water. It does not remain within the strict limits of compliance with our international obligations, but it is taking a political decision which would lead - as Mr Fernández Martín pointed out - to the dismantling of the whole of our Community agricultural policy.

The Dary report, the Westendorp opinion and the Fernández Martín opinion ask the Commission to adapt so as to conform to international law, not to go beyond what it is laid down by the World Trade Organisation, to negotiate and, furthermore, to take account of the fact that, if we give in on this point, we are going to give in on other more important points, such as the maintenance of social and environmental policy requirements on a global level, which is how we stand internationally.

Mr President, Commissioner, the European Commission' s proposal on the reform of the banana sector is negative, unacceptable and disastrous for the agricultural sector in the outermost regions and the ACP countries affected by it, which, of course, supply 40% of the Community market.

I have put this so strongly because, if implemented in the terms which have been laid out, it would lead to the sinking of the economies of thousands of families who live off this very special activity on Community islands such as the Canaries, Madeira, Guadeloupe, Martinique and Crete, not forgetting the producing areas of the ACP countries.

It would therefore lead to social and economic deterioration in regions which are already least favoured and suffering serious and permanent difficulties with their development, with horrendous difficulties in terms of conversion and which are vulnerable to the uniform and homogenous commercial measures which are taken at international level. In my opinion, the European Commission has given in to such measures, incapable of recognising the regional agricultural reality and diversity of the countries of the Union and the need for a genuine policy of solidarity and cooperation with the ACP countries which, until recently, were colonial territories of countries which now form part of the Union.

Therefore, it is a good thing that the Commission is receptive to the report by Mr Dary, who I congratulate, and the amendments tabled, which are intended to achieve the following: correct the imbalances created by globalisation and persuade the Commission to be sensitive to the problems of banana-producing families, not to submit to imports with single customs tariffs and to fight where necessary to maintain, for a reasonable period, its commitment to the citizens and the agricultural organisations involved. These organisations make up one of the most vulnerable sectors of very special regions of the Union and the ACP countries, with the accompanying social, economic and environmental repercussions.

For many of us, bananas are a national issue, since they are related to our history and our culture.

Mr President, it is important for this House to approve Mr Dary' s report, as the Commission proposal to introduce a tariff only system for banana imports by 2006 is unacceptable.

The flat-rate system that the Commission intends to introduce would cause producers in the outermost regions of the European Union, such as Madeira and the ACP countries, to go bankrupt.

Furthermore, the fiasco at the last World Trade Organisation meeting demonstrated that the WTO is in no position to meet the expectations and demands of the public and of consumers in certain respects, such as product quality, environmental protection, training, social conditions and worker protection, as is evident from the report.

If our policies are to be consistent with our declarations of support for the ACP countries and for the development of the outermost regions of the European Union, we cannot allow agriculture in those regions and its future development - in which the production and export of bananas play a major part - to be squeezed by waves of dollar bananas from the large plantations that banana multinationals own in Latin America.

It is against this background that we are supporting most of the amendments in the report, which we also contributed to. I have in mind in particular the call for a transitional period of not less than 10 years, and which should not imply a move to a tariff only system, as the Commission should assess the impact of the new situation on prices and on the income of banana producers in these regions, so as to ensure that compensatory aid can be adjusted, based on the principle of guaranteed income for producers.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, in the long run, we cannot swim against the tide of free and fair world trade with the common organisation of the market in bananas.

We ourselves also have to observe the rules that we signed up to when the WTO was founded.

By infringing them and thus triggering sanctions, we are already blocking access to the major US markets - and also increasingly to Latin America' s markets - for whole sectors of our economy.

We will be jointly responsible for large numbers of lay-offs in these sectors if we as the European Union do not change our stance.

That is why we - and I am now speaking on behalf of a significant minority in the PPE Group, which could be a majority the next time - support the Commission' s position.

Following a transitional period, a tariff of EUR 275 per tonne is to be introduced for bananas from third countries, from which bananas from ACP countries would be exempt.

This will protect the essential interests of the ACP producer countries.

However, the Achilles' heel of the Commission' s proposals is the lack of sufficient protection for the interests of banana producers within the European Union, essentially in the peripheral regions and the overseas departments.

They are up in arms about this omission - particularly our French colleagues, and I assume the same applies to Portugal and Spain.

Commissioner Fischler, things are not as the officials in your directorate-general perhaps claim - and I would also like to address this comment to Mr Lamy. The arrangements for EU banana producers are not as good as they might be.

There is still a need for a political compromise here.

The structural measures envisaged in Title III of the Regulation on the common organisation of the market in bananas need to be considerably strengthened.

If we made just 10-20% of the total punitive tariffs of EUR 400 million, that is to say EUR 40-80 million, available as agriculture budget appropriations, instead of diverting it for other purposes, we could help our banana producers a great deal.

I call on the Commission to improve the structural measures and so open up the way for a compromise which is fundamentally in accordance with your proposals.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, first I would like to present my compliments to the rapporteur, Mr Dary, because he has chosen the path of resistance and not renunciation on this complex issue.

Indeed, we find the Commission' s new proposal unacceptable, because it makes unacceptable concessions to the multinationals of Latin America.

Is there anyone in this Parliament unaware of the role played by these multinationals in financing American campaigns?

Is anyone here unaware that the food safety conditions involved in the production of these bananas are dubious to say the least, and the social conditions are dominated by total disregard for the rights of men, women and children?

Who can ignore that by bending to the diktat of the United States - under cover of the WTO - the European Union would throw 35 000 of its own nationals in the Canaries and over 30 000 in the French overseas territories out of work?

Because, ladies and gentlemen, adopting a 'tariff only' system after a transitional period of six years, as the Commission proposes, would truly condemn our producers to failure and despair.

That is why, like Mr Dary, I urge the maintenance of quotas and I oppose automatic passage to the tariff system, because, for my part, I refuse to sacrifice our producers in Martinique or Guadeloupe on the altar of a liberalisation beyond all regulation.

Ladies and gentlemen, let us make no mistake, if Europe surrenders on the banana issue today, it will surrender on sugar or rum tomorrow, and the next day it will have to abandon its social model and its development policy.

That is why I want to tell Commissioners Fischler and Lamy, in all seriousness, that, while I understand their legitimate desire to put an end to this dispute, they cannot do it at the expense of the poorest citizens in the European Union.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the banana regime of the European Union has already been condemned four times by the World Trade Organisation.

After the United States, Ecuador has also now obtained permission to take retaliatory action for an amount of USD 200 million.

Let us not forget that such punitive measures serve absolutely no purpose at all for our banana producers, but have extremely negative effects on European industry and employment.

Therefore, we cannot afford to be condemned like this again.

We must now come to an arrangement as quickly as possible that complies with the rulings of the WTO, with the promises made to the ACP countries and which is in the interests of our producers and consumers.

That is not easy, but the present system is untenable.

We must, therefore, urgently find and accept a compromise and a more liberal attitude.

In view of the fact that the Commission proposal, in my modest opinion, meets these requirements, I shall support it.

Commissioner, I too remember the European Union introducing a regulation in 1993 on the organisation of the market in bananas, so as to ensure protection of outlets and income for Community producers and to guarantee the exports of the ACP countries to the Community market.

Although they do not produce a single kilo of bananas, the United States has complained to the WTO about the Community banana import regime.

Their one aim was to defend the interests of their great banana companies which are effectively ravaging Latin America and which already dominate over 70% of the world market.

In 1999, the WTO panel, orchestrated by the United States, condemned the Community' s import licences system.

The Commission has submitted to that verdict by amending the market conditions to end up with a 'tariff only' system in 2006.

The implementation of this new regulation, which actually goes beyond the WTO ruling, would call into question the distribution of Community and ACP products and would aggravate an already fragile social situation, especially in the French Overseas Territories where the selling price of bananas had already fallen below 3 francs in 1998 and was less than 2 francs in 1999.

I am glad the Committee on Agriculture has rejected not only the amendments championed by the intermediaries of the American multinationals, but also the Commission' s proposals.

I entirely approve of the Dary report which opposes the automatic move to a 'tariff only' system and which defends the principles which presided over the establishment of the common organisation of markets, especially Community preference.

By adopting the Dary report, we will be sending the Council and the Commission the clear signal that our Parliament is determined to defend the interests of Community and ACP producers, to make the WTO recognise that the preferential agreements constitute development aid instruments.

Our vote will also express our rejection of any compromise with the United States that would sacrifice the Community and ACP producers to the profit of the dollar banana.

Mr President, I would like to start by putting some questions to the Commission in the person of Commissioner Fischler.

Why is it that for the banana trade you are advocating pure and simple liberalisation with effect from 2006, whereas in the case of meat, milk and cereals, which absorb 68% of EAGGF Guarantee Section resources, you refer to the special characteristics of European agriculture, as the Commission did in Seattle?

Surely it is unacceptable to be applying two different sets of criteria.

Is the Commission not guilty of double standards here?

Are bananas the poor relation of agricultural production in the European Union?

Should the European agricultural model not be used to safeguard banana production in the European Union which will certainly be threatened by the liberalisation being proposed?

Is there also a plan to liberalise trade in meat, milk and cereals?

Will the Commission yield to the more radical approach adopted by the United States at a time when the Americans are significantly increasing their support for agriculture?

Is no attention being paid at all to the fact that bananas are the main agricultural product in four outermost regions which are amongst the 10 most disadvantaged regions in the European Union?

What is the relevance of Article 299(2) of the Treaty, which provides for special treatment for the outermost regions, to the proposal to amend the Regulation on the COM in bananas?

The multi-functionality of European agriculture, which is a key aspect of the European agricultural model I have already mentioned, needs to be reflected in this reform, since in Madeira, for example (the region that I represent in this House) the environmental aspect of agriculture is as important as, or even more important than, its economic aspect.

If banana production were to cease on the island of Madeira, it would represent an enormous environmental catastrophe as well as a serious loss of income for thousands of families.

Furthermore, as we saw in Seattle, the new round of WTO negotiations should be a genuine development round.

For this reason, we can justify giving priority to bananas produced in the European Union and in the ACP countries when we reform the common organisation of the market in bananas and this would be perfectly legitimate.

And it is only by maintaining import quotas that we can achieve this objective, which is perfectly compatible with World Trade Organisation rules.

Mr President, Commissioner Fischler, banana production has a special significance in certain less developed countries, signatories to the ACP agreements, island regions such as Crete, and, in particular, outermost regions such as Madeira, the Canary Islands, Martinique and Guadeloupe.

We are not talking about fully developed regions in the centre of Europe which have countless alternatives when faced with changes in market conditions, and where the common agricultural policy invests most of its resources.

For this reason it is not possible for us to accept radical changes in the Community' s trade policy in this field unless we take full account of its regional impact and unless we take the necessary measures in this field in terms of economic and social cohesion.

The Lisbon European Council instructed the Commission to present as quickly as possible practical measures aimed at implementing the Commission' s report on the application of Article 299(2) in relation to the outermost regions.

Agriculture is absolutely vital to many of these regions, which are hoping that the Commission will act swiftly and decisively to maintain regional conditions for agricultural development.

Mr President, I believe that these Commission proposals will mean that a number of African, Caribbean and Pacific countries will go out of business.

That will lead to poverty and even more deprivation.

Yes, we have to simplify the system.

It is far too complicated at the moment.

But I believe those countries need time to diversify properly and that is why I would agree with a ten-year transitional period.

Chiquita, Dole and Del Monte, who produce in Latin American countries, have not seen their production levels go down since 1993.

Their access to the market has not gone down since 1993.

All they want to do is get more access to the market at the expense of the ACP countries.

Yes, we have to find a solution.

Producers in the UK are being held to ransom by the USA.

We must not let ACP countries go to the wall just to save companies in the EU.

This is not just about bananas; it is about trade with developing countries overall.

I am quite aware of the inconsistencies in the common organisation of the market in bananas and associated relations with the WTO.

It is difficult to take into account the various requirements and follow a policy which will favour the weakest parties and supply a high-quality product at affordable prices.

Having said that, it is not that I do not think it is possible, as put forward in the Commission proposal, to adopt, as of 2006, a system which does not impose quota restrictions or tariffs on ACP countries or any other countries.

Postponing this until 2010 would not make much difference, although that would undoubtedly give us more time to find less damaging solutions.

The Commission' s proposal is too similar to the proposal of the Council of Ministers, which does not consider it necessary to allocate part of the budget to a policy of cooperation and protection of the Community' s primary producers in accordance with WTO negotiations.

Rather than adapting to the WTO system, we should endeavour to reform it without giving in to blackmail by US multinationals which make a profit out of exploiting poor countries.

We are all aware of the illiberal acts of these multinationals, which are destroying and corrupting both people and the environment.

The challenge should be to reform the WTO.

The Seattle Summit and the huge public demonstrations made the need plain.

We must reform the WTO, without adversely affecting development and protection policies for poor countries, small producers and craftsmen, but, as per the Dary report on facilitating access to the market for fair-trade organisations in order to invest in environmentally-friendly and socially viable farming practices.

This should be the European Union' s policy.

Mr President, I speak from three perspectives.

That of external trade, where I believe the European Union should uphold progress towards a liberalised world-trade order; that of industry, European industry, where jobs and industries are at threat from sanctions and they are innocent victims of these sanctions; and I speak from the perspective of a UK Member of this House who is tired of receiving letters of complaint from companies whose business and whose workers' jobs are at threat from the sanctions through no fault of their own.

I regret various aspects of this Dary report.

I have to say that this timescale of ten years is wholly unrealistic and unreasonable.

I regret the attempt to cling on to quotas and to interfere with trade in that way.

Of course, I also regret proposals for higher rates of tariff, which is another intervention in trade.

The amendment, which has been put down in my name and others, calls for a negotiated settlement of this dispute, which is World Trade Organisation compatible.

We have been down this road several times now and innocent companies and jobs are at risk and being threatened as a result of our failure to come to grips with this situation.

I have to say that I cannot think of anything more reasonable or pragmatic or sensible than the amendment which a number of colleagues have supported me in submitting.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, like many of my colleagues in the Group of the European People's Party, I reject the Dary report, but there are also some amendments that seem very reasonable to me.

I have in mind above all Amendments Nos 33 and 34.

Amendment No 33 calls for financial support for ecologically sound farming in third countries also.

Amendment No 34 calls for fair trade bananas to be supported regardless of their country of origin.

By the way, I think it is a shame that the Greens are not taking part in this debate and also highlighting these aspects.

But through these two amendments this House is clearly indicating that it also wants a global approach, and there are certainly small producers who behave in an exemplary fashion, not only in the traditional ACP countries and in the EU, but also in Latin America and in the non-traditional ACP countries.

In Ecuador, 60% of banana producers are small producers with less than 20 hectares, and they are suffering from unjustifiable discrimination.

The world is not just black and white, as some people would have us believe, and the Latin American countries have been quite justified in their complaints to the WTO about our common market organisation.

That is why contradictions exist within the Dary report, which, on the one hand, advocates a global approach and support for fair trade bananas throughout the world, but, at the same time, continues to create difficulties of this kind for small producers in Latin America.

I consider fixing the quotas for ten years to be a step in the wrong direction, and I believe that the Commission was already going the right way before this.

To my mind, they could have moved rather more forcefully towards liberalisation, but they were going in the right direction.

I would of course be delighted if Mr Chichester' s amendment, which I have also signed, were to be accepted, but I would like to tell Commissioner Fischler that even if this amendment is not accepted, Amendment No 5, which was accepted by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development, will give him the remit of coming up with a workable compromise acceptable to the WTO.

That is why I believe that the Commission will, in any case, have a mandate to negotiate, including a mandate from Parliament.

Mr President, Commissioner, at this point in the debate I am not going to enter into a discussion of the Dary report, nor discuss its fundamental points, but I do wish to say that the official position of the PPE Group is in support of the entire Dary report.

Commissioner, your proposal does not accord with the objectives nor resolve the problems being suffered by the banana industry and politically it is not worthy of our producers. Mr Schwaiger recognised this a moment ago.

Nor does the Commission' s proposal comply with our international commitments.

However, the most serious problem is that, immersed in difficult negotiations with the World Trade Organisation, we are showing publicly, in black and white, where our weak points lie.

Therefore, Commissioner, I ask you to listen to this Parliament - not simply to hear us - and to take note of the directions indicated in the Dary report and the opinions of the two competent committees.

This Parliament is sending you a very clear political message, unanimously from the committee responsible in this area, and I hope that this House will support it by a majority. Judging by the great political sensitivity which you have always shown, I am sure that you will understand that message.

Furthermore, I am sure that you will find a viable route in the direction indicated.

Therefore, Commissioner, act politically, find a solution and listen to this Parliament.

This is not the time to fail to take account of this House.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I would first like to thank you, Mr Dary, for your wide-ranging and appreciative comments on the Commission' s proposal to amend the common organisation of the market in bananas.

By way of introduction, I would like to stress that the Commission takes a positive view of the principles behind many of the amendments, such as the system of historical references for the allocation of quotas.

In fact, these reflect our discussions with the WTO complainants and the ACP producers.

However, the Commission believes that we should not amend our proposal at this delicate stage in the discussions, and I therefore have no alternative but to reject your amendments.

I would like to give my reasons for this rejection area by area.

The first area is the deletion of references to a tariff only system and an automatic move to such a system after a certain transitional period.

I will make no bones about it: the main objective of our proposal is to bring the COM in bananas into line with WTO rules.

The most important part of the proposal is the introduction of the tariff system after a certain transitional period.

On the other hand, this requires agreement with interested parties on the management of tariff quotas during the transitional period.

The Commission firmly believes that your wish to replace the tariff system with a permanent tariff quota system will only lead to renewed attacks in the WTO.

In addition, I would like to point out that the proposal already includes a request to the Council to empower the Commission to enter into negotiations under Article XXVIII of the GATT, so there is no need to refer to this in the regulation.

The second important area is the issue of managing tariff quotas.

The Commission is attempting to negotiate with the principal suppliers about allocating tariff quotas on the basis of historical references.

It would not be advisable to additionally define the individual options until these discussions have been concluded.

Furthermore, with regard to the demand that the tariff quota administration system should not have an adverse effect on operators and producers already present on the market, I must say that if we have to modify the whole COM now, there can be no guarantee that things will stay exactly as they were.

That really would be demanding the impossible.

Our discussions have also covered other alternatives for managing quota C. However, the Commission believes that it would not be appropriate at present to modify its proposal for auctions in relation to quota C, because auctions of this kind are, in any case, a reliable method of allocating licences.

The third area, which relates to quotas, is the extension of the period for maintaining the quota system to at least 10 years.

The Commission considers that extending the period in this way would reduce the credibility of the central theme of our proposal, which is that the COM in bananas should be brought into line with the WTO rules as soon as possible.

As we explained in the explanatory memorandum, the quickest way to do this is through the tariff system.

The Commission has proposed the transitional period because it gives time for producers within the Community and in the ACP countries to prepare for the new system.

Furthermore, if we moved automatically to a tariff only system, there would be no point in having an interim review or an appraisal at the end of the transitional period.

With regard to the tariff preference for ACP countries, the Commission believes that EUR 275 per tonne is sufficient to secure access to the Community market for these countries.

A higher preference would also lead to renewed attacks in the WTO.

If the higher preference limited Latin American countries' access under quota C, this could be interpreted as if we wanted in practice to introduce a special ACP quota.

I shall now turn to the special support measures for our own producers in the European Union.

As I have already said, the principle aim of the Commission' s proposal is to bring the COM into line with the WTO' s final ruling.

The final ruling does not affect our intra-Community support system.

Furthermore, I would like to point out that this is a deficiency payment system, which means that it has a built-in guarantee. If prices fall, subsidies automatically increase.

My last point is about measures giving equal access to organic and fair trade bananas.

There are already horizontal measures in place guaranteeing equal access for organic bananas from third countries and organic bananas from the Community.

In addition, the European Union can grant subsidies for the production of organic bananas under the agri-environmental measures envisaged in the development plan for rural areas.

Measures to support sales of organic bananas can be financed under national and regional programmes.

Fair trade bananas would also come under the horizontal measures for fair trade, which, I hope, will soon be adopted on the basis of a Commission communication to this effect.

As you know, this communication is not just about fair trade bananas, but about fair trade in general.

In addition to the possibilities I have just mentioned, it is also possible to provide support for developing production of organic bananas and also of fair trade bananas in the ACP countries under the Regulation establishing a special framework of assistance for traditional ACP suppliers of bananas.

The Commission is grateful for the wide-ranging discussions that have taken place here today.

Even if it feels unable to accept Parliament' s amendments because of the current international situation, I must say that the whole dossier has been handled very constructively and comprehensively in the various committees that have contributed to the Dary report and in the recent hearing held by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development.

The vote will take place at 11.30 a.m.

I shall suspend the sitting until the President arrives.

(The sitting was suspended at 11.25 a.m. and resumed at 11.30 a.m.)

Madam President, at the appropriate moment, I would ask you, pursuant to Rule 161(1) of the Rules of Procedure, to request that the rapporteur and the Chairperson of the Committee on Budgetary Control explain their position in relation to the coherence between the explanatory statement and the resolution that we are voting on.

Madam President, Mr Barón Crespo, Chairman of the Socialist Group, also directed a comment to me.

Last Monday we did indeed have a wide-ranging discussion in the Committee on Budgetary Control on the admissibility of this question, and on whether, as chair of the committee, I should make use of Rule 161.

Almost every member of the committee spoke on this.

I myself have several times looked into the connection between the resolution, as it now appears in the compromise, and the explanatory statement, which reflects the rapporteur' s position and is her responsibility.

I established the connection, and I said in the clearest terms that the language in the explanatory statement before us is very harsh.

Nevertheless, I do not think I should comment on the style and choice of words in a censorious way, because I would then have to do the same for every explanatory statement.

As I see it, there is a factual connection and I therefore decided not to reject this explanatory statement and informed the committee accordingly.

Madam President, I tabled this amendment, along with 37 colleagues from the European People' s Party, because I was appalled at the way the media had exploited the explanatory statement which, as everyone should know but obviously does not, is the responsibility of the rapporteur and in no way commits the House.

I was struck by the contradiction in tone between the explanatory statement and the content of the resolution. They are radically different.

That is why I tabled this amendment.

Having said that, I think you are right, Madam President, to declare it admissible because the vote this amendment involves is not a vote for or against the explanatory statement, but is simply intended to highlight the distance between that explanatory statement and the resolution.

After the explanations given by both Mrs Stauner and Mrs Theato, who has stated publicly in the clearest possible way that the explanatory statement is only the responsibility of the rapporteur and in no way commits the House, I consider the amendment no longer necessary, and that is why I am withdrawing it.

Madam President, I would like firstly to point out that the rapporteur has not mentioned what is laid down in Rule 161(1) which - and I quote the French version - says explicitly: "... l' exposé des motifs doit être conforme au texte de la proposition de résolution..." [the explanatory statement must accord with the text of the motion for a resolution].

I understand, after the chairperson of the Committee on Budgetary Control' s explanation of the basis of the question, that her explanations should be recorded in the Minutes, not only for parliamentary purposes, but also for the purposes of any possible use of this explanatory statement.

Therefore, bearing in mind that the rapporteur has not spoken on this fundamental issue, I understand that the amendment still makes sense and the Group of the Party of European Socialists accepts it.

In other words, Mr Barón Crespo, you will take over Amendment No 5, on behalf of your Group, pursuant to Rule 139 of the Rules of Procedure.

Yes, Madam President, and furthermore, I would be grateful if, on such a sensitive issue, the rapporteur could speak on the basis of the question, as she is required to do.

Madam President, on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party, I shall support Mr Barón Crespo' s proposal.

Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, Mr Barón Crespo, I have not specifically reiterated this point, but I am sure you will realise that when I was drafting both the resolution and the text of the explanatory statement I was very acutely aware that they needed to be in accord with each other, and I have really searched my soul about this over the last few weeks.

I did not think it was necessary to say this again explicitly, but if you wish I will gladly do that.

I like to think that I am sufficiently conscientious and intellectually able for you to assume that I would have considered this long and hard, and that I am happy to take responsibility for this and to face all the consequences that you seem to be threatening me with.

Madam President, just so that things are clear, I withdrew the amendment because I considered it unnecessary, but as it is being voted on I obviously support it and I invite my friends to do the same.

After the vote on Amendment No 5

Madam President, although some people are pleased at the decision that has been taken, this creates a very dangerous precedent.

Whenever, in future, there is an explanatory statement which some in the House do not like we have established that every time we will be able to vote against if we wish to do so.

Madam President, since an explanation of vote has already taken place, I believe that this vote is important because it puts a stop to the temptation to write intolerable political pamphlets in relation to Parliament' s resolutions.

Report (A5-0089/2000) by Mr Rühle, on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control, on postponement of the decision concerning discharge to the Commission in respect of the financial management of the sixth, seventh and eighth European Development Funds for the 1998 financial year (COM(1999) 227 - C5­0003/1999 - 1999/2004(DEC)); on granting discharge to the European Foundation for the Improvement of Living and Working Conditions, Dublin, for the 1998 financial year (C5-0150/2000 - 2000/2094(DEC)); on granting discharge to the European Centre for Vocational Training, Thessaloniki, for the 1998 financial year (C5­0149/2000 - 2000/2093(DEC)); on granting discharge in respect of the implementation of the general budget of the European Union for the 1998 financial year; Section IV - Court Of Justice, Section V - Court Of Auditors, Section VI - Part B - Committee of the Regions (SEC(1999) 414 - C5­0008/1999 - 1999/2166(DEC); on postponement of the decision concerning discharge in respect of the implementation of the general budget of the European Union for the 1998 financial year: Section VI - Part A - Economic And Social Committee (SEC(1999) 414 - C5­0008/1999 - 1999/2166(DEC))

We had a problem when we had to prepare the voting list, which was that we could not find the amendment tabled by the Greens, the Group of the European People' s Party (Christian Democrats) and European Democrats, the Group of the Party of European Socialists and the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party for point 5.

I do not know whether it is possible to have it read out so that we have the chance to adopt a position on it.

Yes, I am afraid that will delay our work a little, Mrs Frahm.

I will try to be as clear as possible in taking the votes.

(Parliament adopted the two resolutions and three decisions in successive votes)

Report (A5-0092/2000) by Mr Khanbhai, on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control, on granting discharge to the Commission in respect of the implementation of the budget of the European Coal and Steel Community (ECSC) for the 1998 financial year (C5-0153/2000 - 2000/2077(DEC))

(Parliament adopted the two decisions and the resolution in successive votes)

Report (A5-0097/2000) by Mr Kuhne, on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control, on giving discharge in respect of implementation of the general budget for the financial year 1998 - Section I - European Parliament/Ombudsman Annex (SEC(1999)0414 - C5-0008/1999 - 1999/2051(DEC))

Madam President, there are two amendments tabled to Mr Kuhne's report which propose to postpone discharge for Parliament.

These amendments make reference to the Secretary-General.

If either of these amendments is adopted, will you, as President of Parliament, assume full political responsibility for their content and take the consequences if the demands set out in them are not met by the deadlines.

Mr van Hulten, as President, I take responsibility for declaring these amendments admissible.

I am not expressing an opinion on their content.

Parliament has not yet voted on them.

The problem facing me is whether they are admissible or not.

I am telling you that I sincerely and honestly believe, after examining the position, that these amendments are admissible.

If they are voted through they will obviously be implemented, like everything else we vote for.

Madam President, we have an amendment before us which allegedly sums up the substance of two observations by the Court of Auditors very concisely.

If you think it is necessary, I can read out the full wording of these observations, although personally I would prefer not to.

I just wish to say that I am opposed to this amendment, because I really do not think it serves any useful purpose for us to include tendentious summaries of official documents in our parliamentary documents, even if said summaries are tabled by the chairman of the Committee on Budgetary Control.

on Amendment No 1 from the Greens/ALE Group

Madam President, Point 6, on which we have to vote in this amendment, stipulates a deadline of 15 May.

If we were to accept this, we would be contradicting a paragraph that we agreed earlier.

Earlier on, under Paragraph 10 of the proposal for a decision to be precise, we agreed that we wished to see options for buildings management and a financing plan, taking into account the situation on negotiations, by 1 July.

We have already agreed on this, and this was also unanimously agreed in committee, because we accepted that this was only possible if we took account of the situation on negotiations.

If we were now to set a deadline of 15 May without taking account of the negotiating situation, we would not only be agreeing to something which it was agreed in committee simply cannot be done, we would also be contradicting something that we have already agreed upon.

I therefore appeal to the Greens to withdraw this point, failing which I would recommend that you vote against it, so as to ensure consistency with the rest of the decision.

Madam President, we will not, of course, withdraw this point, because it is at the heart of our amendment.

This is about calling on the administration to present an action plan by 15 May describing exactly how improvements can be made.

We do not want a list of measures, that can come later.

There is nothing contradictory at all about this.

We are talking about a concrete action plan setting out how quite specific improvements in procurement, buildings and human resources policy can be achieved, and I call on the House to vote for this.

Report (A5-0095/2000) by Mr Mulder, on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control, on granting discharge to the Commission in respect of the decisions on clearance of accounts of the Guarantee Section of the EAGGF for the 1993, 1994 and 1995 financial years (C4-0128/1998) - C4-0372/1998 - C5-0167/2000 - 1997/2167(DEC))

(Parliament adopted the decision and the resolution in successive votes)

Report (A5-0079/2000) by Mr Casaca, on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control, on the proposal for a Council regulation amending Regulation (EC) No 723/97 on the implementation of Member States' action programmes on control of EAGGF Guarantee Section expenditure (COM(1999)0169 final - C4-0225/1999 - 1999/0091(CNS))

Report (A5-0086/2000) by Mr Dimitrakopoulos and Mr Leinen, on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs, on the European Parliament's proposals for the Intergovernmental Conference (14094/1999 - C5-0341/1999 - 1999/0825(CNS))

Madam President, this is a compromise amendment which was negotiated among groups and then, of course, examined by the various groups last night.

Our Group supports this compromise amendment with, however, the exception of one word: "plus" - "plus proportionnelle".

Presumably the English version is "more proportional".

However, under the Rules, it is not possible to ask for a split vote on a compromise amendment.

I note that if Amendments Nos 100 and 101 were both to be adopted, it would come to exactly the same text as this compromise amendment, except for the problematic word "more".

As I know that colleagues in other groups had exactly the same problem with this word, I would suggest to friends and colleagues that it might be appropriate not to accept the compromise amendment but to vote instead in favour of both Amendments Nos 100 and 101, which are compatible, and that would achieve precisely the result desired by many people.

But I have to apply the rules.

A compromise amendment has been put before me.

Mr Brok, could you respond to Mr Corbett' s remarks, and say whether you agree to change the compromise amendment?

Madam President, we would like to keep the compromise amendment.

I put the question to Parliament.

Are there any objections to our putting this compromise amendment to the vote?

I thought that was the case.

Madam President, I think it is fair that it be put to the vote.

However, my Group and many others will vote against it in order to support Amendments Nos 100 and 101, which will achieve almost exactly the same effect with the slight improvements.

Yes, Mr Corbett, but I have to ask Parliament if there are any objections to my putting the compromise amendment to the vote.

Madam President, this amendment has been tabled under the Rules of Procedure and it should be voted on accordingly.

If it is rejected, we can then switch to the rules suggested by Mr Corbett.

Let us have a vote on the amendment, and if it is rejected, we can proceed as Mr Corbett has suggested.

Excuse me, Mr Brok, Rule 130 of the Rules of Procedure is very clear.

It says that if there are any objections to putting a compromise amendment to the vote, the President of the European Parliament must leave it to the wisdom of the House.

I am only following the Rules, just as I should.

(Parliament decided not to put the compromise amendment to the vote)

on Amendment No 118 from the Greens/ALE Group

Madam President, there seems to be a lack of correspondence between the different linguistic versions of Amendment No 118.

The French version simply refers to "les autorités compétentes", whereas the English version refers to "the competent devolved authorities" which, in English, has a more significant meaning.

We established our voting lists in favour of this amendment on the basis of the French version.

However, I understand that the original version is, in fact, the English one, in which case, unless the word "devolved" in the English version can be removed, I will recommend my Group to vote against this amendment.

Madam President, the French text takes precedence.

Right, thank you for making that clear.

Madam President, your services were informed yesterday that we would not sign this compromise amendment.

on Amendment No 174 from the PPE Group

Madam President, we wish to request a split vote, first on the term "four-fifths" and then on the rest.

Actually, a split vote on the original text is scheduled, that is, if the amendment is rejected.

Are you withdrawing this amendment, in which case we will hold a split vote on paragraph 29?

Madam President, if we were to do that here, we would not need to present the oral amendment on Paragraph 29.

So it would be easier to do that here.

So what you want, if I have understood properly - and I also want to check with the rapporteurs - is for us to vote on paragraph 29 with an oral amendment.

Madam President, I have the highest regard for Elmar Brok, but in this case he is mistaken.

The only point of the compromise amendment was to add the word "continuing" in English or "anhaltend" in German to "serious" , which is "schwerwiegend" in the German version.

We have not agreed on the four-fifths majority, so it is just too late for this now.

We cannot split this again now.

If the amendments are withdrawn, I will take the vote on the original text.

Now, on the original text of paragraph 29, I believe I had a request for an oral amendment from one of our rapporteurs.

So I will give him the floor to present his oral amendment and then we will have a split vote and roll-call vote on paragraph 29.

Mr Dimitrakopoulos, if you would like to present your oral amendment, Parliament will decide.

Madam President, the oral amendment consists of adding the word 'continuing' to the second part.

That is clear. Are there any objections to putting this oral amendment to the vote?

Madam President, this interesting idea simply takes up in oral form the compromise amendment that has just been rejected.

It is not really in order with our normal procedure.

Are there twelve Members against putting this oral amendment to the vote?

(More than twelve Members rose to oppose the vote on the oral amendment)

Madam President, I would like to say just one thing to the Group of the Party of European Socialists. It has subsequently voted against or withdrawn its name from all the compromise amendments that it had signed, without informing us of this.

I do not think that this is a reasonable way to do business or how we should treat each other!

Madam President, I must refute what Mr Brok said.

A number of compromises were made and we respected those compromises, except in two cases where there are problems, as we sometimes find when we take compromises back to our various groups.

I proposed a solution in both cases.

In this case, we informed your services yesterday that we would not be signing that compromise amendment.

Thus, it should never have been tabled in our name.

It may have been a compromise between the ELDR and the EPP Groups, but it was not a compromise which we signed.

Madam President, I would like to make a political declaration on behalf of my Group in relation to an issue which I believe has left a nasty taste in the mouths of all the groups in this House: the vote on paragraph 3, on the composition and distribution of seats in the European Parliament.

My Group will vote in favour of the Dimitrakopoulos/Leinen report, but I propose that the Committee on Constitutional Affairs, in its wisdom, be charged with the task of finding a solution to this issue, because it is enormously sensitive throughout this House.

I warmly congratulate our two rapporteurs, Mr Dimitrakopoulos and Mr Leinen.

Mr President, I would have been tempted to follow the example of Mr Cox and abstain from the vote on Mrs Stauner' s report, but, in all honesty, I have to say that before I left to come to Strasbourg, some pensioners asked me what I was going to do here.

When I told them that my tasks included voting on the postponement of discharge, which we are discussing today, they asked me to remind the President of the House that the pensioners and their party, which I represent, consider that expenditure takes up too great a part of the European Parliament' s budget. They therefore call for expenditure to be halved and the resources freed up in this way used to increase the pension funds of the 15 Member States, which have been in serious difficulties for too long now.

- The Liberal Group today supported the amendment tabled by Jean Louis Bourlanges of the Group of the European People's Party, which called for the resolution to be separate from the explanatory statement.

By way of explanation, consider the following quotes:

"One might conclude that the Commission had decided in some fields to draw a veil over and forget past events.

The Commission has sought to distract the public attention from unresolved internal problems in the present by making glib and bombastic promises for the future."

"The Commission apparatus which wielded excessive power even under President Santer has now become even more powerful; moreover it is all too often dominated by coteries".

By any standards these comments are excessive, unfair and, in the context of the discharge procedure, wholly unsuitable.

On the final vote on the resolution we were faced with three choices today: to vote in favour, to vote against or to abstain.

We chose to abstain and this requires explanation.

To vote in favour of the Stauner report is to vote for postponement of granting discharge which, all things considered, we believe should be granted now.

As we explained in the Budgetary Control Committee, our preference was to vote "yes" to reform but "no" to visiting on this Commission the sins of its predecessors.

In the Liberal Group we have been consistently in favour of many of the elements in the Stauner report such as access to documents - it is a duty of the current Commission to provide access to documents.

But the political question remains - is this the moment and is this the issue for an apparent public stand off between Parliament and the Prodi Commission?

If we do not vote in favour of the report it is because we want to indicate a preference to do business on reform now rather than later because we believe, on the evidence to date, that this Commission is a reformist Commission.

Voting against the report would merely have the effect of sending the report back to the Budgetary Control Committee without a clear expression of what happens next and by what means.

We are against such an approach.

So we have chosen to abstain.

This is a motivated abstention rather than an indifferent one.

Our Group preference was to have voted to grant discharge while promoting reform which we accept is also the view of the European Commission.

Unfortunately, today's choice did not allow for such an option and so we have chosen to abstain.

The French Socialist delegation has voted for Mrs Stauner' s report postponing the granting of discharge for the financial year 1998, because it resulted from a compromise by our political group with the Group of the European People' s Party (Christian Democrats) and European Democrats and the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party.

This resolution reflected the desire of the majority of members of the Committee on Budgetary Control to break the deadlock over Mrs Stauner' s proposed report in the committee, but also in the European Parliament, which was putting our institution' s relations with the Commission onto a defiant footing.

The French Socialist delegation is glad a majority was achieved to pass Amendment No 5 highlighting the slippage between the resolution put to the vote and the explanatory statement.

By that vote, Members have reaffirmed that only the rapporteur is responsible for the explanatory statement.

The proposed report Mrs Stauner submitted to the Committee on Budgetary Control caused consternation far beyond the members of the committee itself.

Indeed, the proposed document bore little relation to the discharge procedure, which is about approval of the accounts for the financial year and the propriety of the expenditure.

The resolution put to the vote in Parliament today presents a catalogue of reasonable demands and recommendations to the Commission.

The postponement and the response time given to the Commission allow it to answer the questions from the Committee on Budgetary Control within the set time.

They leave the Committee on Budgetary Control sufficient time to prepare a report which will rule effectively on the implementation of the 1998 budget by the Commission.

- (IT) The delegation of the Democratic Left to the European Parliament, of which I am chair, voted against the Stauner report on the 1998 discharge because it does not agree with the basic line taken.

The report does not focus on the Commission' s actions during 1998, to which the discharge relates, pursuant to Article 205a and Article 206 of the Treaty and Article 89(5) of the Financial Regulation, but is lingering over alleged cases of fraud, most of which occurred in the early nineties during the terms of previous Commissions.

The Prodi Commission has undertaken a vast reform, which is necessary in order to modernise the European civil service and to reorganise its structures in preparation for the many challenges which it will have to face over the next few years.

We, too, are convinced that reform of the budgetary control and programme management procedures is essential, for these systems have proved to be inadequate.

Indeed, it is necessary to ensure not only that past cases of fraud cannot be repeated, but also, and above all, that the level of management errors identified by the Court of Auditors in its annual report is greatly reduced.

In any case, it is not by attempting without fresh proof to reopen disciplinary proceedings which have now been concluded that we will achieve a thorough, effective reform of the Commission.

It should be recalled that 80% of Community funds are managed at national level, and improving the financial management of the European Union budget could not therefore be contemplated without the cooperation of the Member States.

Furthermore, we fear that behind this unjustified vicious attack lies an attempt to use such incidents to undermine and sabotage not just Commission actions but the work of the European institutions in general.

We cannot therefore support the perpetrators of these schemes, and, for this reason, we voted against the report.

- (NL) In view of the inadequate management with regard to the buildings and personnel policy contracted out, as mentioned in the Kuhne report and in the report by the Financial Controller, we are of the opinion that discharge to the European Parliament in respect of the implementation of the 1998 budget must be postponed.

The European Parliament must operate the same high standards with regard to its own management as are required of the Commission.

We are convinced that discharge can only be granted to the European Parliament in respect of the implementation of the 1998 budget, provided that specific measures are taken to buck this deplorable trend once and for all.

We are very much in favour of a specific action plan through which such mismanagement can be prevented in the future.

Mr President, I would like to underline that no one in Parliament will agree with every single item and every single paragraph of this important report.

The overall message that we are giving to the IGC is that this Parliament wants the IGC to be ambitious, to think long term and not short term and to address all the issues that need to be addressed if a Union of nearly 30 Member States is to be able to function effectively.

We have put a large number of suggestions on the table.

Clearly, not all of them will be taken up in the form which this Parliament has advocated.

We think it is right that the IGC should look at these issues, look at them seriously and come up with appropriate solutions that will enable the Union to work.

My Group, as you know and as Barón Crespo has just said, has some reservations on particular points.

They relate, in particular, to the composition of this Parliament, where unfortunately attempts to reach a compromise position fell down at the last minute.

We must come back to this issue and put forward a proper proposal on a matter which is of direct concern to this House.

I am confident that we can do that.

We were very near to a compromise agreement.

We should be able to crack this one.

We are happy to vote for the report, given the circumstances, and with the reservations I have just described.

Mr President, I have voted against this report.

I have voted against this report for almost the same reasons that Mr Corbett has voted in favour.

I have the same objectives: an ambitious Intergovernmental Conference which deals with the real issues and looks to the long term.

I believe that this Parliament is sending a confused message to the Intergovernmental Conference through this resolution.

Reading it will not give a true idea of the message that Parliament wanted to send in relation to this Intergovernmental Conference.

Therefore, Mr President, while I am in absolute agreement with many of the things said in the resolution, I disagree with many others and regret, for example, with regard to an issue as important as the Court of Justice, that the resolution essentially fails to provide for the necessary reform of this institution, nor does it provide suitable clear guidelines in this respect.

For all these reasons, I regret, once again, to say that I have voted against.

Mr President, we are opposed to the Dimitrakopoulos/Leinen report because it proposes an integrated, centralised, rigid model of Europe, which is the opposite of our Europe and which can only block enlargement.

We find three points in this report particularly harmful.

The first is the federalisation of the institutions, by making qualified majority voting in the Council and codecision with the European Parliament the general rule, introducing transnational European elections, and strengthening the powers of the Commission in an attempt to turn it into a European Government.

The necessary but unacknowledged counterpart of all these measures is the marginalisation of the national democracies.

The second is making a constitution out of the Treaties and adding a restrictive European Union Charter of Fundamental Rights, gradually subjecting the peoples to texts which go far beyond them and which will be imposed on them, without any of them, individually, being able to escape that.

Thirdly, the totalitarian drift of so-called European democracy, with the introduction of mechanisms, in particular making the application of Article 7 of the EU Treaty more flexible so that a Member State can be suspended, mechanisms, then, which will give a handful of leaders authority to operate a thought police across the continent, even against peoples expressing themselves democratically, as in Austria.

One of the most controversial points that arose during the debate was the contradiction between the anticipated proliferation of Members of the European Parliament because of enlargement, and the ceiling of 700 Members the Treaty of Amsterdam has imposed on our Parliament.

That limit was chosen to make the European Parliament resemble a national one, but all it does today is set the countries against each other, as none of them will accept a reduction in its quota of Members, and that is understandable.

The Europe of Nations Group proposes putting an end to these conflicts by breaking through the ceiling of 700 Members.

Why not a European Parliament of 1000 Members?

It could work in variable geometry formations and its originality would have a powerful impact on the imagination.

Mr President, I shall endeavour to explain myself clearly.

I voted against this report and I was not alone in doing so.

We did so with conviction on behalf of the European regionalists of the ALE.

We form part of the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance, but by taking this position we wanted to express our disillusionment over what is being discussed here today.

This agenda is, of course, too restricted.

Europe is very ambitious when it comes to enlargement, which is a good thing, but it is not ambitious enough to provide a real democratic structure that emanates from the regions and the people.

We regret that all amendments that serve to incorporate this dimension into Europe have been rejected.

We have had to conclude that, contrary to our expectations, the power of the large states will increase and the power of the European Parliament and the possibility of our regions being represented within it, will decrease.

We therefore hope that the IGC will prove successful in getting vigorous reform under way.

We had to vote against because we do not fully identify ourselves with the structure of this democratic Europe.

Mr President, like many others in the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance, I have voted against this report for many reasons, but above all for three reasons.

First of all, it is not, as many perhaps believe, federalism which is now a salient feature of Parliament' s attitude but, rather, centralism.

It is the big States which are obtaining more power, those and the central institutions.

There is no trace of decentralisation and the redistribution of power and no sign of any substance being given to the subsidiarity principle.

Secondly, no adjustments are being made in anticipation of enlargement, which is perhaps the most serious feature of all.

If a Union of 28 Member States is to be successful, it must obviously have a flexible structure.

There must be clear definitions of powers in regard to what is to be decided centrally, what is to be decided in the Member States and what can be decided at regional level.

There is nothing of this, however.

If such a large Union is to be a real success, a large proportion of the decisions now made centrally must clearly be decentralised to a lower level.

Otherwise, the whole system will implode.

Thirdly, this is no democratic, constitutional process but a case of a power game behind locked doors.

Mr President, I express my disappointment at my Green colleagues and my own group, because I was left with no opportunity to vote on two key amendments on the common, foreign and security policy.

One was an amendment on the arms industries and arms exports and the other was on nuclear weapons.

It was very important for us to have an opportunity to say whether nuclear weapons play a role of any kind in the future of the common, foreign and security policy.

Unfortunately, my Green colleagues deemed these amendments unnecessary, which raises the question whether the Greens are changing their policy on nuclear weapons and on the arms industries.

I voted against the report itself, because I feel that more centralisation means less safety for smaller Member States, less democracy, less involvement of people at a local and national level.

This is not in the interest of the ordinary people of Europe.

A new constitution for Europe that overrides national constitutions, a legal personality for the European Union and, of course, more militarisation: this is not the kind of Europe I want.

I want a de-militarised Europe, a democratic Europe where the people have the real say, not bureaucrats.

Mr President, I voted for Amendment No 100 to the Dimitrakopoulos/Leinen report on the European Parliament' s proposals for the Intergovernmental Conference, which, I regret, was not adopted by the House.

It laid down that elections to the European Parliament should be held as soon as possible using the same lists of candidates in all 15 Member States, that is to say genuinely European lists.

I feel that this amendment is based on a point which brings the citizens much closer to Europe and the European Union: the citizens who are called on to vote realise that the candidates are the same throughout the 15 States, and this would show them that Europe does exist and that there is a reason for its existence.

This is why I voted for this amendment.

Mr President, I voted in favour of the motion for a resolution although I did not agree with the individual points.

I regret that, at the end of the day, only 238 Members voted for the text, and I would like to ask those responsible for the running of this House to check whether the procedure followed really made sense.

To my mind, the fact that so many amendments were tabled is a sign that there had been a failure to reach sufficient agreement beforehand, and the fact that not even the compromise amendments were adopted is a sign that we were not yet ready to vote on this in plenary.

I would also ask you, Mr President, to raise this vote in the Bureau, and to consider whether we cannot arrange matters differently, so that we avoid a mammoth voting session like this, which has lasted two and a half hours.

And I am sure that in the end there was not a single Member here who could understand what this was all about.

We should make sure we do not have procedures like this in plenary in future!

Mr President, although I am broadly in favour of the Dimitrakopoulos report on the Intergovernmental Conference, I abstained on the final vote.

In fact, in the course of one paragraph - paragraph 32 - the scope of which will certainly have escaped the majority of Members, the door has been opened to calling into question the current status of public services in the context of international trade negotiations, especially WTO negotiations, without the agreement of a Member State. This is proposed on the pretext of amending article 133 of the Treaty and, in fact, making it possible to break the principle of the agreement of all the States in establishing the position of the European Union as regards services, investment and intellectual property rights.

The rejection of Amendment No 57, which would have removed this ambiguity, therefore leads me to abstain on the text although, I repeat, I support its main thrust as regards the IGC.

And I am quite sure the IGC will not retain the current wording of paragraph 32.

Mr President, I voted for the Dimitrakopoulos report, although I do have some reservations about it. The Dimitrakopoulos report does not go far enough for me in terms of EU federalisation and integration.

I believe that we should go much further, and move more determinedly, towards federalisation and away from nation states, towards the regions and the peoples of Europe.

I hope, even if the omens for this Intergovernmental Conference are not the best, that there may still be an opening here or there.

I am enough of a realist to know that this is a gradual process.

That is why I voted for this report and I hope that we will take many more such steps in the near future.

Mr President, I abstained in the final vote for several major reasons and also some minor ones.

It was difficult for me to support the resolution because it mixes the worst in with the best.

On the other hand, I did not want to vote against a resolution which probably represents the best the European Parliament can do at the moment.

The obvious conclusion seems to me that Parliament itself still has a long way to go to meet the profound aspirations of the majority of European Union citizens.

Moreover, the rejection of two compromise amendments during the sitting bears witness to the difficulty of finding representative majorities, as does the rejection or acceptance, by the narrowest of margins, of institutional measures of the highest importance.

To take just one example, Parliament was only able to maintain a compromise on the composition of the Commission with difficulty, but truth obliges me to state that the compromise incorporates two contradictory ideas.

We have passed a resolution actually stating that the number of members of the Commission should be limited, as long as it is not.

Is that really a very sensible position for a Parliament to take?

Ainardi, Bakopoulos, Eriksson, Figueiredo, Frahm, Koulourianos, Meijer, Herman Schmid, Seppänen and Sjöstedt (GUE/NGL), in writing.

We, Members from different parties in the GUE/NGL Group, have not voted in favour of the report concerning the European Parliament proposal for the IGC.

We oppose the development of the European Union towards a state with superior powers to those of the Member States in all aspects of policy, as the report in practice advocates.

Instead of transforming the EU into a state, we are of the opinion that the Union must be democratised.

Democratisation of the European Union must be achieved through a decreasing of the Commission's power, the introduction of openness and transparency to the legislative practices of the Council, and strengthening of the role at EU level of the national parliaments.

We further protest against the report's advocacy of the militarisation of the EU.

We insist that the EU remain a civil organisation and that the non-aligned countries' special status be respected.

We are of the opinion that the Intergovernmental Conference must reconsider the construction of the EMU, reassessing the currency union's lack of democracy and its right-wing policies.

We demand that the stability pact be reconsidered and Article 56 of the Treaty be rewritten in order to bring the ECB under democratic control.

We reiterate our condemnation of the failure to submit the EMU project to referendum in all of the Member States.

- (DA) The Danish Social Democrats in the European Parliament today voted against the report by Mr Dimitrakopoulos and Mr Leinen on the European Parliament' s proposal for the IGC.

We consider that in insisting on a broad agenda, the European Parliament is not facilitating what should be the main task of the IGC, namely that of resolving the outstanding institutional problems regarding the composition and voting rules of the Council, the Commission, the European Parliament, the Court of Justice and the other institutions, and so making enlargement possible.

The European Parliament ought instead to take up the important task of ensuring that the essential issues which need to be resolved are debated in such a way that Europe' s citizens are involved and can form their own views on the important subjects being debated.

The EU should build on a common political will to achieve the overriding objectives relating to peace, the environment and prosperity in Europe, focusing on the interests of its citizens.

The debate in the Committee on Constitutional Affairs, which adopted the draft report with a very small majority, plus the fact that more than 200 amendments have been tabled for consideration in plenary, show that this report cannot contribute to creating a common basis for the IGC.

Despite the fact that we do not consider that the European Parliament should propose all these amendments to the Treaty, we have elected to adopt positions on the individual points, as will be evident from our voting.

However, we would like to draw particular attention to the points which we think the IGC should concentrate on.

As regards the composition of the European Parliament, we have voted for calculation of the number of Members from each Member State according to a sliding scale so that the European Parliament' s composition reflects the size of the individual States, populations as well as the fact that there are benefits to be had from making the European Parliament more representative by enabling the different political viewpoints in the individual countries to be represented there.

As regards the composition of the Commission, it is important that all States have the right to a Commissioner with the same rights and obligations, particularly as in our opinion, the Commission must continue to enjoy the right of initiative.

When it comes to the voting rules in the Council, we consider that a balance must be maintained between the interests of the small and large states. This can be achieved by laying down requirements for a certain number of votes in the Council which must, at the same time, represent a simple majority of the total population of the Union.

We are open to discussing increased use of qualified majority voting, although we do not consider that it should be the rule.

Each particular instance of a transition to qualified majority voting must, however, be analysed and debated thoroughly and a balance struck between what is fundamental as far as the individual Member States are concerned and the need to make cooperation work.

It is especially important that this matter be discussed on an on-going basis with Europe' s citizens.

All Member States must demonstrate the political will to make cooperation work.

It is this will and the desire for common solutions which the EU must also build on in future.

We are not, therefore, worried that, following enlargement, the EU will be paralysed unless a thorough reform of the Treaty is carried out now.

In parallel with the IGC, the Member States are discussing a common European security and defence policy.

These discussions are far from complete, and we do not think that the European Parliament should table amendments to the Treaty before the outcome is known.

We continue to believe that the EU should not be an actual defence alliance.

In this area, the EU must focus in particular on conflict prevention and civil crisis management.

Also in parallel with the IGC, the creation of a Charter of Fundamental Rights is being debated.

We would like once again to stress that we want a charter in the form of a political document and that it should not be raised at the IGC with a view to incorporating it into the Treaty.

- (ES) The process of enlargement which the European Union has started has brought it to a crossroads and its ability to continue making progress will depend on the direction it takes.

It can therefore be said that the IGC, which is charged with proceeding with the institutional reforms which will make enlargement possible, holds the future of the European Union in its hands, since it has to decide between the minimal reform laid down in the Treaty of Amsterdam and the broad reform which will allow the Union to accept the countries which are preparing for accession and pursue its task in favour of respect for human rights, peace and social justice.

Therefore, given that we are at a crucial moment in the process of European integration, it was appropriate for Parliament to send a message indicating what it understood to be the key points of the reform.

In the Dimitrakopoulos-Leinen report which we have just approved and which I have voted in favour of, Parliament indicates that we have to make further progress and that, to this end, we have to give the European Union the necessary means to complete the shared project of peace and well-being initiated 50 years ago.

Let us hope that the IGC is aiming sufficiently high for the great challenges facing the Union and that it follows that path which Parliament has set for it.

- (SV) Enlargement of the European Union is one of the most important issues for the future of Europe.

The aim of the present Intergovernmental Conference is to prepare the EU for this enlargement.

If enlargement is to be implemented successfully, certain institutional changes are required.

The EU must become more efficient and more democratic, and a balance should be maintained between the small and large countries. Moreover, it is important that the Intergovernmental Conference should be concluded before the end of the year so that the process of enlargement which has been embarked upon is not delayed.

The report on the Intergovernmental Conference is the European Parliament' s contribution to that conference.

It discusses both the necessary institutional reforms, about which no conclusions were reached in the Treaty of Amsterdam, and a number of additional questions which must also be dealt with prior to enlargement.

We, the Swedish Members, Mr Pierre Schori, Mr Jan Andersson, Mr Göran Färm and Mrs Ewa Hedkvist Petersen, support the main features of the report, but we would highlight the following points on which, to some extent, we have different opinions, which is why we abstained from voting in the final ballot.

The role of the European Parliament is to represent the people in the Union.

Enlargement means more States' representatives in Parliament.

If an efficient decision-making procedure is to be maintained, there must be a change in the way the seats are distributed.

We advocate a ceiling of 700 Members of the European Parliament.

The number of seats allocated to each country is determined through a system of degressive proportionality on the basis of the country' s population.

Should a system with a single European constituency be introduced, the number of Members should not be increased.

A new weighting of votes in the Council is a prerequisite for successful enlargement of the EU.

It is important that the solution should be a permanent one and not need to be changed in connection with any future enlargement.

It ought to strike a balance between the principles of, on the one hand, 'one country, one vote' and, on the other hand, 'one citizen, one vote' .

An alternative would be for the weighting of votes in the Council to be calculated on the basis of the root of the population in the individual countries.

We believe that each Member State should have a Member in the Commission.

The Members of the Commission work for the whole Union and are important if a consensus between the Member States is to be achieved.

The Commission should therefore be able to draw upon knowledge and experience from all the countries in the Union.

In that way, the legitimacy of the Commission would also be strengthened.

The task of protecting the Union' s interests against fraud is to be carried out by the individual Member States' institutions and not by a supranational authority.

It is nonetheless important and desirable that there should be European prosecutors in each Member State and that they should cooperate.

Unanimity in the Council must be required in questions of a constitutional and fundamental nature, as well as in questions affecting general security and defence policy.

Closer cooperation between at least a third of the Member States cannot apply in the case of defence cooperation.

EU cooperation is, in the first place, a civilian European project and ought to be distinguished from military cooperation.

The Member States have different backgrounds where military alliances and neutrality are concerned.

We made great progress in Cologne and Helsinki by preparing ourselves for preventive crisis and conflict management.

It is therefore important that the Treaty should reflect the difference between civilian and military cooperation.

Military aid of a kind which places countries under obligations to each other has no place in the EU' s Treaty.

We are not prepared to dispense with the veto in regard to military cooperation.

- The agenda of the IGC has now been set by the Member States.

We now know its general scope, and it is clear that much of the content of this resolution, regardless of its merit or lack of it, has nothing to do with it.

While Parliament is fully entitled to be aspirational, it is a mistake for us not to have focused our input into what the IGC is actually going to discuss and decide.

I fear that not doing this will damage Parliament's reputation and standing, and will not be as helpful to the IGC as it could be.

- (EL) The citizens of Europe, especially workers, farmers, small and medium-sized enterprises, women, the young, the nouveaux pauvres, all those who suffer under the policies of the EU, are already voicing their anger and disagreement, some more forcefully than others, with the choices being made by the European Union.

Unfortunately, instead of heeding the anxiety and supporting the claims of all these classes of society, the resolution on the Intergovernmental Conference kow-tows to capitalist forces and adopts the decisions made by the monopolies to militarise Europe and intervene in third countries, including militarily, in order to limit further still the national independence and the grass-roots sovereignty of individual countries.

With the Single European Act and the Treaties of Maastricht and Amsterdam, the ÅU is now beginning, under the pressure of enlargement and the new order, to address issues which it was unable to solve at previous intergovernmental conferences.

Despite proclamations to the contrary, what we have before us is an integrated plan of attack by capitalist forces on the democratic, social, collective and personal rights and freedoms which workers have fought hard to acquire within the context of bourgeois democracy.

The European Union is being used by imperialists and multinationals as a battering ram to break the people' s resistance and make them give up their fight for a better tomorrow.

The efforts being made, supposedly in the name of democracy and the "effectiveness of the institutions" , seek mainly to serve the interests of monopolies and they will inevitably be opposed by the workers and people of Europe.

What is the implication behind generalising the majority voting rule by introducing majority voting, in terms of both the number of States and the number of EU citizens, if not complete indifference to, and degradation of, the interests of the "smaller" countries, of the less developed regions, of the weaker classes of society and of the working and grass-roots classes of the EU in general?

How else are we to interpret the abolition of a country' s right of veto when its vital national interests are at stake?

What is the point of rotating Commissioners' nationalities and not rotating the presidency of the Union if not to exile a supposedly small country from the centre of power for long periods of time so that it is basically unable to defend its interests and the interests of its people, insofar as they can be defended within the framework of the European Union?

What is the point of limiting the number of MEPs, despite the increase in the number of Member States of the European Union, if not to silence those voices which criticise capitalist forces and their plans and promote political processes which brook no alternatives and which are confined to vapid changes of power which pose no threat to capitalism?

Why is the role of national parliaments being eroded by substantially limiting democratic scrutiny?

Why is the weighting of votes in the Council being changed for the benefit of the large countries, at the expense of smaller countries?

There is only one conclusion to be drawn from the EP resolution, which the MEPs of the Communist Party of Greece will be voting against, and from the Commission' s recent proposals.

The people of Europe can once again expect no good to come out of this Intergovernmental Conference.

They alone can defend their rights by conducting their own fights, fights which the EU will face in ever more acute form, ever more dynamic form, despite all its efforts to mislead, pull the wool over everyone' s eyes and sugar the pill.

Fights which will lead to coordinated action by the peoples of the EU, to a strong, pan-European, grass-roots front opposed to the EU and its policies and fighting for a different sort of Europe free from rulers, exploitation and war.

The institutional changes envisaged with a view to the enlargement of Europe, whether relating to the composition of the Commission, the weighting of the representation of the Member States or qualified majority voting, do not answer the basic questions we face ten years after the fall of the Berlin Wall about the kind of Europe we live in.

European Union policy detaches the most developed regions from any sense of solidarity, accelerating the break up of multinational federations.

Above all, it leads to the policy of a pyromaniac fireman in the Balkans, where all the political, social and environmental consequences still have to be reckoned up.

The stability plan for South-East Europe is a failure: the declarations of loyalty to NATO by the governments of Eastern Europe do not prevent the European Union treating them with contempt and imposing anti-social policies on them.

We must build a Europe capable of enlarging towards the East and the South, to all peoples who democratically express the wish to join.

A genuine public debate, involving all the peoples in drawing up a charter of rights and a common plan for society, would allow us to make progress towards that.

That is why we have voted against this report.

I am sorry I could not vote in favour of the report which contains the European Parliament' s proposals for the Intergovernmental Conference, despite the efforts made, especially by the rapporteur, Mr Dimitrakopoulos, to humour small Member States and look after their interests to some extent.

It is inadmissible to seek to cut the smallest national delegation, the Grand-Duchy of Luxembourg' s, by a third, without giving any details about reductions to the large delegations.

There are other excesses in this veritable shopping list. I denounced them yesterday in my speech and Parliament has adopted them, in particular as regards the composition of the Commission and the decision-making procedures.

Unanimity cannot be limited to constitutional decisions.

It is completely unrealistic and utopian to think that the members of national parliaments will ratify a treaty which contains such dismantling of their rights, as useless as it is unacceptable, and such a veritable castration of the national parliaments.

The Intergovernmental Conference is not intended to increase the powers of the Union; the point of the operation is to improve the functioning of a Union enlarged from 15 to 26 or even 30 Member States.

Through these excesses a majority of this Parliament has done Europe a disservice.

(SV) The Intergovernmental Conference is an historic opportunity for Member States to transform the EU into a democratic, open and efficient organisation, which is why we regret that the governments of the Member States do not have the political will to carry out an in-depth reform of the Union.

We therefore welcome the fact that Parliament wishes to accept the challenge to reform the Union along these lines, but we wish to clarify our position as follows.

A Union of 25 to 30 Member States cannot operate in the same way as a Union of 15 Member States. Instead, we need both an overview of the institutions' working methods and a clearer distribution of labour between the Member States and the EU.

The EU can only function efficiently and democratically if it deals exclusively with cross-border issues and leaves other issues to be resolved mainly at national level.

The difficulty for the Intergovernmental Conference is to find a delicate balance between the desire to create an efficient and democratic Union and the need, at the same time, to reflect the historic balance of power between small and large Member States. In other words, it must be borne in mind that the EU is a Union of both peoples and States.

On this basis, we think it is important for the present Intergovernmental Conference to establish the size of the Commission at one Commissioner per Member State.

With regard to the distribution of power in the Council, the Commission has proposed a system of 'double simple majority' voting on certain questions. This means that a majority is required from the Member States, but also that these States should represent a majority of the citizens if a decision is to be implemented.

This is important from a democratic perspective in view of the fact that, in this way, the voting clearly reflects the will of the people.

The Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party supports the Commission' s proposal but would emphasise that small countries should not be placed at a disadvantage.

Parliament ought to have 700 seats, distributed among the population on the basis of a degressive proportional scale.

We are well disposed towards trying out a new system involving European lists, which means that elections for a limited number of the 700 seats could take place within the context of a single constituency.

We are aware of the fact that European parties at present have little support among our citizens, but we believe that a supplementary system involving European lists would, in time, lead to an increased European identity.

An EU of approximately 25-30 Member States will lead to more countries wanting to exploit the opportunity that exists for a number of them to go further than others in certain areas of policy (so-called closer cooperation).

We do not think it is appropriate to see this as a permanent solution to the problem which will arise when the EU is enlarged.

The risk entailed in a Europe 'à la carte' is that the whole integrity and basic idea of EU cooperation will be lost.

The solidarity between cooperating States would be in danger of becoming fragmented, something which might have very undesirable consequences for the Union as such.

Flexibility of this kind ought to be seen, rather, as a temporary alternative for countries which are not yet ready, or sufficiently well prepared, to enter into deeper cooperation.

The wording in the Treaty of Amsterdam about closer cooperation is therefore an adequate and acceptable solution.

Too many parallel concentric circles create a system which is difficult to supervise.

The Union' s common objectives should be promoted within the context of such cooperation, and no Member State should be excluded from participating.

We welcome the EU' s increased opportunities to pursue a credible foreign and security policy so that the EU can assume increased responsibility when it comes to solving conflicts in the vicinity of the EU.

At the same time, we would emphasise that this development ought not to lead to our having two parallel and competing organisations for resolving conflicts.

It is therefore important to emphasise that the development concerned must take place in the context of close cooperation between NATO and the EU and that representatives of these organisations must sit down together as soon as possible and agree upon a satisfactory distribution of labour.

- While not able to endorse every dot and comma of this report, I support its broad thrust.

If we are to make a success of enlargement a number of key reforms are essential.

A Union unable to make decisions would not serve the purpose of existing or applicant states.

we must increase the use of qualified majority voting in the Council in order to avoid paralysis in decision taking,

we must limit the number of Commissioners so that the Union's executive remains efficient

and we must limit the number of MEPs to 700 to enable Parliament to function effectively.

We must continue to improve the Community's capacity for external action and further democratise key areas of the Union's activities.

- (PT) Once again, the European Parliament finds itself compelled to adopt a maximalist position on the institutions, a position bereft of any realism.

As usual, it is going all out for an unfettered federalist approach.

This is reflected in the proposal to almost totally eliminate the unanimity rule, to make the codecision process the norm, to institutionalise the European political parties, to create a European electoral club, to integrate the Western European Union, to strengthen Europol, and, to constitutionalise the Treaties in a far-reaching way.

These are ideas from which we have always unequivocally distanced ourselves and will continue to do so.

However, this report also proposes new and unacceptable ideas.

On the pretext that it is necessary to adapt the institutions to the prospect of enlargement, it is now being suggested that there should be a disproportionate strengthening at various levels of the decision-making powers of the large countries and an intolerable reduction of the decision-making powers of the small- and medium-sized countries. All this suggests and implicitly encourages the creation of political inner cabinets, which are totally unacceptable, and which will make it easier to achieve 'enhanced cooperation' .

We are, of course, opposed to such ideas.

At the same time, if the European Parliament approves a report like this, it will appear to be indifferent to situations which are obviously urgent, such as the need to overcome or at least mitigate serious democratic deficits; the need to modify the monetarist principles - in particular the Stability Pact - which are the root cause of today' s social scourges such as unemployment and unstable employment; to change the Statute of the European Central Bank so as to ensure greater transparency and appropriate controls and limits on its powers; and to make the existing principle of economic and social cohesion a reality, which is a vital step in creating a Europe of the future based on solidarity.

The European Parliament could demonstrate its worth by adopting these policies.

But if it opts for the proposals contained in the Dimitrakopoulos-Leinen report, this will suggest that it is becoming increasingly remote from the people it is supposed to represent.

We will therefore be voting against the report.

- The complexity of the IGC process inevitably requires a complex response from the European Parliament.

The Dimitrakopoulos/Leinen report covers a wide range of issues which could be considered in the framework of the IGC which is taking place over the remainder of 2000.

The debate which has begun between Member States is reflected in the points of view expressed within the European Parliament, as is the tension over the scope of the IGC.

The European Parliamentary Labour Party believes that it is imperative to conclude the IGC before the end of 2000 in order to leave the EU fully prepared for enlargement.

In order to achieve this, we believe that the scope of the IGC should be restricted to "tidying up" the outstanding points from Amsterdam, plus a small range of other issues.

EPLP Members voted in accordance with this approach, reflecting our concerns over the following areas:

There are doubts over the practicability of a European top-up list from 2009 of 10% of MEPs to be elected on a single European constituency.

We have concerns over the workings of a European Public Prosecutor's office whilst being concerned to protect the Union's interests and resources against fraud throughout Community territory.

Likewise, the legislative measures in criminal matters in respect of fraud damaging the interests of the Union will need to be carefully constructed.

The EPLP believes that unanimity cannot solely be restricted to constitutional items, as issues including tax and social security must be dealt with at national level.

Constitutionalising the Treaties and division into two parts is not acceptable to the EPLP, and the same concerns about unanimity apply here.

The EPLP wishes to see a Charter of Fundamental Rights, but until the content of the Charter is determined, the question of giving it binding legal force should be left open.

Whilst greater coordination is required at European level over our airspace (i.e. Eurocontrol), service provision should remain at national level - the Commission has never suggested a single agency and Eurocontrol already exists to coordinate.

The Commission has not previously called for the establishment of a single European air traffic control agency and the request in this report is superfluous.

- (SV) As representatives of the Swedish Christian Democrats, who view enlargement towards the East as being clearly the most important issue for the EU, I wish to make the following remarks before the Heads of Government and State discuss the European Union' s powers and forms of decision making at the forthcoming Intergovernmental Conference.

1) There ought to be one Commissioner per Member State (paragraph 10).

This is about the Commission' s legitimacy and future and about its being able to claim popular support.

2) There ought to be at least six Members of the European Parliament per Member State and, thereafter, a degressive proportional system as at present (paragraph 3.2) and not, as the Committee on Constitutional Affairs proposes, only four Members per State, followed by a strict proportional system.

This is required if it is to be possible to mirror the political breadth and diversity in each Member State.

3) There ought not to be any pan-European lists or single European constituency (paragraph 4).

So as not to make the distance between electors and elected representatives still greater, the Member States should remain as constituencies.

4) 700 should not be set as the upper ceiling for the number of Members of the European Parliament (paragraph 3). Instead, a certain flexibility should be possible, depending upon the number of Member States in the EU.

5) No EU financing of parties which operate at European level should be introduced, nor should any democratically dangerous and arbitrary suspension procedure (paragraph 6).

6) Decisions by qualified majority voting in the Council should not be taken on the basis of a simple majority from the Member States. Instead, it ought to be a two-thirds majority (paragraph 8), and this in order to win legitimacy.

7) A decision as serious as that of suspending a Member State from the EU should require the unanimous agreement of the other Member States and not, as proposed by the Committee on Constitutional Affairs, the agreement of four-fifths of the Member States (paragraph 29).

8) Social protection should not be regarded as an issue of Community interest (paragraph 42). In accordance with the principle of subsidiarity, this ought instead to remain an issue to be legislated on at national level.

9) The financing of the EU should not be completely independent of contributions by the Member States (paragraph 44.4).

10) Respect for neutral States' solutions in the field of defence policy and for their right to make their own decisions should be clearly upheld within the framework of the CFSP (paragraph 34).

11) To make it easier for citizens of the Member States to know which institutions are responsible for what, the principle of subsidiarity (to which there are unfortunately no references at all in this report) should be integrated into the Treaty in such a way that the EU' s powers are concentrated upon clearly defined, cross-border core issues.

The national parliaments and local authorities should play an important role by ensuring that the principle of subsidiarity is respected and by monitoring governments' action in the Council.

- (SV) When the European Parliament today stated its position on the Intergovernmental Conference, I advocated solutions which also provide for the interests of the small Member States.

The trend within Parliament towards less understanding of smaller countries' needs will increase the antagonism between Parliament and the Council of Ministers.

I am concerned that there is no desire to find a balanced solution regarding the weighting of votes within the Council of Ministers and regarding the number of Commissioners who should provide for the interests of both large and small Member States.

Through my Group, I have tabled an amendment aimed at guaranteeing that all of a particular country' s nationalities and regions are represented in Parliament.

I also supported the proposal which emphasised the right of regional ministers to participate in meetings of the Council of Ministers on matters which fall within the scope of their autonomy.

However, I would express my satisfaction at the fact that so much attention has been devoted to the way in which the EC Court of Justice operates.

The Intergovernmental Conference must now give consideration to Parliament' s constructive proposals.

I am extremely surprised at the proposals which would give Members of the European Parliament the right to participate in the appointment of the judges.

Finland supports the proposal that the Commission might be given a mandate to conduct trade negotiations in regard to services and immaterial rights following decisions in the Council with a qualified majority.

When the Council in this way reaches a decision about a negotiation mandate, Parliament' s consent ought to be requested.

Otherwise, there will be a loss of democratic and parliamentary control over the trade negotiations.

Since I do not consider the report to be in earnest with regard to the demands for decision making in the Council, to the way in which judges are to be appointed and to the number of Members of Parliament, I voted against the report in the final vote (238 votes in favour, 147 votes against and 73 abstentions).

Because the report is far-reaching in its scope and because there is considerable disagreement about it, Parliament' s point of view will be of little significance.

(The sitting was suspended at 2.02 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m.)

I would just like to ask whether Mr Berlusconi' s name was included by mistake in the attendance register in the Minutes of yesterday' s sitting.

I do not remember Mr Berlusconi being present.

Mr Frassoni, the department responsible will, of course, check up on this in the simplest way: we will ask Mr Berlusconi or his assistants directly whether he was present yesterday.

Mr President, with reference to Mr Frassoni' s intervention, we sent a letter to President Fontaine this morning. We, too, would like to know how Mr Berlusconi, who is tied up in an electoral campaign in Italy, came to be included on the attendance list; we would like to know the identity of the joker who played this trick, which is in appallingly bad taste, or whether there is something going on which has nothing to do with politics.

We therefore asked the President of the Parliament, Mrs Fontaine, to carry out an internal enquiry, which we hope will take place during the mini part-session at the beginning of May.

This is certainly a most regrettable incident, Mr Fiori, and I hope that the internal enquiry will shed some light on the matter.

The next item is the debate on topical and urgent subjects of major importance.

Mr President, it is very important to point out that sanctions are themselves a form of warfare.

They are targeted at the most innocent civilians, at the innocent people in societies, especially children, the most vulnerable.

The sanctions on Iraq have become a weapon of mass destruction against the helpless people there.

Over 200 children die there every single day.

We cannot allow this to go on.

Denis Halliday, who resigned his position as Director of the UN Humanitarian Mission in Iraq in protest at the sanctions, confirmed the UNICEF statistics that 5 000 to 6 000 children die every month as a direct result of sanctions.

Mary Robinson, the High Commissioner for Human Rights, has been speaking out against sanctions for a long time.

She said you cannot expect her to condemn human rights abuses in other parts of the world and let the United Nations itself be responsible for what is happening in Iraq following the sanctions.

In February Mr Hans von Sponek, the United Nations humanitarian coordinator in Iraq, followed in the steps of Mr Halliday when he also resigned in protest at the on-going sanctions and the bombing of the Iraqi people.

Within hours of his resignation, the head of the World Food Programme in Iraq since January 1999 also resigned in protest at the sanctions.

These resignations must cause the world community to reconsider the justification for the continuing sanctions policy and also the bombings.

I would like to point out that 70 Congressmen sent a letter to Bill Clinton in the United States asking him to lift the embargo, asking him to de-link economic sanctions from the military sanctions that are currently in place in Iraq.

It is not just here in Europe that people are concerned, but right across the world.

If anyone looked at the very good documentary by the world-famous journalist, John Pilger, they would see what is happening there.

Can we allow this to go on without saying something about it?

It is a blatant violation of international human rights laws.

The sanctions are targeting the most vulnerable in society and making them suffer yet, at the same time, the elite in that society and the people who are part of the Saddam Hussein regime do not suffer from the sanctions.

It is the ordinary people who suffer.

We cannot allow this to go on.

It is not right and the US Congressmen who sent the letter to Bill Clinton are quite right: we have to de-link economic sanctions from the military sanctions that are currently in place.

We also have to address the bombings that are taking place without any UN mandate.

A whole family was wiped out by these bombings, as shown in Mr Pilger's documentary.

This is something we cannot ignore and we must push for an end to this inhumane policy.

Mr President, firstly let me say to my colleague and friend, Ms McKenna, that there is nothing in what she said that I do not agree with.

No Member of this House can remain unmoved by the harrowing situation in which so many Iraqi people find themselves.

The facts have been presented by respected international bodies such as UNICEF.

We have no reason whatsoever to doubt their veracity.

There are shortages of essential foodstuffs and agricultural infrastructure resulting in severe nutritional deficiencies.

Iraq, once one of the most economically advanced countries of the region, is being reduced to underdevelopment.

But let there be no illusion as to the role of the Iraqi regime in the suffering of its people.

The consistent refusal by the regime to fully implement United Nations resolutions has led to a situation where the sanctions remain firmly in place almost ten years after the invasion of Kuwait by Iraq.

Furthermore, the refusal of the regime for five years to accept the oil-for-food programme has certainly contributed to the humanitarian situation.

We, in Parliament, are well-intentioned towards the people of Iraq and are serious in our desire for a peaceful and lasting solution.

We must concentrate our efforts on convincing Iraq to implement the United Nations resolutions.

We must make it very clear in this forum that United Nations resolutions are legally binding on all members of the United Nations.

The European Parliament must not be seen to undermine the legitimacy of such resolutions in any way.

Any such action would be grist to the propaganda mill of the Iraqi regime.

It is within the power of the regime to have the sanctions imposed by the United Nations lifted.

To date, the regime most regrettably has preferred to allow its people to be threatened by disease and starvation than to respect international law.

Full implementation of Resolution 1284 obliges Iraq, among other things, to cooperate with the Red Cross in overseeing the repatriation of detainees.

Let us recall that last January this House voted unanimously a resolution calling on Iraq, as a minimum, to provide answers to the Red Cross as to the whereabouts of the missing Kuwaitis for which there is documented evidence.

I too have met some of these people.

I have shared their suffering with them.

Let us clearly understand that is a tragedy in itself.

We are caught between a rock and a hard place.

It is heartbreaking to see innocent children being sacrificed by their own leaders for purely personal, political motives.

Mr President, during these last few days, Parliament has been watching an extraordinarily powerful documentary on the effects of the sanctions on Iraq, and I would like to thank Patricia McKenna for this.

Civilians, men, women and children are dying because of the sanctions.

I will not repeat the figures, for we are all aware of them and they have been quoted many times in this Chamber.

But what a contradiction. What a tragedy.

In the name of the protection of human rights, the rich, powerful countries of the West are killing communities and starving them to death.

During the war in Yugoslavia, American aircraft continuously bombarded towns, killing civilians.

It is better to tell the truth and admit that the interests of the United States take precedence over those of communities.

Today, we are going to vote on a motion, a very important motion for a resolution calling for an end to the sanctions, an end to the embargo.

I feel that we must then act in order to give practical effect to our resolution.

There is no doubt about the fact that it is important for Iraq to change its policy and that the existing arms must be monitored and decommissioned, but, in this regard, there is abundant documented evidence that the nuclear and chemical weapons have already been decommissioned.

However, I also feel that a clear policy must be developed for the decommissioning of nuclear weapons where they exist in the Middle East.

For example, Israel is full of nuclear weapons and no one is asking Israel to decommission.

Unfortunately, even the resolution called for by Egypt was not supported by the European Parliament in Cairo.

We must do everything possible to free this world from the nuclear threat.

Today, I would also like to pay tribute to Dennis Halliday - mentioned by Ms McKenna as well - who was responsible for the oil-for-food deal.

In a world of hypocrites and careerists, Dennis Halliday had the courage to speak out over the implications of the sanctions on the Iraqi people and to condemn the lies of the United States departments.

Saddam Hussein is certainly responsible and guilty, but we are also incurring a great deal of responsibility and guilt in continuing with a policy which maintains the population of a country in extreme poverty, a population such as the Iraqi people, with a rich history and culture, a population made up of people, women, children, who want to live.

I hope that when the embargo imposed on Iraq is lifted, this will be the end of all embargoes everywhere throughout the world.

This is important for all of us.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, here we are debating a tragic issue - a source of shame to all of us - and Mr Ford is not here. Not one of Parliament' s noble spirits is here, and yet the sanctions against Iraq are already ten years old, ten years!

People think the war, the missiles and the gassings are over, but the filthy effects of this war, which was never clean, go on.

There is still bombing in the North and in the South.

Cornfields are being burned in a country which invented agriculture; date palms are being burned daily.

In the Strasbourg newspaper yesterday, there was an interview with a priest who risked his life just to go to the Babylon area, in Ur.

For people who go there, taking ambulances and medicines, like me and the National Front, Iraq is a vast concentration camp.

18 million women, children, old people, men, a whole Arab people, are being held captive in their own country by the West, with millions of deaths every day, hundreds of children dying, a systematic, scientific, meticulous, planned, cynical, perverse genocide.

It is not just their bodies which are under attack by being deprived of food, milk, meat and fruit. Their minds are under attack as well.

Even pencils are banned, on the pretext that their graphite could be used as coolant in the nuclear power stations.

There are schools but there is no paper.

There are doctors, but there is no medicine.

There are hospitals, but there is nothing inside them.

They were promised food in exchange for oil. But they are asked to practically give their oil away and then buy food.

Ladies and gentlemen - especially Members who are not here - by what right is this happening?

We should not have to go there in thirty years time, like the Belgians in Rwanda, and say sorry, or like the Holy Father, who is prostrating himself all over the place.

The honour of Europe depends on our speaking out for these young Arabs, for this great people being consigned to the night.

It is all very well being afraid of imaginary dangers in Vienna, but it is in Baghdad that the violation of human rights is taking place.

Let Washington' s Nebuchadnezzar let these people go, these slaves in their own country.

They must be released from this poverty.

Just as people kept silent about Spain in 1936, just as people kept silent about the camps, they are keeping silent about Iraq. There is no time to lose; this people could cease to exist.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I ask you to act quickly.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, Parliament will shortly be voting on a joint resolution and that is certainly not just because we are determined to have a clear conscience and actually condemn the perpetuation of sanctions which have never achieved their goals, as everyone agrees.

It is also because we think there is a real possibility of preventing a new risk of military force being unleashed there, given the experience of our colleague, Mr Buttiglione, who has been to Iraq and has alerted us to the fact that there is currently a significant risk of renewed bombing.

He had the opportunity of meeting representatives of the Iraqi government, from whom he was able to obtain a commitment to respect the United Nations resolutions.

So he undertook to ensure that Parliament would send a strong signal to the Iraqi people, given that its government agrees to implement the United Nations resolutions.

We have committed ourselves to ask for the immediate lifting of sanctions.

That is the purpose of this joint resolution and all the groups have agreed that, to show Parliament' s unanimity on this distressing issue, there should definitely be no amendments.

Mr President, I can only endorse the speeches that have just been made, especially Mr Morillon' s.

We certainly cannot continue to accept this situation.

But we can feel gratified that we are voting in Parliament today on a resolution on the situation in Iraq which has, for the first time - and I hope we will take advantage of this to change our style a bit - won the approval of almost all the political groups.

That unanimity is reassuring, because all the signatories to this resolution are in agreement on the essential point. That has happened because we all now know that the essential point is a certain concept of humanity, relations between peoples, values - in short, civilisation, the heart of Europe' s identity.

Mr President, this resolution clearly calls for respect for the UN resolutions, especially Resolutions 687, 688 and 1293, and also Resolution 1284 on which we are seeking clarification.

I would mention, too, that only two members of the Security Council voted for it, against the advice of the three other members who abstained.

Mr President, this does not mean we are releasing the Iraqi regime from its responsibilities and obligations.

It means that, for the first time, the international community is being asked to show consistency with its own principles, because the various UN committees agree that these resolutions have been virtually all applied by the Iraqi regime, except for some minor points of interpretation or detail.

And here I differ slightly from Mr Collins.

The fact is the discrepancies between Iraq and the international community do not justify maintaining the embargo.

Remember, the Iraqi people are innocent.

But it is they and not their rulers, who were never democratically elected, who are now paying the price of these sanctions in human lives.

Mr Hans von Sponek, the former head of the UN Oil for Food Programme, mentioned by Ms McKenna just now, said that, as a human being, with a heart and a soul, he could no longer tolerate what he was seeing in Iraq.

The disproportion between the constantly reiterated demands of certain members of the Security Council for the sanctions to be ruthlessly maintained and their consequences for the Iraqi people is - I am weighing my words - truly terrifying!

UNICEF estimates that half a million children have died as a result of nine years of sanctions, to the utter indifference of the civilised world.

It must be remembered that the rules of war involve respect for civilians.

The right of coercion over populations - it must also be remembered - should not lead to the right to starve them.

That is also one of the great principles of Western civilisation!

Mr President, our resolution is very consistent.

It calls for respect for all the UN resolutions first and foremost, clarification of Resolution 1284 and, consequently, the lifting of sanctions and constant vigilance against the Iraqi regime, respect by all for the rules of the UN Charter, including the members of the Security Council who are carrying out military action contrary to international law and, finally, the search for a global political solution.

Mr President, that is the only way dictatorships can really be weakened and concord between all the peoples of the region promoted.

For once, Europe must speak with a European voice!

Mr President, Mr Morillon has already explained my Group' s position, which is in favour of this joint resolution.

For my part, I would refer to the procedure which seems to me in this case to be important.

This is a debate on topical and urgent subjects of major importance, which has been devalued insofar as we are not getting a declaration from the Council, as Parliament had requested, on including this point as a Council declaration.

I would like to say that, without presenting any valid argument, this attitude on the part of the Council seems to me to show a lack of respect towards Parliament, especially when Parliament offers the Council the opportunity to make any declaration on any subject, as laid down in Rule 37.

It is truly contradictory that this Parliament cannot obtain a Council declaration on an issue as sensitive as this.

Therefore, Mr President, I would like to say that my Group intends to ask the Committee on External Affairs, at its next meeting, to present, pursuant to Rule 42, an oral question to the Council so that the Council will reply.

If this initiative is not successful, my political group will present, pursuant to the same article, an oral question to the Council so that the Council really takes seriously the worries and concerns of this Parliament and really does what is laid down in the Treaties, that is to say, to inform and cooperate with Parliament in all those areas which affect and concern the citizens of the European Union.

Mr Salafranca, you and those who are of the same opinion as yourself could also make the Conference of Presidents aware of your views.

The Conference of Presidents is shortly to meet here in Strasbourg in order to establish the programme for the forthcoming part-sessions, and it could issue a request along the lines that you have suggested.

Mr President, I am as concerned as anybody in this House about the suffering of the people of Iraq as the result of sanctions but also of the actions of their own government.

We should all remember that sanctions are sometimes better than the alternatives that we may have to consider.

If we are to support this resolution then Iraq must most definitely honour its obligations under all the United Nations resolutions.

We, as a Parliament, must stand by our resolution of January this year, calling for the release of all Kuwaitis and other non-Iraqi nationals who are still imprisoned in Iraq.

I had the opportunity to visit Iraq last month.

I met the families of the Kuwaiti prisoners.

I can tell you that fathers do not forget their sons, brothers do not forget their brothers, children do not forget their fathers; nor should this House.

We should remind Saddam Hussein that he must honour his obligations to the international community and we shall then honour our obligations to Iraq.

Mr President, the Commission shares the concern expressed during this debate.

It regrets Iraq' s decision not to accept United Nations Security Council Resolution 1284.

As Mr Collins and Mr Morillon in particular have pointed out, this decision delays the application of the new instrument of control and hence the relaxation of sanctions.

We think the Oil for Food Programme is still the best short-term solution to ease the suffering of the Iraqi population, and the Iraqi government should reverse its policy of non-cooperation and comply with all the United Nations Security Council resolutions, as has been said.

Since the Gulf War, the Community has been the principal source of humanitarian aid to Iraq, with at least EUR 240 million provided to reduce the considerable sufferings of the Iraqi people.

And we could have done even more if the Iraqi government had not imposed restrictions on the activities of non-governmental organisations, hindering the delivery of humanitarian aid in Iraq.

Given the situation we cannot pretend that humanitarian aid can do any more than alleviate some of the effects of this awful economic and human situation in the short term.

The economic situation in Iraq can only improve as economic activity develops after sanctions are lifted. This involves engaging the Iraqi government, perhaps more than we are doing today, in a dialogue on the implementation of the Security Council resolutions.

In this regard, we agree with the draft resolution.

The vote will take place this afternoon at 5.30 p.m.

The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions:

(B5-350/2000) by Mr Markov, Mr Vinci, Mr Papayannakis and Mrs Ainardi, on behalf of the GUE/NGL Group, on Chechnya;

(B5-0363/2000) by Mrs Malmström, Mr Haarder, Mr Maaten and Baroness Nicholson of Winterbourne, on behalf of the ELDR Group, on Chechnya;

(B5-0366/2000) by Mr Oostlander and Mr Posselt, on behalf of the PPE­DE Group, on Chechnya;

(B5-0375/2000) by Mr Sakellariou and Mrs Krehl, on behalf of the PSE Group, on Chechnya;

(B5-0387/2000) by Mrs Schroedter, Mr Cohn-Bendit and Mr Gahrton, on behalf of the Verts/ALE Group, on the armed conflict in the Republic of Chechnya.

Mr President, Parliament has been dealing with the situation in and around Chechnya for some time.

We have followed with concern developments in the fundamentalist Islamic forces' attempts to split Chechnya away from the Russian Federation.

We are categorically opposed to any form of terrorism and we support the fight against terrorism in every country in the world.

I believe that the territorial integrity and sovereignty of every country is an inviolable and fundamental principle.

However, for several months a war has been raging in Chechnya which none of these arguments can justify.

I spent over six years of my life in Russia and have very close ties with that country.

So I feel it all the more that Russia is totally overreacting in its use of military force in the Chechen conflict.

I find it totally unacceptable that we are witnessing violations of international humanitarian law by the Russian army.

It is a matter of deep regret and profound concern to me that militaristic thinking has now again taken hold in Russia.

It has long been recognised that military might never permanently resolves any conflict, and this needs to be remembered now.

It is high time that this war ended and that a political solution to this conflict was found, no matter how difficult and complicated that might be.

Furthermore, an enormous effort is required to restore this devastated region for the people who have lost all their possessions in the war and to make it habitable once again.

In the long term, this is the only way to remove this focus of conflict.

My Group supports this motion for a resolution, and we consider it essential that this Parliament, in conjunction with the members of the Russian Duma, should seek means of restoring peace in Chechnya without delay.

Mr President, ten days ago, the UN' s Commissioner for Human Rights, Mary Robinson, returned home from a visit to Russia where she was to investigate the situation in Chechnya in regard to human rights abuses.

She was not allowed to meet the Russian President and was treated in a most humiliating way.

In her report to the UN' s session on human rights in Geneva, Mrs Robinson reported on individual testimonies concerning very serious crimes which had been committed in Chechnya.

The witnesses she had met had told of murders of civilians, summary trials, executions, rapes, torture and kidnappings.

Domestic affairs can never be pleaded as an excuse for atrocities of this kind.

We have a global responsibility to defend basic rights.

Abuses of these cannot - must not - be seen as internal matters.

The UN' s High Commissioner must continue to be supported in his work.

The European Parliament has, on a number of occasions, expressed concern about the situation in Chechnya.

We support the Council of Europe' s decision of last week to suspend Russia if no appropriate measures are taken.

For a liberal, considerations of trade and short-term benefits cannot come before the defence of human rights.

We would therefore react vigorously to these atrocities, but we also see it as very important to cooperate with democratic forces in Russia and with the new government.

We therefore hope that we can organise a joint delegation from the European Parliament and the Russian Duma to travel to Chechnya and, there on the spot, engage in discussions, conduct investigations and bring about a dialogue.

We presume that Russia will be of assistance and allow the delegation to travel freely.

We also hope that the EU can eventually contribute to a reconstruction programme in the region.

Mr President, what has happened in the war in Chechnya has shocked us all.

A guerrilla war is being fought without the civilian population being spared, in fact, the civilian population is also suffering the dreadful atrocities that can occur in wartime.

The first war in Chechnya may have evoked sympathy from us as a battle for autonomy and independence and setting things right in their own territory, but we now have to say that, although this war really ended quite well for the Chechens, the intervening period was not used to best advantage and Chechnya became a country of complete chaos, where kidnapping was commonplace and where the citizens were no longer safe.

At one stage, Chechen generals even invaded Dagestan, an action which merited absolutely no sympathy whatsoever.

This illustrates that there are various movements within Chechnya.

On the one hand, there are the military who tend to play the Afghan card or count on Iran for support.

The other two groupings seek more of a political solution.

One of them is seeking a solution more in terms of what we in Western Europe would also wish to achieve and the other is again seeking to strengthen relations with Russia.

Mr President, the President of Chechnya has limited control over the troops in his country.

We are pleased to hear that Maskadov does not support the actions of his military.

We are also delighted to hear that the Russians are at long last admitting to the fact that Mr Putin is contacting the Chechen authorities indirectly.

We have also noted hat the Council of Europe has adopted a position in this regard.

We know from the Russian delegation that was here until yesterday that this has hit them exceptionally hard and we spoke about it with them in detail.

We have also heard that there is the possibility of a joint parliamentary delegation undertaking a fact-finding mission on an ad hoc basis under the best possible conditions with a view to looking around the territory of Chechnya wherever it sees fit to do so.

A mission of this kind must take place soon and I believe it is important that in the resolution tabled on the basis of the liberal text, an amendment is included to this effect.

Mr President, we support an exceptionally brief resolution in that regard, perhaps even the briefest ever made in this House, consisting of the first two recitals of the liberal resolution, followed by the recital in which the decisions of the Council of Europe are mentioned.

We shall vote against Article 1 because once again it involves support for this statement and we could substitute a better statement of our own.

We shall willingly support Article 2 of the liberal resolution and then Amendment No 2 as well which refers to the joint parliamentary delegation which may be more useful in the future, because it is the future that we must concern ourselves with here.

The delegation will have to examine what can be done to preserve the defence of human rights in the region, but also examine what we can do in the future to help Chechnya become a democratic constitutional state.

Who knows whether with help from the European Union and Russia, a Stability Pact for the Caucasus region can ever be achieved.

Mr President, for these reasons we support this resolution, which initially was not to our liking, but which, at the moment, provides the best basis for a statement from this House.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I do not want to repeat what the three previous speakers have said, with which I totally concur.

In addition, my colleague, Mr Swoboda, will also say a few words about the reasons behind this war.There is a very broad consensus within this Parliament condemning both the war against civilians in Chechnya and the terrorism which started in Chechnya, and this same consensus applies to the desire to maintain good and special relations with Russia.

On the other hand, we are determined not simply to stand by and watch whilst Russia violates one international convention after another in this war in Chechnya.

We support the proposal from Mr Lukin, the Co-President of the Interparliamentary Delegation of the European Parliament and Russian Duma to send a fact-finding mission to Chechnya to gather information on the ground.

We want to make use of this information at a later stage, that is after the delegation has returned, as the basis for a major debate in this House, involving the Council and the Commission, and leading to the adoption of a really well founded resolution.

For this reason and this reason alone we, the Group of the Party of European Socialists, urge you not to adopt a motion for a resolution today - which would in fact bring the total to seven - and instead wait until we have the information we need for an in-depth debate resulting in a joint resolution.

Mr President, firstly I would like to say that, through political pragmatism and through loyalty to the work that we do with the other groups in this House, we will support a joint resolution which basically supports the decision of the Council of Europe and the sending of a joint delegation from the Duma and the European Parliament.

We must also say that we do not share this kind of silence on the part of the European Parliament which is spreading to all these issues like a low mist which obscures everything.

We have even noted that the Council of Europe itself is showing more courage than this Parliament.

What has happened in Chechnya is shameful, the crushing of a whole people, and it is also shameful that this House has had to listen to 'Mr CFSP' talking about issues such as 'the proportionate use of force' or recommending that the Russian authorities lessen the intensity of the conflict.

What is a proportionate use of force in a case such as Chechnya?

What proportion are we talking about?

What is meant by lessening the intensity of the conflict in Chechnya?

Perhaps stopping the massacre of women and children?

Perhaps stopping the bombing of hospitals?

Of course, we still believe that there is sufficient reason to suspend the partnership and cooperation agreement on the basis of the human rights clause.

I would like to end by saying that I fully agree with what Mr Cohn-Bendit said in this House: in this Europe and this World which we want to build, let us have no more masking of attacks on entire peoples on the grounds of their being internal matters. We have had enough of excuses of this type.

There is no such thing as internal affairs in this world we want to build.

Either we have human rights or we do not have human rights.

Mr President, our Group firmly supports the short resolution tabled by the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party, which largely goes back to a proposal on our part, because we want to see threefold solidarity: solidarity with the people of Chechnya, which is still imminently threatened with genocide, because that is what all this is about, together with energy interests.

Just now we heard about the issue of maintaining order. The history of the twentieth century is littered with strong men who used secret services and other means to create chaos so that they could then present themselves as a force for law and order.

Let there be no mistake, we should not let Mr Putin get away with that.

We must not allow the people of Chechnya to become victims of a genocide motivated principally by raw materials interests.

Secondly, we want to show our solidarity with our colleagues on the other side of the River Ill, with our colleagues in the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe, who have taken a courageous step and who we should not lag behind in fighting for human rights.

Thirdly, we would like to demonstrate our solidarity with the Russian people, because the war in Chechnya is threatening to become an instrument of nationalism, which will be used to lever out the rule of law and freedom of the press, which are still very weak in Russia, and to turn the clock back in that country.

Anyone who wishes to defend the Russian people must work to ensure that attempts to remove press freedom, as evidenced by the Babitsky case and by many other cases, do not succeed, and that Russia continues on the path towards greater freedom and towards closer links with the European Union.

That is why we must say a resounding 'yes' to steps against these wrongdoings and why we believe that it is important for representatives of this Parliament to visit Chechnya as soon as possible, following the example of the Council of Europe and the UN Commissioner for Human Rights, Mrs Robinson.

This joint delegation needs to set off without delay.

It would be a great step forward if this succeeded.

And, as I have already said, it is vital for us to make it crystal clear that we back human rights for the people of both Chechnya and of Russia.

We wish to help both peoples and both peoples have the right to advance towards freedom and towards taking their proper place in the international community.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, foreign policy needs to be based not only on fundamental moral values and principles, but also on success in achieving its aims and objectives, and this should not be confused with opportunism.

I therefore support everything that has been said here about condemning the barbaric war being waged by Russia, which is a war that recalls the darkest days of the Soviet Union.

What we want to see is a new Russia, not a seamless transition from the Soviet Union, but a new Russia.

To my mind, it very much remains to be seen whether the new President Putin can guarantee this, certainly on the basis of what we have seen so far.

So there is no alternative to condemning this war and saying that although we certainly condemn terrorism we regard Russia' s reaction as being totally disproportionate, inappropriate and unacceptable.

That is what we should condemn.

But we should not fool ourselves into imagining that in this case we simultaneously want to achieve something important for peace in Europe and throughout the world as whole, that is to say a dialogue with Russia and ultimately a partnership with Russia.

Unfortunately, Russia is only accepting this in words, not in deeds.

That is why I think it is important that this interparliamentary delegation exists.

It is the job of the Council Presidency and the Commission, whilst at the same time defending moral values and condemning this war, to endeavour to ensure that we support those forces which are all too poorly represented in Russia, but who nevertheless wish to pursue a European path, a path towards a European partnership, a partnership with the European Union.

This is the formula we need: condemnation of the war and a visit by the delegation, after which we must take whatever steps are necessary.

And if those steps have to be harsh ones, then we should, in full awareness of the facts, not shrink back from taking them.

Mr President, once again we are discussing the situation in Chechnya.

In the last few days the Commission and the Member States have held several meetings with their Russian counterparts: the ministerial troika with Mr Putin and Mr Ivanov on 7 April in Moscow, and the Cooperation Council with Russia, last Monday in Luxembourg.

During these discussions, we have reiterated our main demands: cease-fire and political dialogue, access for, and presence of, international and humanitarian organisations, and independent inquiries into any human rights violations.

All these demands are also in the European Parliament' s resolution and the recommendation from the Council of Europe' s Parliamentary Assembly.

As the European Parliament has emphasised, the Russian authorities have failed to respond satisfactorily to these requests.

All that can be said is that Mr Ivanov finally accepted the European Union and ECHO embassies at the last Cooperation Council.

Recent discussions in the Council of Europe, the Committee on Human Rights in Geneva and this Parliament reflect growing concern amongst the European public.

For our part, we support the United Nations Human Rights Commissioner, Mary Robinson' s request to Russia to set up a broad independent committee of inquiry into any violations of human rights, based on recognised international criteria.

Last Monday' s General Affairs Council stressed the importance of maintaining an open and frank dialogue, including on this subject, with the Russian authorities.

We think Russia should pursue implementation of the partnership agreement in terms of its elements - I do mean all its elements - and provide more concrete results than we have at this stage.

The vote will take place this afternoon at 5.30 p.m.

The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions:

(B5-0340/2000) by Mr Belder and Mr Van Dam, on behalf of the EDD Group, on the Jews persecuted in Iran;

(B5­0351/2000) by Mr Sylla, Mr Brie and Mrs Morgantini, on behalf of the GUE/NGL Group, on the prisoners charged with spying in Iran;

(B5­0362/2000) by Mr De Clercq, on behalf of the ELDR Group, on 13 Iranian Jews and 8 Iranian Muslims persecuted in Iran;

(B5­0367/2000) by Mr Morillon, Mr Trakatellis, Mrs de Sarnez and Mrs Maij-Weggen, on behalf of the PPE­DE Group, on the Iranian Jews who may be condemned to death;

(B5­0378/2000) by Mr Titley, Mr Zimmeray and Mrs Karamanou, on behalf of the PSE Group, on the prisoners in Iran charged with spying for Israel and the United States;

(B5­0383/2000) by Mr Jonckheer, Mrs Sörensen and Mr Cohn-Bendit, on behalf of the Verts/ALE Group, on prisoners in Iran charged with spying for Israel and the United States.

(B5­0352/2000) by Mrs Uca, Mr Marset Campos, Mr Korakas, Mr Papayannakis, Mrs Morgantini, Mrs Ainardi and Mr Miranda, on behalf of the GUE/NGL Group, on the rearrest of Akin Birdal in Turkey;

(B5­0358/2000) by Mrs Malmström, Mrs Thors, Baroness Ludford and Mr Duff, on behalf of the ELDR Group, on the arrest of Akin Birdal in Turkey;

(B5­0368/2000) by Mr Salafranca, Mr Sánchez-Neyra and Mr Morillon, on behalf of the PPE­DE Group, on respect for fundamental democratic rights in Turkey;

(B5­0379/2000) by Mr Sakellariou and Mr Schori, on behalf of the PSE Group, on the imprisonment of Akin Birdal;

(B5­0385/2000) by Mr Cohn-Bendit, Mr Ceyhun, Mrs Frassoni and Mrs Flautre, on behalf of the Verts/ALE Group, on the imprisonment of Akin Birdal, President of the Human Rights Association in Turkey and Vice-President of the International Federation of Human Rights.

(B5­0343/2000) by Mr Messner, on behalf of the Verts/ALE Group, on the issue of Tibet within the framework of the 56th session of the United Nations Commission on Human Rights;

(B5­0353/2000) by Mr Sjöstedt, Mrs Eriksson and Mrs Morgantini, on behalf of the GUE/NGL Group, on Tibet;

(B5­0361/2000) by Mrs Malmström, on behalf of the ELDR Group, on Tibet;

(B5­0369/2000) by Mr Thomas Mann, on behalf of the PPE­DE Group, on Tibet;

(B5­0373/2000) by Mrs Muscardini, on behalf of the UEN Group, on Tibet;

(B5­0377/2000) by Mr Sakellariou, on behalf of the PSE Group, on Tibet.

Death penalty in the United States - (B5­0341/2000) by Mrs Frassoni and Mr Wuori, on behalf of the Verts/ALE Group, on the abolition of the death penalty in the United States, with particular reference to the sentence of Mr Juan Raul Garza;

(B5­0354/2000) by Mrs Boudjenah, Mr Brie, Mr Di Lello Finuoli, Mr Manisco, Mrs González Álvarez, Mr Miranda, Mr Korakas and Mr Papayannakis, on behalf of the GUE/NGL Group, on the application of the death penalty in the United States;

(B5­0359/2000) by Mr Haarder, on behalf of the ELDR Group, on the abolition of the death penalty in the United States, with particular reference to the sentence of Mr Juan Raul Garza;

(B5­0370/2000) by Lord Bethell, on behalf of the PPE­DE Group, on the abolition of the death penalty in the United States;

(B5­0376/2000) by Mr Titley, on behalf of the PSE Group, on the abolition of the death penalty in the United States, with particular reference to the sentence of Mr Juan Raul Garza.

(B5­0381/2000) by Mr Corrie and Mr Elles, on behalf of the PPE­DE Group, on the situation in Zimbabwe;

(B5­0382/2000) by Mr Mulder, on behalf of the ELDR Group, on Zimbabwe;

(B5­0386/2000) by Mrs Maes, Mrs Lucas, Mr Rod, Mr Lannoye and Mr Schörling, on behalf of the Verts/ALE Group, on Zimbabwe;

(B5­0389/2000) by Mr Van den Berg, on behalf of the PSE Group, on Zimbabwe.

Mr President, what is the purpose of this joint resolution?

Surely it is to establish a proper and public judicial process against the thirteen members of the Jewish community in the Southern Iranian town of Shiraz?

The European Parliament in no way disputes the right of the Islamic Republic of Iran to react against foreign attempts at espionage and where the burden of proof is decisive, to punish them accordingly.

The point is, however, that the arrest and imprisonment of the thirteen Jews from Shiraz up to now has been a real caricature of a normal judicial process, a process that the constitution of the Islamic Republic itself actually provides for.

What fundamental objections are we actually raising against the judicial action taken by the Iranian authorities?

To start with, a variety of scarcely plausible accusations have been levelled at the accused.

For example, proselytising against Islam and the joint teaching of boys and girls, a violation of the customary separation of the sexes in education in that country.

The latest accusation was scarcely credible to the orthodox Jewish community in Shiraz.

Finally, the official accusers raised the almost stereotypical subject of spying for 'America and the Zionists' , which means the state of Israel.

And so these thirteen Jews are being threatened with the death penalty.

And remember, this has been the case for over a year as they were arrested in March 1999.

The whole affair in the meantime smacks of the unremitting power struggle between the reformist camp around President Khatami and the conservatives around revolutionary leader Khomenei - by trampling on a defenceless Jewish minority of about 30 000 people.

What position should the European Parliament take in this tough, domestic political struggle with regard to the specific case of the thirteen Jews from Shiraz?

Of course, it goes without saying that we should support those Iranian powers that publicly declare that they are striving for a society based on the rule of law and human rights and who are open to contact with the West.

This fundamental choice involves, at the same time, not giving the hard-liners in the Islamic Republic any excuse to undermine this promising path of reform.

Our amendment in paragraph 5 is based on this very consideration.

Iranian fundamentalists will immediately attack the European request to Teheran to support the complete abolition of the death penalty - note that this is a provision that runs directly counter to Islamic law, the sharia, as a renewed attempt at the pernicious westernisation of their own Islamic Republic!

And, in their view, the abolition of the sharia is equivalent to the abolition of the present Iranian form of government.

In short, this addition does nothing to support the case of the thirteen Jews from Shiraz.

The European Parliament must not, therefore, give ammunition for propaganda in this matter of life and death to the ultra-conservatives in Iran, who, in the last few years, have quite simply been pushed onto the defensive by Khatami and his followers.

What we have in mind is a clear legal settlement of this tragedy, ending we hope with the release of all prisoners.

That would really add a happy chapter to the almost 2500 years of history of the Jewish community in the land of the Persians. God willing, that is what we shall see!

Mr President, the trial of thirteen Iranian Jews accused of espionage has opened today in Teheran.

The trial is taking place behind closed doors.

These people have been in prison for months under conditions we know virtually nothing about.

Their lawyers, some of whom are state appointed, were only allowed to look at the files the day before yesterday.

There is no guarantee of the right to a defence.

I am afraid this may only be a mock trial.

Yet the charge is so serious it could lead to the death penalty.

When the case started, we had the privilege of hearing some leading government dignitaries publicly call for the prisoners to be put to death straight away.

This case, which was built up from nothing - I think we are all convinced of that - has mobilised international public opinion powerfully.

With strong feeling all over the world, including in Strasbourg today, the international pressure has had some impact because the Iranian leaders have softened their position, in particular announcing that most of the accused would no longer be appearing on the charge of espionage, tantamount to execution.

Three have been freed on bail. Finally, the court announced this morning that the trial was being adjourned until 1 May, which is a step forward, at least.

But some of the accused are still facing the death penalty and the others face heavy sentences.

The government' s various changes of attitude illustrate their embarrassment very well.

They were incapable of stating the charges clearly until the very last minute.

It is also clear that the outcome of this trial partly depends on how the Iranian political situation evolves.

In the last parliamentary elections, in February, the reformist tendency defeated the conservatives who include the most extremist elements.

So this trial is starting at a significant moment: on the one hand, Iran is signalling openness and progress, on the other, the conservatives are trying to hang on to power by every means at their disposal.

There is consequently a risk that this case of the thirteen Iranian Jews will be used by one faction against another, in step with domestic conflicts.

Justice has little place in that kind of battle, and human rights even less.

So it is imperative that we react.

The European Union is based on the values laid down in the 1948 Universal Declaration of Human Rights. As a member of the UN, Iran should be applying them too.

That is why we must demand the release of the prisoners: the thirteen Iranian Jews, but also the other eight Moslem prisoners and the students we know absolutely nothing about.

We must also call on the Union governments to do the same.

We also demand that observers be permitted to attend the trial, because public hearings are fundamental to holding a fair trial.

Finally, we must make it absolutely clear that the development of our relations with Iran will be subject to respect for human rights in that country.

Mr President, Commissioner Lamy, ladies and gentlemen, since 1979, fifteen Jews have been executed in Iran. The charge was espionage, but their real crime was being Jewish.

Today, a new trial is starting in Shiraz, in the South.

Thirteen Jews and eight Moslems have also been detained for a year in Iranian jails, facing death by hanging.

The youngest is only sixteen years old.

Back in September, Parliament resolutely called for respect for the fundamental rights of these prisoners in terms of a fair, just and public trial, with their own lawyers and with international observers present.

When the more moderate elements won the last elections, we thought our call had been heard.

But now there is this parody of a trial, a summary procedure behind closed doors before a revolutionary court presided over by a single judge, and a cleric at that. As for observers, so far Teheran has not granted any visas.

In other words, we are disappointed, disappointed and alarmed.

We are continuing to insist that the international community be able to follow the proceedings from start to finish.

Furthermore, at the request of the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party, the European Parliament is urgently calling on the Council to send an official delegation to visit the prisoners.

There is no such thing as an internal matter where human rights are involved.

Our feelings are as strong as our concern.

We must make ourselves perfectly clear.

Iran' s possible return to the bosom of the international community has a price today.

We hope the Council and the Commission will rally unequivocally to our position.

We must remain intransigent on this point - human rights are not negotiable.

Mr President, Commissioner, if voices other than ours had not been raised in the last few days, to give the Iranian Government a warning, thirteen Iranians charged with espionage just for being in touch with relatives in other parts of the world would, at this very moment, be facing trial behind closed doors under summary procedure, leaving them no chance of their most basic rights to a defence being guaranteed.

You have just heard confirmation, from Mr Sylla, that this planned mock trial is at least going to be adjourned for a few days.

That means there is the utmost justification for dealing with Parliament' s second joint resolution on this issue under urgent procedure.

It also means there is a chance this resolution - expressing our indignation - might be heard in Iran, where the results of the recent elections have raised the hope of progress there on fundamental human rights. As everyone who has already spoken has said, it is our duty to ensure that those rights are respected.

Mr President, when we learned a few months ago that thirteen Iranian Jews had been imprisoned a year earlier, we were concerned for their fate. At that time, in an effort to reassure us, the Iranian Government told us it was not a racist trial because many Moslems had also been arrested and indicted on the same charge along with the thirteen Jews.

But the trial opening today only involves the Jews. They are being tried separately from the Moslems charged with them, which proves, if proof were needed, that this trial - which we are told is to be adjourned - is no genuine trial.

You will remember, Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, and it has been mentioned, that some Iranian Jews were arrested for spying for Israel a few years ago.

They were put on trial for it and hanged.

We should point out that they include a cobbler, a cemetery caretaker, a boy who is not even sixteen yet, and two old men.

It is hard to understand how these people are endangering Iranian democracy.

What are they supposed to have done?

We do not have the right to know what they are supposed to have done.

A letter to a family in Israel may have been enough to set this case in motion.

In a previous resolution and in repeated letters supported by the President, we asked to be allowed to visit the prisoners.

We then asked to meet the families who are not sworn to secrecy, as far as I know.

We asked - in a unanimous resolution - to be able to attend the trial.

Up to now that has been refused.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, we must recognise the immense risk run by these thirteen people and strenuously reiterate our requests to send observers to this trial and be given access to the evidence in the case. We must also make clear our intransigence on relations with Iran.

I hope we are not going to wake up, some day soon, and find that these thirteen people have been executed because they were Jewish.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance wholeheartedly supports the joint resolution that will be put to the vote today.

I agree with all the previous speakers.

But I also support the massive protests that have been taking place for some time throughout the world in connection with this affair, such as today at 6 p.m. in Brussels in front of the Iranian embassy.

Today is a special day, 13 April 2000, the date of the so-called 'trial' .

In 1979, 1993, 1998 and 1999, resolutions were sent from the European Parliament to Iran, but what happened to them?

Via Amnesty International, Jewish families and organisations, we learned that, on 8 March 1999, thirteen Iranian Jews and Muslims were arrested and detained.

The youngest is sixteen years old and the oldest forty eight.

Requests have been made to send letters, but to no avail.

The Israeli Minister for Foreign Affairs, David Levy, sent a letter to various ministers, including the Belgian Minister, to point out that these people are in no way guilty of spying.

They are Hebrew teachers and perform religious rituals, among other things.

Three of the thirteen have been allowed to choose a lawyer and the others have had lawyers forced upon them.

I heard today at 11.30 a.m. that the forum of Jewish organisations in Belgium says that there will not be a trial.

People disappear, they are locked up, but for how long?

Either that or they are used for cattle trading.

It is very worrying and must be followed up.

I hope that Iran will act wisely and responsibly and not with hatred.

Mr President, we should be clear that already some 17 Jews have already been executed in Iran for charges of espionage, which basically involves no more than contacting anyone in the outside world, certainly anyone in Israel or the United States.

That seems to me an unacceptable position for any country that claims to respect human rights.

These 13 who were arrested were arrested in secret; nobody knew of their whereabouts for two or three months.

In addition, these 13 were all religious leaders or leaders of the Jewish community.

Therefore, we can only interpret this trial as a deliberate attack on the Jewish community in Iran.

We know that there will not be a free trial; it will not be open to the public and we have no idea whether these people will have representation.

Let us send our message very clearly from this Chamber.

If Iran claims to respect human rights, trials like this should never be allowed to happen.

- (EL) Mr President, we were most satisfied to see President Khatami' s forces of modernisation strengthened during the recent elections in Iran.

At the same time, however, hopes were raised that there would be an acceleration in the processes of democratisation, respect for human rights without discrimination on the grounds of gender, religion or nationality and stronger dialogue with the European Union.

Unfortunately, the case of the 13 from the Jewish community, including a sixteen-year-old boy, is yet another link in the long chain of prosecutions, usually on trumped-up charges, intolerance and discrimination against minorities living in Iran.

Greece has started using its good relations with Iran to wage a campaign and to take steps to rescue the 13.

We are using diplomatic channels to try and ensure that the death penalty is not imposed or, more to the point, is not carried out.

We feel that such an occurrence would put both relations between Israel and Iran and stability in the already sensitive Middle East to the test, which is why the European Parliament must send a strong message to Iran today, a message stressing the need to respect human rights, respect the international conventions which Iran has signed and grant a moratorium on the death penalty.

Mr President, Turkey is now standing at a crossroads.

It can choose the past, it can choose oppression and barbarity, or it can choose the future, freedom and humanitarianism.

Akin Birdal has now been imprisoned for such a statement, in spite of his ill-health.

We are faced with a country which apparently fears its own citizens so much that it is willing to violate the most basic human rights and place the unity of the state above the freedom and rights of the individual.

We must say to the Turkish Government that the policy which the country is conducting belongs to the past.

This type of behaviour does not belong to the future, where we hope that human rights will be foremost.

Such a country will never achieve the unity which it desires.

My advice to Turkey must be: choose the future and free Akin Birdal and his colleagues.

Mr President, in Helsinki, the EU countries confirmed Turkey' s status as a candidate state.

The Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party supported this proposal.

We hope that we shall one day be able to welcome Turkey into the Community.

We believe that this message gives an important signal to the Turkish people.

But - and it is an important but - before negotiations can begin, a good many changes are required in Turkey, especially with regard to human rights.

Many of us had hoped for improvements in this area.

It is therefore all the more distressing to study all the reports about atrocities which arrive on an almost daily basis.

Turkey has signed international agreements on human rights but, as has become bitterly apparent to journalists, writers, human rights activists and opposition politicians, these are not observed.

We in the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party wish especially to express our concern about the chairman of Turkey' s Human Rights Foundation, Akin Birdal.

He had scarcely received a just trial and had been sentenced on flimsy grounds.

Following a period of freedom, he has again been imprisoned and is being denied the proper medical care he needs following the severe injuries he suffered in the attempt on his life in 1998.

In the EU, we are proud not merely to be an economic club.

The EU is a Union founded upon values, respect for human rights, democracy and the principles of the constitutional state.

Everyone, both existing and future members, must respect these criteria.

Unfortunately, Turkey still has a long way to go.

Mr President, during the debate the day before yesterday with the Council and the Commission, I mentioned the savage reaction of certain Turkish leaders to the fear that the European Union might try to interfere in internal Turkish affairs on the Kurdish question, at the very moment when a new path to membership is opening up for Turkey.

I can only repeat here as firmly as possible what I said in Ankara on my last visit there.

The European Parliament has no intention whatsoever of allowing the micro-nationalist miasma which has just drenched the Balkans in blood to develop in Turkey.

Turkish public opinion need have no fear of our being tempted to encourage any separatist claims whatsoever.

On the other hand, the values we subscribe to include respect for human dignity the world over and the right of European citizens to keep their roots in their native soil and in the culture of their upbringing.

At any rate, that is my interpretation of minority rights.

We are not trying to tell anyone what to do, but we must constantly reaffirm that the European Union - as Mrs Malmström said - is not just about creating wealth at home. There are many of us in this House who believe we must go on building Europe to promote and uphold its fundamental values, in the spirit of the founding fathers.

That is the purpose of the draft resolution we will be voting on shortly.

Mr President, two weeks ago, we met Akin Birdal in Ankara at the offices of the EU delegation.

These were his words to us then: "For five months we have had a new Turkey.

Now that the country has acquired candidate country status, we see opportunities for democracy and freedom in our country.

In addition, the internal armed conflict has ceased and our relations with Greece have improved" .

Those were Akin Birdal' s words.

Akin Birdal was free at just that particular time because of what was termed 'ill health' .

However, he would shortly be forced to return to prison if he were too healthy.

He also, of course, forfeited the right to be chairman of the Human Rights Foundation.

His so-called crime was that he had spoken about the Kurdish people on World Peace Day.

Because of this crime, and in accordance with Article 312 of the law in force, he was sentenced to one year' s imprisonment and ordered to pay fines.

Akin Birdal is a gentle and peaceful man.

He still suffers from the after-effects of the attempt upon his life in the spring of 1998.

In the course of our conversation, he said that he wanted democracy and a peaceful solution to the Kurdish question and that he saw the value of EU membership.

He also commented on how important it was to abolish 152 laws and articles which limit freedom of expression and cause so many people to be put in prison.

Mr Birdal was re-imprisoned the day after our conversation and after we had spoken with Prime Minister Ecevit about him.

What we are seeing in this case is how an undemocratic system imprisons, persecutes and oppresses democrats.

That is why, in our resolution, we are demanding that measures be taken swiftly to guarantee freedom of expression, reform the judicial system and release all political prisoners.

Mr President, the previous speaker made it easy for me because he spoke in detail about Akin Birdal who was the leader of the human rights organisation in Turkey and who is mainly known for calling for a peaceful solution to the Kurdish question.

In 1998, he survived an assassination attempt by right-wing extremists, but since then his health has greatly deteriorated.

He is now in prison again, at the very time that a number of our MEPs visited Ankara.

From Mr Schörling' s statement, it appears very clear that this is in no way coincidental.

Through this kind of action Turkey alienates itself from Europe.

The gulf becomes deeper instead of the other way round.

If Turkey wishes to heed our call, then it can only respond by releasing Mr Birdal because this is out-and-out provocation.

This is not the only instance of human rights violations that concern us.

I understand that a press bureau in Amsterdam has been ransacked and that this was formally sanctioned by the Belgian judiciary.

In the meantime we also know from incidents in Belgium who is really behind this.

Human rights are unambiguous, human rights are the same everywhere and Turkey must also be aware of that, otherwise it will never become a Member of the European Union.

Mr President, once again we protest and call upon the Turkish Government to release a prisoner who is guilty of the desire to live in a country where democracy, rights and freedom are truly respected.

Akin Birdal is not a Kurd. He is a Turk, a man of peace, condemned for speaking out about the Kurdish issue and calling for an end to this dirty war.

His imprisonment is the product of an illiberal legal system, the abolition of which Turkish democrats are fighting for, a legal system which has made hundreds and hundreds of citizens suffer.

No one who has met him could forget his smile and gentle nature.

And yet he has had to endure great suffering.

This is not the first time he has been arrested and an armed attack has been made on his life; he escaped with his life, but he was unable to leave the country and was rearrested.

Leyla Azan is still in prison, and so are thousands of Kurds.

There is no justification for the behaviour of the Turkish Government.

The KWP has stopped fighting and its leader, Mr Öçalan, is calling from jail for peace, reconciliation and recognition of the cultural identity of his people.

The European Union has accepted Turkey' s candidacy and now the Turkish Government must respect our agreements and conventions.

We must explore every possible avenue, save military interventions and embargoes, starting with a refusal to sell Turkey any more arms, so that, at last, democracy and freedom can be established in Turkey.

Mr President, from all accounts, the human rights situation in China has deteriorated considerably.

This is especially true of Tibet, where, for the time being, the Dalai Lama' s reasonable five point plan has no chance of finding its way onto the agenda.

The European Union cannot continue to turn a blind eye.

The United States presented a resolution on the violation of human rights in China at the fifty-sixth session of the UN Commission on Human Rights.

We are extremely concerned by the fact that the Council of the Union has also not yet announced its intention to support this resolution, and this may not be coincidental, since the EU-China dialogue on human rights is at a complete standstill.

We call for an end to this policy of turning a blind eye to events in China, and for the European Union to join the American initiative without worrying about losing choice economic opportunities, and to cease this silent and tolerant stance towards the continuous violations of human rights in China, and, in particular, Tibet.

Europe is laboriously and extremely inconsistently shaking off her lethargic attitude to the horrors taking place in Chechnya.

I sincerely hope that she will follow the example of the United States and, at last, wake up to the human rights situation in China.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, two weeks ago an interparliamentary conference on the human rights situation in China was held at the European Parliament in Brussels.

We Members of the European Parliament agreed, together with the Foreign Minister of the Tibetan government in exile, the US government official responsible for Tibet and members of national parliaments, that it is time we put an end to shady compromises with China for the sake of maintaining purely economic relations.

The Chinese are still refusing to enter into a constructive dialogue with His Holiness the Dalai Lama, and political repression is on the increase.

People are being mercilessly persecuted, and religious freedom and freedom of speech are being curbed.

Tibet' s culture and identity are being systematically obliterated.

These continual violations of the most fundamental human rights must now become an issue.

The United States needs the support of the European Union at the 56th UN Commission on Human Rights in Geneva.

The European Union must use its inherent authority to work for human dignity and minority rights.

If it takes the first step, other countries, including the candidate countries, will certainly follow suit.

My own group, the Group of the European People's Party, is firmly convinced of this.

Commissioner Lamy, Europe needs to stick its head above the parapet.

The Commission and the Council belong at the head of a movement fully supporting the Dalai Lama' s five-point peace plan.

Point one: Tibet must become a peace zone.

Point two: China must finally renounce its policy of expulsion.

Point three: democratic civil rights must be guaranteed for all minorities.

Point four: Tibet' s culture and environment must be protected.

Point five: genuine negotiations must take place on Tibet' s future autonomous status.

Commissioner, all our economic agreements with third countries need to be based on the same premise: respect for human rights.

You demonstrated in Seattle, Commissioner Lamy, and I was there to see for myself, that you know how to build bridges.

How did a Tibetan delegate put it?

"We will survive because of your moral support, but above all because of your solidarity" !

Mr President, as you are calling on each Member in his own language, perhaps you could address me in Bavarian!

Eight years ago I was rapporteur on Tibet.

In 1992, I presented a motion for a resolution that was unanimously adopted by the European Parliament.

It is with some dismay that I have realised today that eight years later the same motion for a resolution could be presented on the same grounds, lamenting the same poor, nay appalling, conditions in Tibet.

The Tibetans' human rights are being trampled upon and their cultural and spiritual heritage is being threatened with complete extinction, especially in Tibet itself.

Nature and the environment are being polluted and damaged to an extent never seen before.

Millions of Tibetans have no human rights, let alone civil rights. Above all, they have no right of assembly, no freedom of association, and no right to freely practise their religion.

For this reason we are calling on the Chinese Government as a matter of the greatest urgency to seek a political solution for Tibet through discussions with Tibet' s political and religious leaders, on the basis of the proposal made by His Holiness the 14th Dalai Lama.

Mr Mann has made it unnecessary for me to reiterate this.

But I would like to stress this point: if a people is prepared to fight for its autonomous status without questioning borders and without separatist tendencies, then we should really be supporting them, as they are setting an example for our own European Union model!

Mr Sakellariou, unfortunately, the seriousness of this subject prevents me from responding to your introductory comment with some Bavarian humour. This subject is so serious that I think it would be out of place.

A great many people are involved here.

Mr President, today we are discussing Tibet, but we have also discussed Chechnya, Kurdistan and Taiwan, and we will continue to do so.

In my opinion, the reason for this is that when we talk of human rights, we always focus on individual rights and too often disregard the rights of peoples.

The fundamental right of self-determination is all too often ignored, possibly for reasons of political convenience.

It may be easier to act in defence of a person who has been wrongfully imprisoned, tortured or denied freedom of speech than in defence of an entire people.

But this is the crux of the matter: until the right of self-determination is declared and applied everywhere, we will continue to witness such situations and we will continue to debate and adopt resolutions, but, as Mr Sakellariou said, sadly, nothing will change.

We must change our perspective completely and progress from the protection of individuals to the protection of peoples, for it is not fair for the inhabitants of East Timor alone to be able to exercise this right: all peoples must have the facility to exercise this right if they so desire, from the Sahara to Chechnya, from Taiwan to Kurdistan, and, of course, in Tibet.

I am sure a large majority of the House agrees with you.

Death penalty in the United States

Mr President, as I am sure you are aware, at the moment there is much talk of the reform of the urgent debates, and there are certain influential members of the larger groups who see these debates as unnecessary and consider our resolutions to be somewhat superfluous.

And yet I would argue that no topic more than the death penalty in the United States has proved that this type of humble debate can, over time, play a major role.

Things are changing in the United States.

I would not presume for a moment to think that this is entirely due to the European Parliament, but I feel that it is partly the result of the attention constantly paid to the matter by our institution.

I do not see the motion for a resolution that we are about to vote on as simply yet another resolution, but as further proof that things can change.

Moreover, I believe that the three elements which are highlighted as positive in this resolution - the stances adopted by Janet Reno, the governor of Illinois and the U.S. Justice Department - should be brought to the attention of the Americans.

From this point of view, I feel we can congratulate ourselves.

Mr President, you could say that there is something of a feeling of helplessness in standing here yet again and talking about the death penalty in the USA, since it is certainly not the first time we have discussed it, not even the first time during my short period in Parliament.

Most recently, we discussed the Mumia Jamal case, and now it is the Juan Raul Garza case, among others.

However, these men are just examples as there have been so many that you could say that the USA, in its legal policy, is almost waging war against its most destitute and most marginalised people.

In this way the USA has brought itself into line with China, Congo and Iraq.

You may well feel that it is strange to sit in a near half-empty chamber, apart from the visitors, and discuss such an important subject, but I think it is a subject which we must continue to take up, and I would ask the Member States to also respond to it here, to respond swiftly and in no uncertain terms to this so-called friendly state which repeatedly violates the most basic human rights.

Mr President, the European Parliament has, on various occasions, approved texts which state that the death penalty is an assault on human dignity, on human rights and it is a great pity that we have to establish once again that the death penalty still exists among our American friends and that, regrettably, the number of executions is increasing - there have been 350 since 1990.

What I find particularly distressing is the fact that young people as well, people under 18, can also be sentenced to death, and even the mentally handicapped can be sentenced to death.

Those are particularly depressing aspects of the text now before us.

Every execution is an irreversible act and that makes it so extraordinary.

In the case we are discussing here it was not life imprisonment that was imposed, but the death penalty, and that is on the basis of facts that were not proven beyond any doubt.

For that reason even the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights asked for time to re-examine the case and to be able to issue an opinion, and it also asked that no date be set for an execution.

We must urge the Americans to act not only in this specific case, but to ensure that the death penalty is abolished in their country.

Together with a few other countries where democracy is a long way off, they are the only ones where the number of death sentences is rising.

This is by no means an enviable record.

Our Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party has repeatedly argued in favour of the abolition of the death penalty, not only in this specific case, but in general.

More specifically, I would ask our American friends to abolish it once and for all.

Mr President, we should be clear as to why this resolution today is so important.

Firstly, we all know that there is a wave of judicial executions across the USA - over 600 since 1977 - but this would be the first federal execution since 1963.

Secondly, it is important because this is the only case since executions resumed in 1977 in which the evidence of unsolved, unadjudicated crime in a foreign country has been used to secure the death sentence.

Juan Garza's death sentence came as a result of murders in Mexico, which he was never charged with.

Thirdly, there are 21 prisoners currently in federal death row: 14 are black, 5 are white, one is Asian and one is Latino.

We know that in state trials black defendants are four times more likely to be sentenced to death than white defendants.

Fourthly, Governor Ryan of Illinois, as we have heard already, has imposed a moratorium on the death sentence in his state because of its appalling record of wrongful convictions.

When we bring all those factors together we see that the death penalty in the US is an arbitrary process and is fundamentally a racist process.

That is why we constantly demand that the death sentence should not be carried out in the US.

In this case it is particularly important because it is a federal execution and will be the first since 1963.

That is why we urge President Clinton to grant clemency in this case and a moratorium on federal executions.

There is a presidential campaign under way.

In a presidential campaign executions, regrettably, become a political football in the US. President Clinton has the opportunity - he is not standing for re-election - to make a stand on this issue today.

Mr President, I join with previous speakers in demanding the immediate and unconditional abolition of the death penalty in the United States, and everywhere else in the world.

The death penalty is a political arm used by the American Government apparatus to settle accounts with militants like Mumia Abu Jamal.

Like the whole prison system, it is also an instrument of social discrimination because Afro-Americans, ethnic minorities, and more generally the poor, are far more at risk than others of being condemned to death.

It is also a penalty whose irreversible character makes any reparation impossible if a mistake is made - and mistakes are often made.

A government which makes legal assassination one of the pillars of its justice system is infinitely more criminal than those it claims it is protecting society from.

The death penalty expresses all the barbarity of a society organised in a way that also condemns so many children and adolescents, even in the richest country in the world, to die from drug use or insecurity, actually from material and moral poverty, simply because they had the misfortune to be born in a poor area.

On a planetary scale, that barbarity condemns millions of human beings to die of hunger or disease when they could easily be cured - but they are not cured because they do not get the medicine they need.

In rising up against the death penalty we also rise up against all that barbarity, against the barbarity linked to permanently organising society so that all the wealth is concentrated in the hands of a minority and the great mass of humanity is condemned to poverty.

- (PT) Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the death penalty was abolished in Portugal over a century ago. So for the Portuguese, being opposed to the death penalty is inherent in our culture.

I would like to remind you of another reference: the US Declaration of Independence, an inspirational text which defines the three rights on which the United States war of independence was based: "the right to life, to liberty and to the pursuit of happiness" .

Some two hundred years on, the right to life has still not been fully recognised in the US legal system and this deserves a strong reaction on our part.

Mr President, my Group firmly supports this resolution.

We owe a debt of gratitude to the USA for defeating two totalitarian regimes, for defeating national socialism and communism, and for establishing democracy and the rule of law throughout our continent. Nevertheless, the existence of the death penalty in the USA means that they could not join either the Council of Europe or the European Union.

That means that we should tell even such an important partner as this one, in no uncertain terms, that they should finally abolish the death penalty at individual state level and all the more so at federal level.

The American election campaign could provide a unique opportunity to send a strong message about this.

Sad to say, just the opposite has happened, and the candidates are vying with each other in a populist way on this issue.

However, we believe that the Atlantic Alliance is founded on democracy and the rule of law, so that the right to life should form the centrepiece of the legal system in both the USA and in Europe.

That is why we want to state unequivocally in our Charter of Fundamental Rights that we support the right to life and that we are opposed to a culture of death as typified by the death penalty.

Mr President, this short debate takes place against a background of increasing tension in Zimbabwe.

All of us who speak should remember that every word of our speeches and the resolution will be eagerly read in Zimbabwe within the next 48 hours by all sides.

We must, therefore, all encourage Zimbabwe to move towards elections in May.

The old parliament was dissolved on 11 April and President Mugabe pledged at the EU-Africa Summit in Cairo that the elections would go ahead.

It is therefore worrying that constituency boundaries have yet to be set.

This could take up to three months.

I hope that, when the elections are called, observers from Europe will be invited to Zimbabwe to monitor the proceedings.

It is not for Europe to meddle in the internal affairs of any nation.

African countries must work together to consolidate their future.

However, the old Lomé Convention made democracy, human rights and the rule of law a requirement for development aid.

The new Partnership Agreement goes further and asks for good governance.

All we ask is that disputes of any kind be settled through courts and not in open conflict.

Zimbabwe has much to gain from the Partnership Agreement and urgently needs aid and debt relief.

Much of this could go to rural areas for agreed land resettlement.

It is disappointing that Zimbabwe feels the need to be involved in the war in the Democratic Republic of Congo at a time when precious resources could be spent on domestic requirements, such as education and health.

We all look forward to the rule of law being strengthened and a democratisation process fully operating under an independent judiciary to allow civil society to express its wishes through a fair and open press.

The Zimbabwean people must be given a chance to choose their future.

Mr President, in the last few decades Southern Africa has formed the subject of much attention in this House.

We have fortunately been able to witness a democratic regime that seems to function well coming to power in South Africa.

At the moment we are receiving very alarming reports from Zimbabwe.

There are clear signs that democracy in that country could be in jeopardy.

I sincerely hope that the ruling that was taken about an hour ago, that the police must act against those occupying the farms, will not be ignored this time, as was unfortunately the case with other court rulings.

What is more serious is the fact that innocent people are being beaten for no apparent reason.

The only possible reason for this is that they oppose the government of President Mugabe.

All this, Mr President, is a recipe for anarchy and a threat to democracy that could endanger the entire region.

We therefore believe that elections must be held as quickly as possible, preferably under the supervision of international observers so that everyone can be satisfied that they are held as fairly as possible.

There are many landless farmers and unemployed people in Zimbabwe.

It must, however, take place lawfully.

Above all, it should not occur along racial lines and it must certainly not be the case that holders of political office of whatever party be given priority in the distribution of land.

Finally I should like to say something about the war that is currently raging in a certain part of Africa.

I agree with Mr Corrie that the money for this war could be better spent on development in Zimbabwe, on education, training and health care.

One can think of a whole range of things.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I should like to begin by expressing my confidence in the people of Zimbabwe.

These people have, over the last few years, shown that they deserve our confidence.

Zimbabwe is a country which, since independence in 1980, has steadily chosen the path of peaceful development under the leadership of President Mugabe.

Not only in the economic sphere, but also politically, with a degree of press freedom in which the leadership of the country has also not been spared from criticism.

As one of the leading SADEC countries it was at the forefront of the battle against apartheid in South Africa.

It would be particularly sad if this country of all countries became the victim of war, racism and civil strife.

Zimbabwe does, of course, still have considerable problems, but the European countries and the Union will continue to assume their responsibilities as partners of Zimbabwe in jointly tackling the problems of poverty, ill health and under-development.

These problems will not be resolved by letting the Zimbabwean army fight in the Congo.

The country cannot afford such a drain on its resources, as is evident from the economic situation.

Neither will the occupation of the land of white farmers resolve the problems.

Land reforms can be introduced through legal channels by a lawful government, and a lawful government comes to power after normal elections.

These have been announced for June at the very latest.

I hope that nobody will use the current problems as a pretext - by exaggerating and increasing these problems, for example - to postpone the elections and heavily influence the spontaneous development of this movement.

In my view, Zimbabwe deserves our confidence.

The population has chosen the path of development.

I hope that nothing whatsoever is done to put an abrupt end to this.

With this in mind, we support the resolution.

Mr President, on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists, I should like to agree with the comments made by my fellow MEPs.

I believe that we have a reasonable common position.

Land reform is one of the most important issues throughout southern Africa, so it is therefore not surprising to see that it is again being exploited by Mugabe to his advantage, just prior to the elections, exactly as he has done in previous elections.

After all, this issue is so important for so many black and poor people.

The rule of law is necessary.

You need to have faith in the people and in the law for the system to function properly.

I support what other speakers have said about the SADAC countries who will no doubt be looking upon this situation with great concern and who are undoubtedly working behind the scenes to maintain a democratic climate.

It is also true that they are continually pressing for the withdrawal of troops from the Congo.

Could the Commission and the Council help us, as the European Parliament, to remain involved as observers at these elections, because if things go wrong in Zimbabwe, there will be more trouble in the region.

After South Africa and the democratic government there and the sound developments that have taken place in the region, we very much need to see the positive side.

Let us express our complete confidence in the Zimbabwean people and wish them successful elections for 1 June.

Mr President, it is five to midnight in Zimbabwe.

Everything points to the country sitting on a volcano that could erupt at any minute.

In the run up to the elections, Mugabe will not hesitate to use violence against his political opponents.

At the beginning of this month, peaceful demonstrators were attacked by his followers while the police looked on.

What is more serious is the fact that the demonstrators were arrested and the attackers left alone.

Similarly, Mugabe will not recoil from provoking anarchy and racial hatred by encouraging the illegal occupation of white farms.

Whites are being systematically intimidated and driven from their land through violent means to punish them for their support for the opposition and to buy the votes of the landless farmers.

The government systematically disregards the rulings of the Supreme Court.

In fact, the public prosecutor warned that any attempt to remove the occupiers could lead to civil war.

It is clear that Mugabe, who has become unpopular through his mismanagement of the economy and his exploits in the Congo, intends to do everything necessary to stay in power.

Some people even fear that he is inciting the chaos in order to be able to proclaim a state of emergency and postpone the elections.

At long last, the European Union has this week threatened to suspend aid if the President does not keep his promise of free and fair elections.

But it is already clear that the elections have been rigged.

A quarter of the names on the electoral lists are fictitious or duplicates.

The President is still not allowing any foreign observers in. What else has to happen before structural aid is suspended?

I would urge the Council and the Commission not to wait until it is five past midnight.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I think it is a shame that this resolution was not adopted at the March part-session, just as I think it is a shame that the recent EU-Africa Summit did not tackle this subject head on.

These are subjects which should be at the forefront of political action by the European Union.

We cannot hide the seriousness of what has been going on in Zimbabwe for many weeks now.

The fact is that Hitler is on the loose again - Hitler is out and about again there.

It should not go unnoticed that the leader of the band that is encouraging these arbitrary acts in Zimbabwe chose the name Hitler as his own name.

He is a gentleman by the name of Chenjerai 'Hitler' Hunzvi.

We know that the instigator is the President of Zimbabwe himself, but the leader of the movement took this name, a name that we know all too well from the horrors of our own history.

This is what is happening in Zimbabwe.

That is why we have to take more vigorous action.

The chaos, the threats and the intimidation taking place in that country are unacceptable and it is also unacceptable that this is being encouraged by the person holding the highest office of state, the President of Zimbabwe himself.

Thank you very much, Commissioner Lamy.

The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.

The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions:

B5-0355/2000 by Mr Miranda and others, on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left/Nordic Green Left;

B5-0357/2000 by Mr Andreasen and Mrs Sander, on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party;

B5-0371/2000 by Mrs Banotti and Mrs Pack, on behalf of the Group of the European People's Party (Christian Democrats) and the European Democrats;

B5-0380/2000 by Mr Van den Berg and Mrs Kinnock, on behalf the Group of the Party of European Socialists;

B5-0384/2000 by Mrs Lucas and others, on behalf the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance

Mr President, The World Education Forum in Dakar is a follow-up to the first conference of Education for All held in Thailand eleven years ago.

There has been some progress but, unfortunately, not enough as yet.

As we speak there are 125 million children in the world who do not go to school.

There are 880 million illiterate adults, two-thirds of whom are girls and women.

The Community is the largest donor to many of these countries.

It is regrettable that we are not sending our highest official to attend that conference on behalf of the Community.

We also regret that there has not yet been a communication on children's rights from the Commission.

A prominent African leader made a very pertinent comment.

He said that education is the only existing vaccination against AIDS.

One of the main problems with providing education in many countries is the catastrophic effect AIDS is having on the lives not just of children, many of whom are orphans because they have lost one or both parents.

In several of the African countries which I recently visited, I was informed that in order to have one teacher, the colleges must train three, because by the age of 30 so many teachers are already dead from AIDS.

This underlines the seriousness of the problems.

Many of these children who are not in school are working.

Future plans for education programmes and commitments on the part of the donors to the developing world will have to take this into consideration.

Unfortunately, only 2% of the aid we send to these developing countries is actually being spent on education.

We hope very much that this conference will raise the issue again and bring to it the urgent attention that is needed.

Mr President, for about ten years I have been involved with campaigns to promote education throughout the world.

A hundred and twenty-five million children, mainly girls, do not receive any education.

I am extremely pleased that I am now a Member of the European Parliament and can take specific action and that in this resolution all Groups are saying that the EU development cooperation budget should be doubled.

We are not talking about more money for the development budget but about redistribution within that budget.

According to Commissioner Nielson, we spend 5% on education as a whole and an estimated 80% of that on primary education.

Because I am also rapporteur for the budget for the year 2001, I hope that we as a Parliament, in consultation with Commissioner Nielson - who has, moreover, said that he wants to move in this direction - will be able to double that budget next year.

That would really be a concrete step forward, because so much of the money that we spend simply does not reach the poorest people and is not a step towards real development.

Finally, we cannot develop others, they must develop themselves, but this is a wonderful opportunity to help them and Parliament, together with the Commission, will soon be able to translate this resolution very specifically into real action in the 2001 budget.

Mr President, it is incredibly sad and, in fact, humiliating for us all that, in the year 2000, there are still children who do not receive any basic education or schooling at all and that there are still adults - almost a billion of them - who cannot read or write and who are thus also prevented from participating in the political and democratic life of their society.

It is, of course, also a waste of human resources that this is the way things are.

Unfortunately, it is also those countries which most need educated people to participate in the democratic development of civil society which lack resources for education.

As has been mentioned, the world' s governments agreed in 1990 that steps should be taken to ensure that everyone received a basic education by no later than the year 2000.

At the Copenhagen Summit, the deadline was changed to 2015.

Now, a new summit looms, namely the World Education Forum in Dakar, Senegal in April.

We know that education is the key to combating poverty, promoting respect for human rights etc.

We cannot accept a situation in which the deadline by which everyone is to receive a basic education is moved forward once again.

I am pleased with this resolution.

I hope that the decision will be a unanimous one and that the clear message will be: ensure you establish a specific framework for a global action plan for prioritising educational needs in the world.

This is also our message to the Commission.

Mr President, the recent Euro-African Summit in Cairo has made poverty one of our central concerns.

As the author of the general report on poverty approved in the Bahamas by the EU-ACP Joint Assembly a few months ago, I would like to say that the fight against poverty must become one of our objectives and, in many cases, our main objective.

In this context, education, together with health, is the tool with which we can implement an ambitious programme to win the fight against poverty in the world.

Education is a universal human right and the key to sustainable human development. It is the basic responsibility of the States and, above all, an achievable objective if we mobilise the necessary resources.

For this reason, we are supporting this initiative and we urge the Commission to mobilise the necessary budgetary and economic resources and to adopt the relevant institutional initiatives so that this objective may be achieved.

Mr President, I want to preface my remarks by saying that whenever there is lack of respect for children' s rights, there is violence.

And the first form of violence is failure to provide education.

Children from families with problems suffer and often do not have access to proper education.

They will have far less chance of success in life and the conditions are all present for their children to experience the same situation.

So it is time to prioritise prevention and by creating a different family framework finally make it possible to avoid pointless social and individual suffering and implement a real policy of inclusion, socialisation and education from birth.

We need to invent new responses and new social attitudes.

It is our duty to take an interest in these children, particularly the girls, because in some countries they are still regarded as domestic slaves.

The importance of the early years and education must be recognised in order to provide young people with forms of self-expression other than rebellion due to deprivation in childhood.

Human beings are born in a state of dependency.

Defenceless, babies have no duties. They cannot have any.

Duties follow awareness and awareness awakens with education.

So in parallel with the implementation of processes to promote literacy and education in general, we must also engage in some collective thinking about the living conditions of children in the various countries, especially in urban areas, and assist in projects to look after street children in third world countries, and also in our own countries, developing pilot schemes inspired, for example, by the family pre-school proposed by ATD Quart-monde.

It involves reaching out to families and helping children within the family, as well as cooperation and funding to help families in difficulty, especially single-parent families and vulnerable children.

In fact it is our duty to launch an extensive review of the education of children on our planet if we want a better future for all.

Mr President, the Commission has participated actively in the Forum' s preparation process through the 'Education for All 2000' evaluation and the regional preparation meetings, particularly the one in Johannesburg in 1999. The Commission will be represented at the Dakar Forum by the director-general for Development.

In line with these international commitments, Community investments in education have primarily targeted basic education and primary education, especially in the context of cooperation with the ACP countries.

Thus, a majority of the education programmes financed under the 8th EDF have been devoted to primary education.

The funds allocated to this heading represent 80% of the total amount devoted to education.

The Commission has incorporated the recommendations of the Jomtien Conference on Basic Education into its policy and, in the framework of indicative national programmes, 35 ACP countries out of 71 have made education a priority.

However, I have to specify that, while a balanced approach means prioritising basic education, as has been said, other levels of the educational system must not be neglected as a consequence.

We agree that the effectiveness of our approach on education requires very close coordination between the Community and the Member States as well as with the other backers.

But we believe we must also establish a dialogue with civil society and that will be the Community' s approach to supporting national education action plans in ACP countries.

We are also pursuing the target of eliminating disparities affecting people by the year 2005, in line with the OECD Development Aid Committee' s strategy and the conclusions of the European Union' s social affairs summits.

My last point is the question put by Mr Van den Berg on the doubling of the basic education budget in 2001.

In our view, the Community and the Member States should all allocate more resources to education overall and to basic education in particular.

Nevertheless, we also know this cannot have the anticipated effect unless the recipient countries have the necessary absorption capacity and the resources to ensure the sustainability and durability of the system.

Consequently the answer is not 'no' , but it is not entirely 'yes' either.

We think the issue needs to be examined country by country to ensure adequate analysis adapted to each case.

Thank you very much, Commissioner Lamy.

The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.

The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions:

B5-0347/2000 by Mr Collins, on behalf of the Union for a Europe of Nations Group;

B5-0356/2000 by Mr Haarder and others, on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party;

B5-0372/2000 by Mr Jarzembowski and others, on behalf the Group of the European People's Party (Christian Democrats) and the European Democrats;

B5-0388/2000 by Mr Nogueira Román, on behalf of the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance

Mr President, the elected Vice-President of the island of Taiwan has been called "the dregs of the nation" by the government in Beijing.

Extra troops have been sent to the Chinese province of Fujian, which lies across the water from Taiwan.

This elected Vice-President, Annette L, said last week that although Taiwan and the mainland are very close to each other geographically, they had become distant relations over the course of history.

Lü had shown her true colours as an extremist and incorrigible agitator for the independence of Taiwan.

According to Beijing, with her poisonous words she wanted to stir up her Taiwanese comrades to hate their fellow countrymen in the mother country, i.e. Beijing.

Lü said that these slanderous comments reminded her of the way in which the Kuomintang had treated her - during the long dictatorship of this party she was imprisoned for five years - and that she is only interested in improved relations with Beijing.

We know Annette Lü and the new President of Taiwan Chen Shui-bian.

Their election is the crowning glory of the democratisation process in Taiwan.

Is that a threat to China? Yes, indeed, after all it is clear that the Chinese people are quite capable of building a democratic system with respect for human rights.

For the old man in Beijing the internal developments in Taiwan must be a nightmare. Do they really think their threats will bring results?

Beijing' s behaviour confirms our opinion that the future of Taiwan lies in the hands of the Taiwanese themselves.

As Europeans we do not need to interfere.

Our business is to ensure that this great and independent island is properly represented on the world stage, at the World Health Organisation, the World Trade Organisation, and such like.

The idea that Beijing could represent the Taiwanese in such organisations is absolutely ridiculous.

It is extremely important for this Parliament to forge closer links with the elected representatives in Taiwan.

Democratisation in that part of the world is also important for Europe.

China will only be able to be reunited if both Taiwan and the mainland adopt democracy, human rights and the rule of law as their guiding principles.

Mr President, Commissioner, as European Parliament observers, my colleague Georg Jarzembowski and I were able to follow the presidential elections in Taiwan on 18 March on the spot, 'live' as it were.

On the basis of numerous conversations with various parties and visits to the polling stations, we satisfied ourselves that the election was free and democratic.

We had the impression that the elections in Taiwan were marked by a mature awareness of democracy amongst the population.

This was evidenced both by the high turnout, which, as compared with the presidential elections, had risen by 6% to 82%, and by the result itself.

After a very long period of supremacy by the party in government up to that point - a period lasting over 50 years - the political scene has been revitalised.

The opposition candidate was elected the new President and, for the first time in Taiwan' s history, a woman was elected Vice-President.

These results alone mark a historical turning point.

The people of Taiwan viewed any attempts by outsiders to influence them with enormous sensitivity.

The result was primarily an expression of the internal policy debate, and the newly elected President, Mr Chen Shui-bian, based his election campaign almost entirely on internal issues, and the high-profile, aggressive and provocative noises emerging from the People' s Republic of China, from a variety of sources, had, if anything, the opposite of the desired effect.

Nevertheless, everyone involved was aware of the circumstances.

Chen Shui-bian was also elected because the previously governing Kuomintang party was split by the presence of two candidates.

However, the Kuomintang still has a majority in the Taiwanese Parliament.

Chen Shui-bian is very well aware that a radical pro-independence policy would have been condemned to failure.

The region needs security and stability.

The only way to achieve reconciliation and lasting peace is through positive cooperation and a constructive dialogue between mainland China and Taiwan.

Healthy relations are also needed for economic development.

We therefore welcome the fact that both sides in this conflict are seeking a peaceful solution.

In this respect we welcome Chen Shui-bian' s initiative to commence bilateral talks, and we also welcome the cooperative approach announced by the People' s Republic of China.

The PRC is officially endeavouring to reach a peaceful solution, subject, of course, to Taiwan renouncing its efforts towards independence.

Our resolution is intended to further democracy in Taiwan, but the People' s Republic of China is taking it as an affront.

That is why I seriously ask myself whether we should not perhaps adopt a different approach, based on reconciliation instead of polarisation.

Mr President, Commissioner, on behalf of the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance, I would like to highlight this Group' s contributions to the joint motion for a resolution, both in terms of promoting dialogue with the People' s Republic of China and Taiwan, as well as in the firm position which has to be maintained on this issue.

We believe that there is an objective need for Taiwan to have a greater presence in the international institutions; this Parliament can promote that.

We therefore support the existence of relations between this Parliament and the Taiwanese Parliament by means of the delegation from our institution and also the need to open a European Union information office in Taiwan.

Having said this, we also want this dialogue to have an objective basis, as have the declarations of the new President, Chen Shui-bian, to which, however, the People' s Republic of China has replied with a renewed display of nervousness, arrogance and a disrespect for democracy.

We must reject these threats since they are absolutely unacceptable, but also because they are an objective threat to the dialogue which is so necessary to the resolution of this problem.

Mr President, thank you very much for letting me speak for the second time today.

The recent presidential elections, which not only observed all democratic norms but also marked the end of the 50-year rule of the Kuomintang, secured the presidency for Mr Chen Shui-bian.

The newly elected President reflects Taiwan' s democratic maturity.

This makes the behaviour of the People' s Republic of China all the more worrying for us, as before, during and after the democratic elections in Taiwan the Republic did not cease to make in some cases totally unacceptable threats towards its little brother.

I realise, of course, that the People' s Republic of China does not understand the word democracy.

Nevertheless, there is no need for them to start panicking just because democratic elections are taking place in a neighbouring state.

Mr President, like you, we are delighted that the people of Taiwan have been able to express a democratic choice for the second time.

As the Union has stated through its Presidency, most recently in July last year, in principle we are in favour of one China, but we also want the tension which breaks out from time to time between Taiwan and the People' s Republic of China to be resolved peaceably within a constructive dialogue.

We call on both Beijing and Taipei to take the path of dialogue as quickly as possible.

We are encouraging intensification of economic relations with Taiwan and we think that should happen if, as we expect, Taiwan joins the World Trade Organisation.

Finally, we note the request in your draft resolution, also mentioned by Mr Knörr Borras, for an information office to be opened in Taipei.

We are hoping to do that, but we have not set any timetable because we have other priorities in Asia and worldwide, and you know how limited our resources are in this field, so we are forced to make choices.

We hope to open an office, but it is not one of our priorities at the moment.

The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.

(The sitting was suspended at 5.25 p.m. and resumed at 5.30 p.m.)

We shall now proceed to the vote on topical and urgent subjects of major importance.

Relating to the joint resolution on Iraq

Mr President, there is a drafting error in Paragraph 2 of this resolution.

I would like to propose - and this is in fact correct in the German version - that we should forward this resolution to the High Representative for the CFSP.

But it then continues: "forward this resolution ... and the governments of the Member States" .

I would like to propose an oral amendment so that it reads "and the governments of the Member States, of the United States and of Iraq" .

If there are no objections, Mr Sakellariou' s motion will be adopted.

Mr President, I should like to clarify whether this resolution is compatible with the resolution that we passed in January of this year, drawing attention to the problems of the prisoners of war who are still in Kuwait, or whether this resolution is to be taken as contradictory to our resolution of January of this year?

Mr Perry, your objection is political, not procedural.

Mr Sakellariou tabled a motion; nobody opposed it and so the motion has been adopted.

Mr President, this morning we had a debate on whether or not, in future, the House should meet in plenary on Fridays.

A possible justification cited in favour of change was that the agenda is generally relatively uninteresting and that something should be done about this.

For that reason, and in order to establish whether a quorum is guaranteed on Thursday afternoon when there is an interesting agenda and very important votes, I request that you establish the quorum.

Mr Markov, you cannot make this request on your own.

The request has to be made by 32 Members.

If this request is made by 32 Members, I can check on the quorum.

Thirty-nine or 40 Members appear to have stood up, and so we must check on the quorum.

Mr President, given that agreement was reached on this subject, I find this a rather crude method of avoiding such an important vote.

Mr Naïr, the method may be crude as you say, but the problem is that, according to the old Rules of Procedure, a certain number of Members could request the quorum and then leave the Chamber.

The current rule is that whoever requests the quorum has to remain in the Chamber.

Other Members could have requested the quorum and then not voted.

Consequently, all this may well be crude but it is just a touch more practical.

Mr President, I think it is terribly sad that when we are about to take such important votes some people are trying to obstruct this.

I have heard that some Parliamentary staff worked until 4 a.m. so that we could vote on the Dimitrakopoulos/Leinen report.

I would like to sincerely thank those staff on behalf of my Group, and, I hope, on behalf of all of us.

They work very conscientiously and we should be just as conscientious when it comes to voting!

However, this is a possibility provided by the Rules of Procedure, and any Member has the right to avail himself or herself of it.

Mr President, I think we should vote.

Just one comment if I may: I understand that on various occasions colleagues may want to test the quorum.

Would you ask the President to invite the Committee on Constitutional Affairs to consider a change to the Rules so we can check it electronically?

Mr Cox, do you really think we can make this change to the Rules of Procedure now?

Mr President, I can understand the reasoning behind not being able to do it electronically, because you cannot check whether everyone uses their card.

I can understand why you would have to take a head count.

I would like to know exactly how many people you counted in the chamber today?

Straight in front of me I can see at least four people, just in this row here, who are Group staff - not Members.

How can you, from up there, see exactly which people are Members and which are staff and what the actual figures are?

Ms McKenna, the services of our Chamber are quite familiar with us Members, and also with the collaborators who are authorised to enter the Chamber: they recognise each and every one of them very well.

If you are in agreement, I would like to proceed with the vote.

Other Members are asking for the floor, but if we continue we will be opening a debate which is completely unrelated to the matter in hand.

Let us proceed to the vote.

Relating to the joint resolution on Chechnya

Mr President, I rise to speak about the vote on the Chechen resolution.

During the debate and also during the efforts to agree on a compromise amendment, it emerged that there is a large majority who are of the same view as regards policy and substance.

It can only be a matter of tactics if, at this stage, having adopted six resolutions already, we say the same thing, or virtually the same thing, once again without any serious debate with the Council and with the Commission.

For this reason I would like to make this appeal to Members in the other groups: first of all, let us send the joint delegation to Chechnya.

Everyone has agreed to this specific proposal.

And then, when the delegation has returned, we can hold a major debate on Chechnya in conjunction with the Council and the Commission, and at the end of that debate .....

(The President cut the speaker off)

At the request of Mr Sakellariou, the motion for resolution B5-0350/2000 has been withdrawn.

Mr President, I wish to request a suspension of the sitting in accordance with Rule 69(2) and I wish to ask the Commission if their attitude towards the amendments has changed following this vote.

In that case there is no need for us to hesitate any further.

I therefore request that in accordance with Rule 69(2) the vote on the legislative resolution should be postponed.

I am requesting this in my capacity as committee chairman and in agreement with the rapporteur and the various political group chairmen.

(The matter was referred back to the committee responsible)

Report (A5/0069/2000) by Mr Lagendijk, on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy, on the communication from the Commission on the stabilisation and association process for countries of South-Eastern Europe [COM(1999) 235 - C5-0124/1999 - 1999/2126(CNS)]

Report (A5-0059/2000) by Mr García-Margallo y Marfíl, on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, on the Commission communication on implementing the framework for financial markets: Action Plan [COM(1999) - 232 - C5-0114/1999 - 1999/2117(COS)]

Report (A5/0053/2000) by Mr Kuckelkorn, on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, on the communication from the Commission "Towards a single market for supplementary pensions - results of the consultations on the Green Paper on supplementary pensions in the single market" [COM(1999) 134 - C5-0135/1999 - 1999/2131(COS)]

Report (A5-0098/2000) by Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi, on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market, on the Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament and the Council: "The Strategy for Europe's Internal Market" [COM(1999) 464 - C5-0212/1999 - 1999/2167(COS)]

Mr President, since this voting session is a continuation of the lunch-time voting session, would I be correct in thinking that the few roll-call votes in which we have participated this afternoon will count as part of our daily count, and that this has direct relevance to the earlier vote on whether we had a quorum or not?

Perhaps you could let me know later.

Mr President, I just wanted to ask why we are not voting on Ethiopia now.

Mr Swoboda, the vote is scheduled for tomorrow morning.

Mr President, now the vote is over, I would like to come back to the issue of a quorum.

I do not think you would need a head count unless you did a test with cards and got below what is required.

It would save time if you tried that first.

For example, today there were 226 in the first vote after the issue of the quorum was raised.

If there had been a check with cards, maybe we could have avoided the problem of having a head count.

Ms McKenna, this is not an issue that can be resolved right now in this Chamber.

Both your interventions - this one and the one you made earlier - have been recorded.

We will have to evaluate whether it would be appropriate to amend the Rules of Procedure.

It is not an issue that we can deal with now.

Mr President, I voted for the definition of the "Youth" Community action programme, as agreed in the Conciliation Committee, mainly because it will finance and implement the European voluntary service programme, which has a large number of young people involved in community actions, including the provision of assistance for the elderly.

Having said this, I would like to put forward a suggestion for future discussions on the "Youth" project and point out something which concerned me in the vote, although the report was adopted, and that is the definition of the word "youth" .

Mr President, do you feel young?

I think you are saying that you do.

In my opinion, it would be appropriate to establish that "young" means those who are young at heart, and therefore give those who are no longer young in years but who are young at heart the opportunity to take advantage of these services.

(PT) We have been discussing this programme for too long, with all the consequences that that delay implies, as all this effort has not been reflected in the budget agreed in the conciliation procedure - EUR 520 million for seven years, whereas the European Parliament' s original proposal was for EUR 980 million - which is quite frankly less than the programme requires.

On the other hand, whilst the accession of the candidate countries will give more young people access to the YOUTH programme and there will be an even richer exchange of experience, I have some doubts about whether the budget for the programme is enough to guarantee the success of this initiative.

Although the initial phase of this programme has been positive, its scope is very limited, as it relates to just one facet of the youth policy that we need, which should actually tackle the various issues affecting young people - such as education, employment, housing, health and culture - across the board.

The references to ways of solving the problems of discrimination and to the age range for participation in the programme - 15-25, although there are some exceptions - are also inadequate, given that the average age for completing higher education is very close to the upper limit, which should be raised to 30 years.

Lastly, it is important to strengthen the role and obligations of the bodies responsible for promoting the programme in each Member State, to make sure that it is promoted as efficiently and as quickly as possible.

- I was disappointed to see that in the decision of Parliament and Council establishing the "Youth" Community action programme, reference to the family has been removed in final conciliation negotiations.

This reference, which was accepted by the Culture and Youth Committee as well as Parliament, referred to the need to examine the role of the family among those factors which have promoted and hampered the social integration of young people.

The importance of the family in promoting or hampering social integration among youth is clearly recognised within society today, as well as through various studies.

The Council of Europe, in its report Coherent and Integrated Family Policies, states, "Families play a primary role in socialisation because they communicate the values, standards, customs and behaviour of the social groups to which their children belong" .

It is inexcusable that this reference to the family has been removed.

In a report designed to assess and support our young people in the best possible way, the deletion of reference to the family, the single most important influence in a young person' s life, is incomprehensible.

- I wholeheartedly endorse Mrs Gröner's recommendation to approve the agreement reached with the Council on European youth action programmes.

The previous youth programmes, Youth for Europe and the European Voluntary Service, will be grouped together in a general medium-term programme which will run from 2000 until 2006, as the European Parliament has demanded.

A longer-term programme will ensure young people have the opportunity to benefit from such schemes for a guaranteed time.

Every participant will also have full access to health services and social security, therefore allowing as many of our young people as possible to become involved.

Although the funding of these programmes of EUR 520m is well below our original demand of EUR 980m which is necessary for new Member States after enlargement, there will be a possibility of increasing this figure, following extra demands on the budget by enlargement.

These programmes will certainly benefit our young people and give them invaluable opportunities to learn about themselves, about others and about Europe.

Not only is this crucial for their personal development, but in a fiercely competitive world it will vastly improve their chances on the job market.

Increasing our young people's skills has always been one of our priorities and we must continue to support this aim.

Our young people are Europe's future.

We must encourage them to learn about others and about the European Union, as well as developing their own values, ideas and skills.

It is important that they are able to participate in voluntary work abroad, school exchanges and learning languages.

Funding for these types of programmes are a fundamental step towards this objective of opening the eyes and minds of our young people and preparing them to be part of a flexible, skilled workforce.

Our society does not have enough confidence in young people.

In my political life I have always been struck by the fact that the future of young people and their concerns are not at the heart of public debate, and neither the political world nor the power of the media really tries to help young people.

That is especially true in Normandy, the region I represent, where too often youth is associated with deviance and delinquency, forgetting the vast majority of young people who work, dream, love and live, the bearers of all our hopes.

The European 'Youth' initiative is a first step in that direction, and bears witness to a growing awareness of young people in the EU institutions.

But it is essential to maintain this effort over time if it is to bear the desired fruit, in the interests of young people and therefore of Europe.

So I am convinced that other initiatives, especially aid to youth associations, should be massively encouraged and financially supported by the European Union.

(ES) Mr President, we would like to express our satisfaction on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party at the approval of the Graça Moura report on the European Year of Languages 2001.

We believe that it is a magnificent initiative on a European level to dedicate a special year to languages in Europe, to knowledge of them and to the recognition throughout the whole of the European Union of the importance of languages as a reservoir of cultural and historical wealth and an expression of the very identity of the societies which make up the Union.

We have supported this report but there are two aspects which we are not happy with.

I am referring to some amendments which we have presented, both on behalf of the Liberal Group as well as the group of MEPs headed by Mrs Ferrer, in order to incorporate in a clear and specific way the official languages which are recognised in the Member States so that they may participate directly and in an institutional sense in the development of the European Year of Languages.

This amendment has not been taken up, and we regret the line followed by the European Commission, with the participation of the Member States, because it leaves aside, at risk of marginalising it, a form of participation which is particularly important in this field.

I would like to remind you that this Parliament recognised Catalan as a European language and gave it a specific personality.

It is this language, together with others, which must be taken into account in the application and celebration of this European Year of Languages.

Mr President, I voted for the establishment of the European Year of Languages 2001.

This is, without any doubt, a major, positive step, although, in my opinion, every year should be a year of languages.

It is of paramount importance for the European Union that the citizens of the 15 States learn to speak the languages of their fellow citizens of the European Union.

I would like to take this opportunity to call for language teaching for the elderly to receive just as much attention and funding as language teaching for young people, which receives an extensive amount of aid. In this respect, the elderly are all too often forgotten and they would love to visit the other States of the European Union.

Mr President, I would like to give an explanation of my negative vote on the report on the European Year of Languages.

Firstly, language occupies an important place in European civilisation and culture, irrespective of numerical considerations regarding the size of the population.

This statement is thoroughly valid for lesser-used languages.

Secondly, the target year for this decision is 2001; European citizens could become proficient in other languages as is shown by the fact that all people who speak minority languages, without exception, have in common an excellent training in this field.

All of them are already bilingual.

It is completely wrong to exclude minority languages from this initiative.

It is regrettable that this House has not accepted the important services that lesser-used languages could contribute to the success of this initiative.

I am glad the European Parliament and the Council have agreed to make 2001 the European Year of Languages.

In a European Union of fifteen Member States, committed to enlargement, with eleven official languages and a multitude of regional languages, it is actually very important to make the citizens of the Union aware of the advantages of understanding and speaking other languages and of the many opportunities that exist for learning to do so.

Speaking a language other than one' s mother tongue undoubtedly broadens the mind.

So, from primary school and kindergarten, children should be encouraged to start learning languages, as an instrument to raise awareness of cultural diversity.

Some European countries, especially the Scandinavian countries, already have very advanced policies in this field and the resulting advantages are evident.

This practice needs to be disseminated to the other Member States.

Of course, we must ensure that this knowledge is not confined only to the better off in society.

Boosting the learning of foreign languages will bring European citizens closer together by giving them the means to communicate, and thus get to know each other and forge the links to make the concept of European citizenship a reality.

Opening up to other cultures and finding out about the traditions of our European neighbours are essential ways of combating intolerance and racism engendered by fear of the unknown.

At the practical level, it needs to be made clear that the European Year of Languages is in fact a joint European Union/Council of Europe project.

To show that, it would be better for the two partners to use an identical logo and slogan.

The same concern for visibility and transparency leads me to support the creation of an interactive Internet site so that people can access useful information about the project.

I am in favour of people being multilingual, but I am sorry we are not trying to develop the teaching of Esperanto in parallel.

It is a language with European roots and easy to understand, but also rich and subtle.

As an auxiliary language, it can provide one means, amongst others, of facilitating communication between all European citizens.

I therefore regret that it is not mentioned in this proposal.

The undersigned members of the Confederal Group of the European United Left/Nordic Green Left agree entirely with the point of view of both the Commission and the Committee on Culture, Youth, Education, the Media and Sport that language is a rather crucial component of human communication, whether it be the spoken or written language, sign language or body language.

There are people who prefer Esperanto as a form of communication across national borders.

There are also professional jargons, different dialects in one and the same country and minority languages which are now being recognised by democracies.

It is also important for posterity to carry out research into languages which are dying out.

In short, we believe that an understanding of the importance of language is invaluable and that the European Union ought to be acknowledging this beyond the mere one year of the present campaign.

We hope that this view of ours is also shared by the Council and by national parliaments both within and outside the Union.

The sums proposed by the Commission (EUR 8 million) and by the Committee (EUR 10 million) are too modest, in our opinion.

It ought to be possible to spend the proposed sums of money on other things, for which reason we are completely abstaining from voting.

- (NL) I am pleased with the report by Mr Graça Moura, the rapporteur, and I am grateful to him that my amendments have been adopted.

In the frame of this European Year, most of the amendments aim to establish closer cooperation with the Member States at all levels of policy, not only at national level but also at regional and even local policy level.

An essential requirement for this is that the Member States earmark sufficient funds to set up activities that can then be cofinanced by the European Union.

If not, the European Year of Languages is likely to remain a PR exercise, just a lot of hot air.

The second aim of my amendments was by means of the activities set up in the context of this European Year to pay special attention to socially vulnerable groups, migrants and semi-skilled and unskilled workers.

This is something very close to my heart: learning to have an active command of foreign languages should not become the umpteenth barrier to the integration of this target group, a privilege for the already privileged members of our society.

Foreign language learning is indeed the key to integration.

A third series of amendments that I have tabled concerns the availability of language courses and accessibility to them in the respective Member States.

It is an open secret that this situation differs greatly from one Member State to another.

Smaller Member States with a correspondingly small language area must ipso facto make much greater effort, whereas in the larger Member States and larger language areas respectively the economic incentive is not so great.

The Member States are therefore inherently asymmetrical in this regard.

I hope that the Council will endorse this initiative and that we shall be able to start the specific activities as soon as possible, because there is a lot to be done.

Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, giving Europeans the best training for the future, from their earliest youth, whatever their origin and level of education, above all means giving them the ability to speak languages other than their mother tongue.

Haute-Normandie has one of the youngest populations in France, but also one of the highest levels of youth unemployment.

Speaking another European language can clearly be a key to success for those young people.

Making 2001 European Year of Languages will make Europeans aware of the linguistic diversity of the European Union. It is an excellent decision and has my full support.

But I do not think we should only devote one year to this aim. Lasting commitment is needed.

Indeed, it is our duty to be ambitious and to demand that all our young people are able to speak another language fluently, offering them bilingual education whenever possible.

In this respect, IBIS (Institut Bilingue Interuniversitaire de la Seine), which first saw the light of day in Haute-Normandie, is most exemplary.

I am convinced that other operations of a similar nature should be massively encouraged and financially supported by the European Union.

(NL) Mr President, we not only voted with enthusiasm for this report, but also for the amendments that the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development tabled.

We are sure that in our partner countries of the ACP, substantial investments are being made in order to be able to compete with regard to quality on the world market.

The problem, however, is the price.

Many of these countries are still battling with excessively high costs and I believe that a long transitional period, which I would insist on, is very important for these countries.

I think our ACP partners will also be pleased with the outcome of this vote.

- The British Labour members have a strong commitment to the producers in the Caribbean and wish to see an early settlement of the dispute within the WTO.

These are delicate negotiations and at this stage the UK does not rule out an eventual tariff only system.

This is the context in which we have supported the Dary report while being against Amendments Nos 6 and 7.

- (NL) It is clear from the debates once again that there is still considerable disagreement in the Union about the length of the transitional period, the level of the quotas and the system for granting licences.

The vote on the Dary report has demonstrated once again that the European Parliament does not respect the internationally agreed trading rules.

It is unacceptable that in the Dary report again a transitional period of ten years is proposed, without putting a definitive ruling first.

Taking account of the internationally agreed trading rules within the WTO, the GATT Agreement and the internal market strategy of the European Union, we should be arguing in favour of introducing a tariff only system as quickly as possible.

We could possibly agree provisionally on a tariff quota ruling that is WTO compliant, but on condition that a date is specified on which the tariff only system will be introduced.

Belgium has always argued in favour of the immediate adaptation of the banana regime to comply with the WTO, but with a concession to the ACP countries.

Preference should indeed be given to a tariff only system because this option respects the trading flows best and is most clearly WTO compliant.

The vote today is a sham because the real decisions have been taken in secret deals between the great capitalist groups of the United States and the European Union. Their banana war is just one aspect and, like banana production, just one factor in a complex of conflicts of interest.

This war, which is presented as a conflict between producer countries, Latin American and dollar area countries against Lomé Convention countries and European overseas dependent territories, is actually a war between capitalist groups.

Three large American capitalist groups, including Chiquita, the new name for the notorious United Fruit, dominate the dollar banana and are supported by the American Government.

Behind the producer countries the European Union is claiming to protect, however, there are some large families of wealthy French-Creoles and, indeed, powerful English and French groups.

Our position is this: while we do not want to give the mighty dollar banana sharks any awards, neither do we have any intention of providing backing through our votes to the smaller sharks protected by the European Union.

However, it is essential to take measures to protect the small producers who work their own plantations without exploiting anyone, and for them to be guaranteed a decent minimum income, regardless of market fluctuations.

We demand protection for agricultural labourers, who should not be the victims of the commercial war raging on the world market.

If a guarantee fund is created, it must underwrite the wages of these workers and the incomes of small producers, and not allow banana magnates to increase their wealth just to invest it in other, more profitable, sectors.

- (FR) This report gives us the opportunity to welcome the European Parliament' s becoming aware of the need to defend the banana producers of, on the one hand, the ACP countries (to whom we have made commitments in the course of renewing the Lomé Convention) and, on the other hand, the outermost countries of the Community.

Although the WTO' s dispute settlement body condemned certain key elements in the competitivity of ACP operators, the validity of the principle of tariff quotas has not been challenged in any way.

The fact is that we are, as is often the case, witnessing the overzealousness of the Commission which, in the context of the negotiations initiated within the WTO, has gone too far.

In attempting to reconcile the contradictory interests of all parties, in the end it has not been able, or has not wished, to achieve this.

It therefore seems curious, to say the least, to note the paradox of acknowledging that operators are all in favour of a tariff quota system, while adopting the solution of a single rate system!

We therefore congratulate Mr Dary and the members of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development who are attempting to restore a little order to the Commission proposal which we find simply unacceptable as it stands, because it is selling off Community interests for the benefit of American multinationals whose manufacturing standards are obviously not comparable with EU standards.

While it may, admittedly, be quite laudable to seek to obtain the most advantageous prices for consumers, we must still be able to compare like with like, particularly in terms of manufacturing conditions (social legislation, child protection).

We must therefore ensure that we do not tend towards harmonising these social conditions of manufacturing to the lowest common denominator, and, instead, let us pursue, as a priority, the objective of better product quality, without GMOs or pesticides or anything else. Developing better quality products will cause a consequent increase in demand, and thus in the volume of production, with a concomitant reduction in prices!

After years of difficulty due to the economic crisis in industrialised countries and the decline in the economies of Eastern Europe, the Commission' s solution would be likely to cause the untimely disappearance of these producing countries whose economies would not, for want of time, be able to restructure and diversify production.

It is clear today that, without actively seeking confrontation, the EU must champion its own point of view, a position which is all the more tenable as present and future European consumers represent a major proportion of the banana market.

We are therefore satisfied with Mr Dary' s report, even if we feel it does not go far enough, particularly in terms of the ACP tariff system, the transition period extended beyond ten years, and the definition of a new system for the allocation of import licences, or additional European aid.

- (SV) The EU' s system for importing bananas - which the WTO panel declared to be discriminatory on 7 April 1999 - must be reformed.

There is justification for showing consideration for banana producers in the ACP States and in the extremely peripheral areas of the Union, but there is no reason for special treatment in the field of trade.

Import duties and production subsidies are incompatible with our liberal values.

In our view, it is only through a system of free trade that long-term, sustainable, global economic development can be created.

For that reason, the Commission' s proposal for a rapid transition to a system with fixed uniform rates of duty is a step in the right direction.

(IT) Mr President, it was with great pleasure that I voted for this measure on the communication from the Commission on the stabilisation and association process for countries of South-Eastern Europe.

This is one of the measures adopted in this Chamber which I have most appreciated, for I am sure we all remember the serious problems which arose in this area just over a year ago during the NATO military intervention.

I feel that the only way to prevent wars is precisely to be closely aware of the tangible problems of other peoples.

In all probability, it is only this initiative and those which will be approved and supported by the European Parliament which will truly succeed in preventing disasters in this region and any other regions that find themselves in a similar situation.

In this communication from the Commission, the European Union sets out its claim to impose itself as protector on the countries of South East Europe.

But throughout the century which has just ended, that region of Europe has known nothing but suffering because of that claim, whether made by rival European powers or by a Western Europe which likes to think it is united.

While it is easy for the rapporteur to denounce nationalism and local chauvinism, which are indeed intolerable, who can forget that the great European powers have always played on these nationalisms, setting them against each other according to their interests as great powers?

The economic and political rivalries between European powers have led to two world wars: the first started in that region and the second was particularly destructive there.

As to the newly united Europe, it has principally distinguished itself first by contributing to the carve-up of former Yugoslavia, and then by bombing Serbia and Kosovo.

As the entire current situation illustrates, that war has further aggravated the situation in the region, both in material terms and in terms of relations between communities.

Under the circumstances, entrusting the stability of this region to the European powers is the same as having the wolf look after the sheep.

Our vote against this report expresses our opposition to the past and present policies of the European powers.

I am delighted to welcome this report calling for the European Union to play a leading role in the context of the stability and association pact for the countries of South-Eastern Europe.

People are always saying that South-Eastern Europe is the European Union' s crisis-riven back yard.

The political context in this region is extremely sensitive and came to a climax in the Kosovo conflict.

That conflict demonstrated the potential political effects of instability on the neighbouring States, threatening to destabilise the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia (FYROM), Albania and Montenegro.

Other countries in the region like Bulgaria and Romania have also suffered serious economic repercussions.

It is easy to see that the European Union has every interest in the stabilisation of the region and that interest will grow with future enlargement.

The European Union was traumatised by its powerlessness in the face of the process of violent disintegration at work in the Balkans.

It was incapable of doing anything likely to stop that disintegration because it lacked a common political will for action, but it also lacked a political approach and appropriate instruments which would have allowed it to manage the crisis effectively at the international level.

It can be said that the Balkan crisis was a turning point which had the effect of stamping a decisive orientation on European defence and security policy.

The decisions of the European Councils of Cologne and Helsinki on creating military and civilian capabilities for independent European Union crisis management are proof of that.

The outcome of the Cologne Council was the establishment of the Stability Pact for South-Eastern Europe on 10 June 1999, a pact involving not only the Member States of the European Union and, of course, the countries of the region, but also the United States and Russia.

The pact is part of the global stabilisation approach the European Union has been developing since 1996.

The stabilisation and association agreements to be signed by Bosnia-Herzegovina, Croatia, the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Albania are the keystone of that approach.

Negotiations are currently taking place with Macedonia.

Croatia, where positive political changes have recently occurred, should be involved in the near future.

These agreements constitute an entirely new contractual framework for the countries of the region; they draw great inspiration from the institutional arrangements and conditions attached to the European agreements linking the European Union with the CEECs.

These agreements are individually tailored to take account of the specific situation in each country.

They hold out the prospect of long-term integration into the European Union on the basis of the Treaty of Amsterdam and in compliance with the Copenhagen criteria.

Above all, they give the countries of this crisis-riven region an important political signal and a definite incentive.

These agreements also encourage stronger regional cooperation, which seems to me indispensable to the creation of an axis of stability in the region.

(IT) Mr President, I also voted for the measure on the Commission communication on implementing the framework for financial markets: Action Plan, because it is clearly important for the European Parliament, the Commission, the Union and the Council to make progress in terms of competition, using networks and electronic money, which are the latest forms of economic activity.

I would have been happier with my decision to vote for the measure if it had included the intention to present every pensioner with a computer when he draws out his first pension payment.

The elderly need to familiarise themselves with new commerce techniques as well as young people.

(PT) This report comments favourably on the Commission' s proposal for an action plan on financial markets, the objective of which is to liberalise capital markets.

It is also in line with the Lisbon Summit, which declared that this and other liberalisation programmes should be speeded up.

But the truth is that this process increases financial instability and encourages concentration of capital markets and financial institutions, and for this reason we are opposed both to the position adopted by the Commission and to the rapporteur' s position.

However, with a view to introducing specific measures to combat the volatility of capital markets and to control capital movements in the EU, especially those of a speculative nature, and also with a view to minimising the risk of financial crises, we attempted, by means of an amendment to this effect, to persuade the Commission to include in its action plan corresponding concrete measures. These included, in particular, the presentation of a report on the introduction of a tax on capital movements, especially speculative movements.

We regret that our amendment was not approved.

The resolution tabled by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs is certainly much better than the original version, and I want to thank the rapporteur, Mr García-Margallo y Marfil.

However, I have not been able to vote for it because it still contains inconsistencies after the plenary vote.

Thus, as regards the idea of the creation of a commission for stock exchange operations, I recommend a green paper on the establishment or gradual creation of such a commission, preceded by a feasibility study.

Moreover, the subsidiarity principle requires that, at a time of remarkable boom in the craze for cross-border investments in securities, we bear in mind that the interests of the issuing companies and investors will be better served by proximity of supervision and monitoring of international investments, with more efficient channels for cooperation between the monitoring authorities.

Supervision of the securities markets can be carried out better by people close to the markets and with in-depth knowledge of them.

In this context, comparison with the commission in place in the United States, the SEC, is particularly inappropriate, because the SEC is the corollary of a financial system resulting largely from a segmentation of the profession between commercial banks and investment banks, and in Europe we have chosen the universal bank model, which has strengthened the role of the banks in the European financial system.

It would be equally aberrant to include the stock exchange listing rules in the remit of such a commission, when at most it should ensure respect for them.

The establishment of a pan-European equity listing would also be aberrant.

Harmonised yet competitive listings guarantee a diversity of investment products.

A pan-European listing would make it impossible for national stock exchanges to concentrate on niche markets and would restrict opportunities for specialisation which may emerge from a competitive situation, even though it is convergent.

Instead of focusing on the listings - already largely harmonised anyway - to the detriment of diversity, we should emphasise rapprochement or even harmonisation of existing dealing systems and environments should be emphasised.

On prudential supervision, I made a direct appeal to the Commission and the Council yesterday not to cling to the crazy idea of entrusting supervision of all the credit establishments in the fifteen Member States to the European Central Bank.

Governments control banking activities, hence the need for financial sector supervision by government authorities, not the European Central Bank.

I have not voted for paragraph 26 which is mostly incomprehensible in French anyway.

(IT) Mr President, considering that we are discussing supplementary pensions, the representative of the Pensioners' Party could not let the occasion pass without explaining why he voted for this measure.

I am convinced that the future of pensioners can only lie in supplementary pensions. These pensions should, however, be optional and replace compulsory State pensions, which are a veritable sieve and lose water from all sides.

When we cook spaghetti, which is a delicious Italian national dish, we use a colander, a container full of holes which drains the water off the spaghetti.

Well, instead of a colander, we could use the national State schemes, which, I am afraid, also lose water from all sides, except that, instead of water, it is the hard-earned money of all the working citizens which drains away.

For this reason, we must replace the national State pension schemes with private supplementary and alternative pension schemes.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I voted in favour of Amendment No 39 by mistake.

In fact I reject it for the following reasons: this amendment is based on the assumption that neither the Commission report nor the European Parliament' s Kuckelkorn report give any impetus towards structural reforms in the Member States of the European Union as regards reforming retirement pensions.

The opposite is true of course. Right now there is a considerable need for reform in Member States' retirement pension systems.

I therefore believe that any impetus given by the European Union and by the European Parliament will assist debate in the Member States, where we still have more questions than answers.

(PT) We voted against this report because we consider that in content it differs little from the Commission' s proposal, which aims to put social security totally in the hands of the financial markets, thus weakening or even replacing state pension schemes by stock market speculation. This makes it quite clear what the "modernisation of social protection" agreed at the Lisbon Summit is meant to be.

As we stated in the amendments we tabled, creating a single market for supplementary pension funds is not an adequate response to future demographic problems. What we need are expansionist economic policies which help to create permanent jobs, thus expanding the pool of contributors to the state pension fund.

The state social security system, which is financed on a solid footing independent of commercial interests and financial profitability, and which is based on a spirit of solidarity between generations, is in a position to guarantee the right to a dignified retirement and to security in old age for workers who have paid contributions to state pension schemes.

I spoke yesterday on the Kuckelhorn report as draftsperson of the opinion of the Committee on Women' s Rights.

The committee expressed an opinion on the outcome of the consultation on the Green Paper on supplementary pensions in the single market, just as it did on the Green Paper itself.

We believe this very broad consultation should rapidly conclude with a proposal for a framework directive to ensure the development of a genuine single market in supplementary pension funds, under the second and third pillars. The first pillar, covering biometric risks, must still continue to be the cornerstone of social protection in the European Union.

The targeted directive we are seeking for the second pillar of supplementary pensions should, in particular, define the context for eliminating obstacles to free choice of pension fund, free movement of persons, free provision of services and double taxation.

As regards taxation, the only acceptable solution is one based on the principle that contributions should be tax deductible, at least up to a certain ceiling, and that supplementary pensions paid out should be taxable in accordance with the income tax legislation applying in the countries of residence.

As regards the controversial question of whether supplementary pension systems should cover biometric risks, I want to point out that, from the fiscal point of view, pension funds which do not cover these risks cannot be discriminated against as compared with those which do cover them, it being understood that the need to cover these risks depends on the extent of the first pillar in the various countries.

Subsidiarity and free choice require this.

Prudential rules must not be disproportionate to ensuring that the funds are secure.

They must be differentiated according to whether a scheme is internal or external to the enterprise. They must allow managers to determine the best investment strategy.

In the absence of agreement on certain essential points, I am unable to vote for the general framework.

I regret this all the more as almost all the relevant conclusions from the Committee on Women' s Rights and my recommendations are included in the motion for a resolution, in particular those considering that

as regards supplementary pensions too, the preservation of acquired rights is essential when a spouse interrupts or abandons his or her work in order to devote himself or herself to his or her family or look after close relatives who are in need of assistance;

for the purpose of calculating pensions, certain periods devoted to the upbringing of children or care of family members ought to be taken into account;

it is desirable to provide for the possibility of continued voluntary or optional insurance to preserve and improve pension rights and guarantee a right to payment of the capital under certain conditions.

We should obviously take advantage of this opportunity to ask the Member States to implement more consistently the principle of equal pay for equal work, because wage discrimination against women has repercussions on women' s pension levels.

Any legal or contractual provisions infringing the principle of equality of treatment of men and women should be invalid.

Finally, I want to reiterate my long-standing demand - disregarded by the Commission for many years - for revision of the existing directives on equality of treatment of women and men in terms of social security, in the same way as it applies in legal and professional systems.

And let us not forget assisting spouses, those millions of invisible workers, the large majority women, on whose behalf this Parliament has demanded an upgrading of the half-hearted 1986 directive to give assisting spouses proper status and compulsory membership of social security schemes, especially pension schemes.

On 28 March President Prodi and seven of his colleagues met with members of the Committee on Women' s Rights, the European Women' s Lobby and the Equal Opportunities Consultative Committee. I hope he and the committee responsible will now stop ignoring those demands of the European Parliament I have just mentioned.

Mr President, I also voted for the Communication: "The strategy for Europe' s internal market" , despite the fact that the text did not include the opinion drafted by Mr Medina Ortega on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs, page 20 of which states that from the point of view of social security, the ideal of supplementary pensions requires the creation of a genuine European social security system - and I repeat, European social security system - to replace the current approach, which is based on the harmonisation of national systems.

I am not, therefore, alone in hoping that, tomorrow, the 15 governments will at last decide to take social security and pensions in hand at European level, for this is the only way to prevent the current breakdown of the systems.

. (EL) According to its communication, the Commission intends over the next five years to continue the same internal market strategy, but to apply it more strictly and extend it to new areas.

Not only does the European Parliament report support this approach, it also calls for the relevant measures to be speeded up.

The starting point for the proposed objectives are what are typically referred to as the 'enormous benefits' of the internal market.

However, no explanation is given as to who will benefit from, and who will suffer under, this procedure.

Without doubt, the only outcome of all the measures to implement the principles of free establishment and free provision of services, the measures to liberalise the markets, the measures to promote the free movement of goods and the numerous concomitant laws is to strengthen the huge multinationals whose potential to extend and mobilise on new markets at greatly reduced costs has been facilitated and which have benefited from deregulation measures. These multinationals have seen their profits increase and their position consolidated.

Unfortunately, the same does not apply to small- or medium-sized businesses in small Member States, where much stiffer competition has resulted in an increase in the number of bankruptcies, shrinking business and job cuts.

The problem for these companies is not, of course, that they are 'hampered in exploiting the opportunities afforded by the internal market' ; their problem is precisely the measures used to implement the internal market, the principles which constitute the EU's competition legislation and the reduction in demand in the middle and lower classes as the result of anti-grass roots austerity policies.

And, of course, the solution does not lie in venture capital and the financial markets, which increase the risks for most small businesses, due to their limited resources, but in a different economic development policy which supports productive investment, increases demand and makes it easier for small businesses to trade.

The report calls for new, improved arrangements for companies by 'simplifying the legal, administrative and fiscal environment' and for 'laws... which do not involve costs and other burdens for businesses which would otherwise lose their competitive advantage over foreign competitors' .

In other words, even less accountable capital transactions and even fewer legislative specifications.

At the same time, there is not a word about workers' rights, about the fact that fewer obstacles mean less protection under labour legislation and less accountability during mass redundancies, mergers and transfers.

It is not by chance that neither the individual Commission proposals nor the European Council guidelines make any reference to the need to limit these phenomena, control speculative movements of capital and impose a tax and other measures on capital.

The report calls for greater liberalisation of sectors such as the pharmaceutical market and a reduction in the tax burden on employment, thereby proving that the measures being taken are paving the way for greater liberalisation of and less accountable capital transactions and profits with exceptionally dangerous consequences for the entire social protection system.

The report under discussion is fully in line with the anti-grass roots economic and social policy exercised within the framework of the single internal market and EMU and we shall, of course, be voting against it.

The sub-text of Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi' s report is recognition of the deadlock between national governments, which fail to transpose Community law when it does not serve their interests, and companies, normally the principal beneficiaries of the single market, which have to be convinced of the benefits through information campaigns and 'incentives' .

In the light of the success of earlier campaigns on the euro, the results of these are still to be established.

This is another illustration of the 'soviet-style' procedures of the Community institutions which are now trying to invent the new consumer and the new businessman, after the new citizen of the Ludford report.

So while the rapporteur supports companies, especially when faced with the difficulties SMEs encounter because of 'administrative obstacles' and complexities, I have considerable reservations about certain provisions in the final text.

The report underlines the vital importance of making infringement procedures faster and more efficient and 'welcomes the proposals to the Intergovernmental Conference' along those lines. Because Community centralisation is failing to demonstrate its validity and its contribution, we are now forced to insist on repressive procedures, where cooperation would have made it possible to draw up flexible rules more easily acceptable to those involved.

Then, the Commission should, and I quote, 'pay special attention to creating internal-market mindedness' in national governments, 'while monitoring national implementing measures' .

When we know the political context surrounding officials in Community institutions, this desire to brainwash officials in our governments alarms me.

Finally, the report regrets that the advantage to businesses of treating the whole of the EU as a single market rather than as a collection of national markets is not always apparent to them. To remedy this lack of awareness which is additional to administrative obstacles and consumer behaviour, the report envisages 'mass information campaigns similar to those conducted in the case of the euro and incentives to encourage the private sector not to treat partners from other Member States unfavourably' .

These points do not seem to undermine the confidence of this House in the chosen Community construction model. People are going to be made happy, whether they like it or not.

That concludes the explanations of vote.

The next item is the report (A5-0081/2000) by Mr Pesälä, on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development, on the proposal for a Council regulation amending Regulation (EC) No 1255/1999 on the common organisation of the market in milk and milk products (COM(1999) 631 - C5-0339/1999 - 1999/0254(CNS)).

Mr President, Commissioner, this is indeed a matter of an amendment to a Regulation by means of which competence would be transferred from the Council to the Commission.

With this amendment to the Regulation, the Commission would be empowered to amend the list of goods not covered by Annex 1.

The Commission already has this power in the area of agricultural produce, such as grain, sugar, rice and eggs.

It would be logical if this power were extended to cover milk products.

This would be the case as a result of the amendment.

When we consider that funds set aside for aiding exports will dwindle in a couple of years from EUR 587 million to EUR 415 million, as a result of WTO agreements, it would be a good thing if the Commission had the power to examine the list of goods.

There are many goods for export that also contain substantial amounts of non-milk products, such as yoghurt containing sugar and fruit, and yet dairy products attract export subsidies.

This being the case, the question here is very much one of logic, allowing us to proceed in the same way as with grain, sugar, rice and eggs.

It is also very much a question of budgetary discipline, of being able to observe budgetary discipline consistently in the years to come, as appropriations for exports grow scarcer.

There has been some discussion that the transfer of power from the Council to the Commission might not be such a good thing.

My own view on this, and on such situations as this, is that it is what we call a zero-sum game.

We must be logical and adopt the right use of power and the right course to do our job as well and as consistently as possible.

This has nothing whatsoever to do with shifting the balance of interinstitutional power.

I think it is rooted in common sense, and a very far-reaching sense of consistency.

In my opinion, in the future, when prices and situations change rapidly in the world markets, this is the way we should be able to progress with regard to practical matters and react quickly.

I believe the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development is also unanimous on this.

This amendment to the Regulation must be made.

It will be a very good and positive move for everyone, and agricultural and dairy producers in particular.

Mr President, Commissioner, I would like to start by very sincerely thanking Mr Pesälä for his statement, but I must say straight away that the thrust of my comments is somewhat different.

We have a slogan in German which says 'Milk cheers up tired chaps' .

But you can also just say 'Milk cheers you up' , because we now have some women in key positions in the Commission and that is why I would like to put on record my view that the Commission is now cheerfully planning to abolish export refunds for milk products too.

The Commission is empowered to delete goods eligible for export refunds under the COMs for cereals, sugar, rice and eggs, for example.

In the case of goods not covered by Annex I to the Treaty the list has been amended in this way.

My question is this: is the Commission now seeking carte blanche for other products?

I know that the Member States have taken widely differing views of this, not least in Council meetings.

Is this really what is intended for the entire milk sector?

I would be grateful if you could give me a couple of answers in a moment, when we consider whether this really is efficient.

The Commission text indicates that additional administrative options are to be created, so as to facilitate more precise selection of those goods for which export refunds are to be granted.

Would the Commission not agree that in this context the expression 'efficient use' is rather euphemistic?

What does 'efficient' mean in plain language?

In this case, "efficient" quite simply means abolishing export refunds for milk products.

In practice it means that, for example, no export refunds will be granted for the milk part of fruit yoghurt.

So I would like to ask if there is not a danger that without the milk export refund component export refunds for yoghurt will be reduced.

Do you have real calculations and reliable figures for this? What will the situation be then?

The rapporteur, Mr Pesälä, has, of course, already pointed out that this will also hit other products.

There are also other export products, such as cakes and pastries, which contain milk components.

So it sounds rather crazy to me if, on the one hand, we say that we must reduce costs while, on the other, it is possible, because more milk will remain on the market,that additional costs will have to be met for storage and so on.

As I see it, excess production in the milk sector is likely to get worse rather than improve, and this gradual increase in minimum market access and the simultaneous reduction in the maximum export refund are rather contradictory.

I am sure that you will be able to explain this in your statement in a moment.

I believe that in terms of market policy there is no urgent need for this, and I can therefore see no reason why I should happily vote for this procedure or why it should be in the interests of the people I represent.

I think I might find it rather difficult to explain to the farmers at home.

So I would like to ask once more - is the abolition of these export refunds really unavoidable?

Of course we agreed at the Berlin Summit that savings would have to be made, but surely in the right place.

I am sure that you will be able to give us some answers in a moment.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, first of all I would like to thank you very sincerely, Mr Pesälä, for your report.

So what is this all about?

The proposal is to transfer to the Commission the power to amend the list of processed products containing milk products which are eligible for refunds.

As the rapporteur has already explained, the Commission already has this power for cereals, sugar, rice and eggs.

Planned total expenditure for export refunds for goods not covered by Annex I to the Treaty have been reduced from EUR 610 million in budget year 1999 to EUR 551 million in budget year 2000.

This year, for the last time, we can exceed the WTO upper limit of EUR 475 million by the amounts not used in 1999.

In the next GATT year, total permissible expenditure will be limited to EUR 415 million by the WTO system, and it will no longer be possible to carry amounts forward.

Let us compare: last year we had EUR 610 million, and next year will only be able to spend EUR 415 million.

We believe that it would have been unwise to make this enormous change from 600 to 400 in one go.

So we have introduced an interim stage this year.

Our WTO commitments and budgetary discipline mean that we have to adopt a selective approach.

That means that we can no longer grant export refunds for products where this is not essential to maintain their competitiveness. And that, Mrs Keppelhoff-Wiechert, is exactly what you were asking about.

We want to be in a position to adjust the list in accordance with destinations and sales opportunities, so that in future we can use the maximum permissible amount of budget appropriations to export a maximum volume of milk products.

You gave yoghurt as an example, and it is a good one, as it demonstrates how illogical a system can be.

At present, the situation is that if any sweeteners or other additives are added to a yoghurt, it is not covered by Annex I to the Treaty.

If it is a pure natural yoghurt, that is made from milk and nothing else, then it is a milk product and it is not classified as a good not covered by Annex I to the Treaty. So we have not been paying export refunds any more for natural yoghurt for years, but we still have to grant them for flavoured yoghurts.

We really are not in the business of putting the thumbscrews on agriculture; this is about being able to react appropriately to short-term market requirements.

So this proposal will, in future, make it possible for the Commission to adapt the list of goods eligible for export refunds swiftly, but the Member States will be involved as it will come under the management committee procedure.

In conclusion, I would like to say that I find it discriminatory if milk only cheers up tired chaps.

Why not 'weary women' as well?

The vote will take place tomorrow at 9 a.m.

The next item is the report (A5-0074/2000) by Mr Maat, on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development, on the proposal for a Council regulation amending Regulation (EC) No 1255/1999 on the common organisation of the market in milk and milk products (COM (1999) 608 - C5-0047/2000 - 1999/0246(CNS)).

Mr President, during the two months I have been working on the report, I have discovered that feelings run high on the subject of school milk in Europe.

There have been many responses from schools throughout the European Union and also from school children.

I found that remarkable in itself.

There has also been much discussion because the Commission says let us go over to joint financing, which means reducing the European contribution.

Many schools reacted particularly to this point and I have also noticed among my supporters that people wondered whether things would turn out all right for school milk, whether it would keep going as an instrument?

In that regard I must say that I was very fortunate as a new Member of Parliament that, in dealing with the budget for 2001, Parliament in any case adopted my proposal to increase the school milk budget from EUR 53 to 83 million.

The proposal now before us in the report that was unanimously accepted in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development - I would stress 'unanimously' - and it was particularly gratifying that all parties in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development support the report - boils down to the fact that more money is needed, EUR 96 million in fact.

That does not come entirely within the budget, but the reality is such that, in view of the change in the dairy market, this small difference could also perhaps be found in the dairy budget.

It is also for this reason that I would urge Parliament most strongly to support the report on school milk, because there is every reason to do so.

It is remarkable how casual we in Europe sometimes are about food.

It is always there and in itself is no problem.

But it is clear that school milk has an added value for the dietary pattern of children and contributes to a better diet, particularly in urban areas.

This has been borne out by studies.

The European Commission has also commissioned a study.

I did find it to be rather limited, on the basis of a desk study, but in view of the considerable interest in Europe there is every reason to continue the regulation.

There is extra money for education in the field of the Internet, the electronic superhighway and there is more attention paid to the environment and much attention to safe living and to social conditions and within this we should not neglect a sound policy on the proper use of food and undoubtedly on milk as well.

For these reasons, and to see whether this regulation could be brought more up to date, I am pleased that the report has also been accepted in this sense in the Committee and I hope it will also be in Parliament.

There is an expansion in the number of products that can be used in the school milk regulation.

I am thinking of drinking yoghurt, low-fat cheese, skimmed milk and in this regard valuable amendments have been tabled by my own Group, and also by the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party, among others by Mr Pesl for Scandinavia.

Many specific proposals have been made and that means that in this way we can adapt the school milk regulation in a better way and integrate it better into the current dietary pattern.

That in itself makes for a stronger case.

Anyone who thinks that the school milk regulation will rescue the dietary pattern is wrong.

If this report is accepted by this House, every year about EUR 12 will be spent per child on subsidies for school milk and that is peanuts in my view.

This can easily be justified socially within the budget and in respect of a sound nutritional policy.

Mr President, on the basis of the information provided I shall wholeheartedly recommend this report.

I should like to thank the members of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development for their unanimous support, that bodes well for the vote in this House.

I should also like to thank the Commission for its willingness to provide the necessary information and also for preparing the report.

I hope it will lead to a constructive position with regard to the implementation of this report.

I understand that in any case the Council of Ministers will meet next Monday.

It would therefore be an appropriate moment if Parliament were to approve this report and the school milk regulation.

Mr President, at the request of Mr Cunha I am presenting our statement on this debate on the school milk scheme.

For more than 20 years, the European Union has been financing the free distribution of milk in primary and secondary schools.

In recent years this action has amounted to an average annual expenditure of some EUR 90 million for more than 300 million litres of milk, benefiting around 10 million children and young people, or nearly 20% of eligible schoolchildren.

There are two main reasons justifying this measure and why it should continue.

The first is its social impact, as it ensures a minimum balanced diet for many children and young people who otherwise would not have access to one.

The main beneficiaries are children and young people from disadvantaged social classes and poorer districts in both rural and urban areas.

The second reason is that, as there is a structural surplus in the market for milk products, this measure also represents an incentive to dispose of milk in a far more useful and constructive way than by distributing it, denaturing it or exporting it to third countries at even greater cost.

It is a pity that the European Union does not have more actions of this kind for other products, instead of dumping them on international markets by means of subsidies which are sometimes twice their price on those markets, which makes it difficult to understand the alleged objective of budgetary savings.

The United States, which is famous for having a more individualist outlook with less solidarity, spends nearly 9 000 million dollars a year on distributing foods to schoolchildren, i.e. 100 times more than the European Union.

And the European Union is now proposing to move away from 100% financing and is proposing 50% cofinancing, which will especially penalise less wealthy countries like Portugal.

As a Portuguese national, I would be shocked if a measure of this kind were to be approved while my own country held the presidency of the European Union.

Mr President, Mr Maat has committed himself most impressively to the issue of school milk.

I myself am a great supporter of school milk.

In fact, I think that not only children but adults too should drink more milk.

I regret therefore that there is no fresh milk available at the Parliament building in Brussels.

I do hope that Mr Maat' s next battle will concentrate on making fresh milk available in Brussels.

Having said that, I do not support Mr Maat' s proposals.

In the evaluation report on the school milk regulation that the Commission itself quotes, it says that if you only take account of the explicitly stated objectives of the regulation particularly to maintain and increase the consumption of dairy products and promote the sale of surpluses, the positive effects are marginal.

Nevertheless, on 10 December, the Commission decided not to withdraw the measures but to halve the subsidy.

I have asked the Commission a number of questions in this regard.

I asked Commissioner Fischler to what extent this measure corresponded with the subsidiarity principle.

I believe that this measure could be implemented perfectly well by the national parliaments and that national MPs would be quite able to do so.

I am also not convinced about the scientific basis as far as certain aspects of public health are concerned.

Moreover, when dealing with public health, the Commission must make a proposal on the basis of the chapter on "Public Health" in the Treaty.

Nor is it clear to me in the school milk regulation how much will be spent on administration costs.

It is such a small proportion of the overall milk production that I feel that this weighs particularly heavily on the European Commission budget.

I am also not sure what the financial consequences will be after enlargement.

I am not an opponent of school milk as such but I do object to the way we are going about it.

I believe that the Commission must confine itself to the core tasks and leave other matters to the Member States.

I support the Commission proposal but not the proposals of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development.

Mr President, I would like to thank Mr Maat for a good report and good cooperation, namely in his raising the issue of public health.

Until now the basis for pricing has favoured fattier products.

There was strong unanimity in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development on the need to change the basis for pricing so that less fatty products might benefit more from this aid.

It has been an excellent signal from the EU to the heart of the people for decades now, and we have been able to get it across via children, school pupils, schools and homes.

In that respect it has to continue, and, as Mr Maat said, be brought up to date and this issue, which is in the common good, should be promoted.

Amendments Nos 9 and 10 specifically move the proposal towards a direction where less fatty products would be treated along the same lines as fattier products.

Mr President, I am pleased to have the opportunity of speaking in the debate and I congratulate the rapporteur for his work.

One clear result, of course, of the proposal before us to curtail or remove this subsidy on school milk will be decreased availability of milk and a drop in the consumption of milk in schools.

I ask you sincerely: is that what you want to see happening?

The nutritional aspect is surely the central element here and the continuation of the consumption of milk by schoolchildren is what we should be working towards.

The proposals before us definitely militate against that.

Can I suggest to you what might happen as a result.

Children will switch to consuming non-nutritional products or, God forbid, we will move closer towards a situation where children will have to pay for milk consumed, thus discriminating against poor children from deprived communities.

We all acknowledge the aim here.

It is to cut milk subsidies.

But to use schoolchildren as the means towards that end is a sinister way to go about it, especially in a world that is becoming far more health-conscious by the day.

This is the age of non-GM food and organic products, and the proposals before us represent a major step backwards.

Several Member States will not operate this scheme at all if the present subsidy is withdrawn or decreased.

That is the reality of the situation.

This would be a catastrophe, not only for the health of schoolchildren - our future citizens - but to the viability of communities also.

I come from a part of Wales, where GDP per head of the population is less than 75% of the European Union average, in other words, an Objective 1 area.

I am not proud of that.

It is an indication of our deprived status.

Cutting the subsidy, however, would make my community even poorer, a community whose farmers have lost 80% of their income in 2½ years.

This is not the European Union that I thought my nation had joined.

We were looking to a Europe of cohesion that seeks to bolster its deprived communities and help its poorest citizens.

There is also the misconception that Member States will somehow foot this bill and make up the deficit on the basis that it is their responsibility to deal with health and social policy.

Can I tell you that my Member State, the UK, is already prevaricating on the provision of additional money for Wales and for Scotland to match European funds, a point that I and my colleagues have already highlighted previously in this Chamber.

This is not unique to my nation.

Sadly, it affects other nations as well.

Farmers then are told to diversify, to become multifunctional.

These are the buzzwords now in the European Union.

They have already become as multifunctional as humanly possible.

It is time we rewarded them, particularly in the peripheral and deprived communities of the European Union.

Cutting this subsidy would destroy an industry already on its knees.

We need to give a window of opportunity to these people and provide them with the assistance to sustain themselves as they undoubtedly face the most difficult period economically they have ever faced.

It is clear to me that the proposals before us are not merely a means to curtail the subsidy, but rather, in the event of a lack of participation by Member States in the wake of the subsidy cut, to terminate it entirely.

This continued erosion of the milk industry is, I am afraid, part of a general trend that we are witnessing throughout the agricultural industry.

Without people farming in our villages and communities, there will be no rural communities; nobody left to service the needs of those of us that sometimes visit rural areas for recreation.

The process of amalgamating farms and the buying-up of farm units by consortia pushing up prices unrealistically is already well advanced in my nation of Wales and is becoming the sad pattern in other regions and nations as well.

I believe we should call a halt to this general erosion of our rural communities.

At the present moment in time, that requirement transcends the need to cut milk subsidies.

Defending communities is far, far more important.

We must keep our milk farmers farming and the communities where they earn their living as viable entities.

The Agricultural Committee deserve every support in this regard.

Mr Maat has done well in a very difficult situation and I wish him every success.

Mr President, first of all I should like to congratulate the rapporteur for bringing forward a report that not only looks at the problem but puts forward new ideas for the future.

In many countries and areas - such as where I come from in Northern Ireland - young children might not have had the opportunity to have that nourishment and that nutritional support supplied by milk if it had not been for the milk provided to them in schools.

I also hope and trust that they will begin to appreciate and to continue to drink milk.

One thing which amazes me, especially when the agricultural community and dairy farmers are going through such difficult times, is that people are prepared to buy many other products and pay substantial amounts of money for them, but they are not prepared to pay the same amount of money for milk, either for themselves, or for their children.

Milk provides a very healthy and balanced diet, something we should all support.

The European Union should take that on board.

It is good value for money. We do not always achieve that.

We are in a situation in Europe at the moment where we are pouring millions of euros into the agricultural industry, yet the farmers have never been worse off in their lives.

We have to go back to the drawing board and ask ourselves what our priorities are.

I want to thank Mr Maat.

He has challenged us to look to the future, not just in relation to milk itself, but also to milk products and ways in which we can encourage children to drink milk.

Mr President, for years I have been calling for the school milk scheme to be changed.

I think it is complete nonsense.

It is totally wrong from a nutritional point of view and it is impossible to administer.

Currently, full-cream milk is fully subsidised, semi-skimmed milk is semi-subsidised and skimmed milk receives no subsidy.

The aim of schemes such as this is to do away with surplus stocks, and since full-cream milk contains the most butterfat, it receives the highest subsidy.

We should instead award subsidies per pupil.

I would have preferred it if we had set milk prices lower so that we could abolish the bureaucratic milk quotas.

In the longer term we must change the EU's agricultural policy so that we can put an end to artificial excess prices and surplus stocks.

However, the school milk scheme is one of the better schemes.

It is not just beneficial to farmers.

The scheme is also to the advantage of children and their parents, especially if it is changed so that it offers subsidies to low-fat products.

Children do not need so much fat.

Furthermore, a scheme with subsidies per pupil would be much easier to administer.

There is an enormous amount of administration involved in the present scheme.

I have received many complaints from schools which cannot work out how to administer the scheme.

It is a real science calculating the fat percentages in milk and cheese.

The schools often end up having to pay back large sums.

It is not that they are out to cheat; they simply cannot work out how to administer the scheme.

I think, therefore, that we must vote for the amendments of my good colleague and friend, Niels Busk.

The scheme which he is recommending is administratively and nutritionally the only correct one.

Mr President, I would like to start by thanking the rapporteur, Mr Maat, for his report, which I support in its entirety.

And thanks as ever for the usual good work of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development.

I would also like to thank my good colleague and close friend, Freddy Blak, of the Socialist Group, for his support for my amendment.

The school milk scheme concerns health and nutrition.

Children and infants must learn healthy eating habits, and milk, with its protein and calcium content, is a very important part of this.

On behalf of the Liberal Group, Mr Pesälä and I put forward three amendments which basically aim to make the school milk scheme a lot easier to administer, but which also seek to make the scheme more flexible with regard to the products which are subsidised.

There are various traditions relating to which dairy products are consumed, and the scheme is simplified by awarding the subsidy on the basis of a quarter of a litre of milk per pupil per school-day.

For products other than full-cream milk, the subsidy should be calculated on the basis of low-fat solids or a maximum butterfat content of 50%.

In this way the scheme takes account of the differences in the milk traditions which exist in the different Member States.

Mr President, Commissioner, the Commission proposal to henceforth fund the school milk programme by means of 50% cofinancing has evoked a furious response in the Council and in Parliament.

As soon as the term cofinancing is mentioned in terms of agriculture, people' s hackles rise.

Many see cofinancing as the renationalisation of the common agricultural policy.

The Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development is also against the Commission' s plans.

With such a viewpoint, Parliament can make the most of it. Will we read in the newspaper tomorrow "European Parliament in favour of school milk subsidies - to the rescue of the dairy sector" ?

Are we not kidding ourselves and the sector with this attitude?

Is massive opposition to cofinancing in the interests of the sector in the long term?

We shall have to make do with the financial package established in Agenda 2000 and to deal with the enlargement of the Union.

If agricultural policy is not changed we shall not be able to pay for it.

The Union should develop its policy within this context.

The main question here is, how can we operate as efficiently as possible with the limited resources of the European Union? Must we continue to burden the agriculture budget with a school milk programme of about EUR 90 million a year?

Is it not more sensible to seek possibilities of financing such programmes elsewhere?

If we wish to guarantee the agricultural sector a reasonable level of support, then that is urgently required.

If we do not do that, then the Commission will undoubtedly try in other ways to remain below the agricultural ceiling. What do you think about a reduction on the direct income supplements?

Those who are against cofinancing bring such painful economies a lot closer.

We do not wish to be part of that.

Relieving the EU budget by means of creative solutions, such as cofinancing, seems to us a better option for the agricultural sector itself.

Finally, I agree with the objection to the fact that school milk is distributed to people at meetings in this building who certainly do not need it.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I would first like to thank Mr Maat very sincerely for the effort he has made to present a balanced report on the Commission proposal.

You will have seen from the debate that the school milk scheme is a very sensitive issue indeed, on which there are many different shades of opinion, and that means that he certainly did not have an easy job.

Some of the amendments proposed in Mr Maat' s report in effect totally reject the Commission proposal.

I cannot therefore accept the amendments in question, which are Amendments Nos 1, 5, 6, 7, 10 and 12.

I am still convinced that the cofinancing proposed would promote the commitment of state and municipal authorities - and that of school authorities and the dairy industry - which is, in turn, a prerequisite for the success of all of these efforts.

It is quite simply wrong to say that the level of aid will drop from schoolchildren' s point of view.

The level of aid will remain the same, only the source of funding will change, and no one can seriously maintain that aid is only good if it comes totally from the Community budget.

I am also quite happy to concede that there are health, nutrition and social policy objectives here.

But there is one point I wish to make, and this is also the reason why a particular Treaty article has been taken as the legal basis here: in the field of agricultural policy, we can only justify aid that leads to additional sales.

If the real objective is to take social policy or health policy measures, then these should be financed under health and social policy and not, as it were, through the back door.

Amendments Nos 2, 4 and 9 are designed to cover a broader range of milk products under the scheme.

In this respect the Commission would like to maintain the existing scheme, in which the selection of subsidised products is a matter for the Commission.

Although I cannot therefore accept these amendments, I have no problems with the underlying message, which it is worth conveying, and that is that the current range of products needs to be reviewed, and I will ensure that this issue continues to be dealt with and discussed in the Management Committee for Milk and Milk Products.

Lastly, Amendment No 3 is in the form of a statement, so that I do not think it would be appropriate to incorporate the text into the regulation.

As regards the practical side of the proposal, I fear that this amendment would lead to varying levels of support in different Member States and to dramatic fluctuations in the level of aid within a short time.

And as I am sure that no one would want that, it would be better to keep the existing provision, which is clear, based on objective criteria and which guarantees general stability.

For the same reasons, I am unable to accept Amendments Nos 8 and 10, which are designed to link the level of aid to milk components other than fat.

Finally, Amendments Nos 8 and 9 are intended to make it clear that the aid will be paid for a fixed quantity of milk per schoolchild per day.

This would essentially mean maintaining the existing position, so that is in fact another argument as to why these amendments cannot be accepted.

The vote will take place tomorrow at 9 a.m.

The next item is the report (A5-0077/2000) by Mrs Thyssen, on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, on draft guidelines on Vertical Restraints (C5-0009/2000 - 2000/2003(COS)).

Mr President, this debate on the guidelines on vertical restraints is the last in a series of four on an extremely technical subject, for now anyway.

Industry is all too aware of the importance of the Community competition policy for its operations, but let us also not forget that fair, enforceable and sound competition rules also affect the consumer.

I have the impression that for people who are not familiar with the competition policy, the whole question of vertical restraints between companies seems a rather strange business, but the fact is that a large proportion of daily distribution is made, managed and organised on the basis of the rules of vertical restraints.

I did intend, Mr President, to provide my colleagues with a bit more information on this subject, but I can now see how few people are in the Chamber and I think I should not waste your time and the interpreters' time on this.

The Commissioner knows the subject and the Members who are still to speak on this matter know at least as much as I do about it.

I shall therefore just say that I think that we as a Parliament, and as the rapporteur on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, can say that it is a good thing that the Commission draws up guidelines and that it publishes them.

The Commission is the European competition authority par excellence and everyone and certainly legal security will benefit if it explains its new policy in detail beforehand.

Secondly, I hope the Commission will incorporate the comments listed in the report by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, which I shall not repeat here, in the final version of the guidelines that will soon be published and I should also like to hear that from you personally, Commissioner.

I should now like to ask a few questions.

First of all, are we going to receive the evaluation which we asked for after three or four years of new policy in the sphere of vertical restraints?

Secondly, when can we expect the proposals for a new policy for the horizontal agreements, a new policy that has also been announced by the Commission?

Thirdly, the automobile distribution contracts for the time being fall outside the new policy, but the regulation for this sector expires in 2002.

We can expect an evaluation to be made this year by the Commission.

When will we receive it and has the Commission already consulted the automobile distribution sector and particularly the small distributors?

Fourthly, despite everything, we still have a very fundamental question, a question that we have repeatedly raised in vain and I must therefore repeat it again here; why has the Commission nevertheless opted to apply the new policy immediately also to those sectors where the competition policy, as it was hitherto organised, operated perfectly well?

In conclusion, Mr President, I should like to thank those Members - unfortunately they are not here in the Chamber - who also dealt with this subject in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, not only for this report, but also for the three reports that preceded it.

I wish to inform those who tabled amendments, that is, amendments tabled on behalf of the PSE Group, that I have unfortunately had to reject those amendments by reason of their content as I explained earlier in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and secondly, because these amendments had already been tabled at Committee level and rejected one by one.

Mr President, I should finally like to apologise for the fact that I cannot be present at the vote tomorrow morning, but Mr von Wogau will replace me here as rapporteur, if necessary.

Mr President, Commissioner, my colleague, Mrs Thyssen has produced some excellent work and I wish to congratulate her on it.

In this connection, I myself would like to comment just on the relevant production markets and the guidelines for interpretation regarding how market share is determined, especially from the point of view of cooperation agreements in the petrol station business.

These issues cause problems, at least in my home country of Finland, and in other small Member States.

Guidelines on vertical restraints should be designed to help us see clearly and accurately when the seller' s market share in the relevant product market exceeds the 30% threshold to be applied.

Regarding cooperation agreements in the petrol station business, the draft guidelines to be applied do not at present take sufficiently clear account of the special features of that industry' s market and delivery agreements.

The 30% market share limit provided for under the Block Exemption regulation will cause problems relating to equal treatment for existing petrol stations, at least in Finland.

Applying the new ruling might lead to situations where, for example, we will be inspecting in a different manner the contractual obligations regarding cooperation in the petrol station industry that are otherwise comparable in every respect with each other as far as their direct effects are concerned if the market share of one company exceeds the 30% threshold.

It is important to define unambiguously the relevant markets referred to in Article 3 of the Block Exemption regulation.

The guidelines have not defined sufficiently precisely how the market share of a manufacturer and a wholesaler should be determined.

I feel this is especially problematic.

As this is a matter of regulating the right of competition in an industry in which competition takes place among brand names, the guidelines should clearly state that calculating market shares should always involve studying each stage of delivery separately.

In addition, the guidelines should indicate unambiguously that the 30% threshold in the relevant market has been calculated to take account of sales of the supplier' s own brand to the retailer or distributor.

Mr President, I am pleased that you knew I was here and that I was going to speak. You know that I do not usually speak too long.

I will simply explain the amendments presented by Mr Berenguer, who is unable to attend.

These are Amendments Nos 2, 3 and 4.

Amendment No 2 deals with the possibility of freeing the distributor by means of the return of contributions once the contract has finished.

The formula used is contained in section 147 of the Commission guidelines on this subject, which is known as the investment depreciation period.

The possibility should exist, in certain circumstances, of freeing the distributor by means of a reintegration of the investment.

In other words, the distributor should not be permanently bound by the initial investment of the producer.

Amendment No 3 refers to the setting of prices by the producer - the resale price - in certain cases, such as the launch of the product.

There are certain cases in which this setting of the resale price can be justified.

This is referred to in sections 38 and 39 of the Commission guidelines, but it is clear that, in certain cases, we have to provide flexibility and we are sure that the Commission will understand this.

Lastly, Amendment No 4 refers to the protection of producers against pressures applied by the distributor to force them to extend the contract.

We are talking about exclusive contracts, sections 131 et seq.

Finally, these amendments are simply intended to be a reminder of certain specific aspects, but it is clear that both the guidelines proposed by the Commission and Mrs Thyssen' s report move within boundaries which are reasonable and practical.

We hope that the Commission will administer these guidelines in a flexible way so that, on the one hand, market competition is guaranteed and, on the other, we do not create situations of enslavement or limitation of economic activity with regard to the distributors.

Mr President, as we are short of time I will make my statement telegram style.

First of all, many thanks to you, Mrs Thyssen, for your excellent report.

Second, my thanks also to the members of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs for supporting this important reform project.

The draft is an important step in the reform of competition policy in respect of vertical restraints.

Since the Green Paper was published in 1997, the development of the institution of vertical distribution restraints has gone through various phases, including most recently the adoption of new Regulation 2790 on the application of Article 81(3) of the Treaty to categories of vertical agreements and concerted practices.

As you know, the Commission is taking this policy as a basis for a decisive switch from a traditional approach based on formal criteria to an approach based on the analysis of economic impacts.

The objective of this is to re-establish freedom of contract for the great majority of companies and to simultaneously improve the protection of fair competition for the benefit of consumers.

Furthermore, in answer to your question, Mrs Thyssen, as to whether there will be a review, the answer is yes, there will indeed be a review of the guidelines after four years.

With regard to your question about horizontal measures, the Commission is currently drawing up a set of guidelines relating to this horizontal cooperation agreement.

A first draft of these guidelines will then be transmitted to the European Parliament before it is published in the Official Journal.

It is very likely that this will happen before the end of April.

I am delighted to report that the European Parliament and the Commission have worked together closely and constructively on this issue.

Mrs Thyssen' s report demonstrates once more that this will to cooperate is making a valuable contribution to various relevant aspects of the reform process.

The vote will be taken tomorrow at 9 a.m.

(The sitting was closed at 8.20 p.m.)

Adoption of the Minutes of the previous sitting

The Minutes of yesterday' s sitting have been distributed.

Mr President, I should like to say that I cast a vote in error yesterday afternoon on the question of referring the bananas issue back to committee.

We in this Parliament risk setting ourselves on a course which will fail to help the banana growers and, at the same time, will continue to inflict grave injustice on small enterprises engaged in producing things like bath products and ...

I therefore wish I had cast my vote the other way.

I wish that to be placed on the record.

We will include this in the Minutes, Mr MacCormick.

Mr President, I only wanted to report my presence for the Minutes.

I will not be signing the attendance register as I am leaving in one hour, but I wanted everyone to know that I am here.

We can all see, Mrs Van der Laan, that you are here.

It will be included in the Minutes.

Mr President, we were somewhat confounded yesterday by an action of a Member of the Confederal Group of the European United Left/Nordic Green Left, but I think that what I am about to announce will not come as a surprise to anyone here, as I explained at length on Monday what I am about to request. In fact, you have also received several e-mails and I have also written to the Conference of Presidents on the matter.

The fact is that according to Members of various groups, the agenda on Fridays is too light, as a result of which many Members genuinely believe that their time can be spent more productively elsewhere.

Consequently, there are few of us here today and we cannot guarantee that our electorate is adequately represented here.

We therefore believe that a choice needs to be made: either we need to give more substance to Friday' s agenda or to abolish the Friday sitting.

In this context, I wish to ask for the quorum to be checked.

I think that we all know the rules by now.

Mrs Buitenweg, you cannot request this on your own.

Such a request must be made by at least 32 Members.

I will check if there are sufficient Members present who wish to check the quorum.

I notice that more than 32 Members have made this request.

We will have to establish whether there is a quorum.

You will undoubtedly know that there is a quorum if one third of the MEPs are present in the Chamber.

(The number of Members present was counted)

I note that there is no quorum and that the vote on the Pesälä report will therefore take place in the next part-session.

Mr President, firstly I would like to ask you to determine an exact figure and to carry out an electronic check during the roll-call vote so that we know who is here and who is not.

Secondly, I would like to say that I share the concern of my colleagues who want to upgrade Fridays.

I am always here as a member of the so-called "Friday Club".

I also want to upgrade Fridays, but through work and not through sabotage.

Mr Posselt, the Rules of Procedure, which I have followed to the letter, are very clear on this and do not allow the electronic voting system to be used.

They also specify that the outcome of the vote shall not be made known.

It is up to the President to establish that there is no quorum.

Report by Mr Maat (A5-0074/200), on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development, on the proposal for a Council regulation amending Regulation (EC) No 1255/1999 on the common organisation of the markets in milk and milk products [COM(1999) 608 - C5-0047/2000 - 1999/0246(CNS)]

Mr President, I am pleased to say that I, together with a number of other colleagues from my Group, fully back the initiative which Mrs Buitenweg has taken.

Needless to say, we do not aim to sabotage the work. This is why we announced this action a long time ago - the Conference of Presidents were made aware of it six weeks ago - and neither is this any reflection on today' s agenda, of course.

I think that the outcome of the quorum count is sufficient reason for the Conference of Presidents to revise the agenda for 2001, but at the moment I would like to ask you the following: according to my interpretation of the Rules of Procedure, the request for the quorum means that none of the votes can take place.

If this is not the case, Mr President, I would ask you to check the quorum before we proceed to vote on the Maat report.

(More than 32 Members rose in support of this request)

(The President established that there was not a quorum)

Mr President, I have been trying to catch your eye for a while now.

I note that the Members who are now asking for the quorum to be checked are the Dutch Members, or a number of Dutch Members, who do not usually attend.

Mr President, we have checked when exactly these people are present on Fridays.

It appears that, evidently, no Friday is important enough for these people to turn up.

They have had their little pleasures, Mr President.

They were able to appear on radio and television last week.

Mr President, is that the only way they can think of to sabotage our work here, by soiling the nest of so many other Members who, just like me, are trying to do a decent job here today.

Mr President, I cannot accept this and would like to offer my apologies as I feel ashamed on their behalf.

I would also like to say to these Members, if they had worked like I have in recent months and if they had been given the mandate from the electorate personally, they would behave differently today.

I notice that a few other Members would like to be given the floor on this point of order.

We should, however, bring this to a close very shortly.

I am now giving the floor to Mr Schulz.

Mr President, I will not actually speak for very long, but, so far, if I disregard the comments made by Mrs Oomen-Ruijten, only those in favour of the process have been allowed to speak.

We do have individual opinions within our Group.

The delegates in the Socialist Group are not unanimous here.

I would therefore like to speak as someone who is against this process.

I would ask the Members who this morning requested that the vote be postponed in the absence of a quorum to consider the following: if you want to reform the Rules of Procedure, which are indispensable in this House, if you want to improve our working practice, you cannot achieve this through impulsive actions; instead you must initiate a full debate on reform of the House.

The delegates who are here this morning, who have done their work, who spent yesterday evening preparing for the work to be carried out today, are being punished here today, by a spontaneous action, for the fact that not everyone in Parliament has done their homework.

I do not think this is fair to these delegates!

Finally, I would ask you to consider the following, and I am addressing this to my colleagues in the Greens and in the left-wing Groups of this House, who have the somewhat remarkable impression that through the Rules of Procedure you can change the free mandate into an imperative mandate with a duty to be present for all votes.

That is nonsense! You will never be able to compel a freely elected delegate to take part in a parliamentary session or a vote if that delegate does not want to.

This is why I consider this morning' s action to be impulsive, although it did perhaps serve a purpose, but, in terms of highlighting the key issue, it was quite unhelpful!

Mr President, I feel that we are making rather a spectacle of ourselves. I am reminded of the priest who berates his parishioners because other people do not come to Church.

We are here to work and those who are not here to work are preventing us from doing so.

Mr Schulz is right. This is completely immoral.

Secondly, Mr President, I would like us to get on with the debate. Even if the fact that we do not meet the quorum means that we cannot vote, we can still debate.

Thirdly, I would like to point out the absurdity of the Rules of Procedure and ask the President to see that the matter is referred to the relevant Committee, for our Rules of Procedure state that the quorum cannot be required if less than 32 Members are present.

Therefore, if there had only been 29 Members present we could have voted and no one could have stopped us, but, because there are more than 32, we cannot vote!

This is absurd, and we are making a spectacle of ourselves in front of the whole of Europe.

We cannot go on like this.

Mr Bourlanges, I can perhaps put your mind at rest by informing you that I will, of course, refer this morning' s matter to the Bureau.

Needless to say, we will discuss this matter.

I think that goes without saying.

For the rest, as President, I am at your service at the moment and I, together with yourself, need to apply the Rules of Procedure to the best of my ability.

I still have many requests from Members to speak.

I am now giving the floor to Mr Medina Ortega.

Mr President, since there will no doubt be another quorum vote, I would like to remind the President and the Members of this Parliament that, during a quorum vote, it is not permitted to leave the chamber.

Four MEPs have left the chamber.

The practice often consists of asking for the quorum and then leaving the chamber.

I would ask you, Mr President, to remember this and not to allow any MEP to leave the chamber while a count of those Members present is taking place.

Mr Medina Ortega, we need to straighten a few things out.

We are now working within the Rules of Procedure.

Since the start of the new parliamentary term, it has been defined very clearly that every Member is allowed to leave the Chamber.

If, however - and this is according to the Rules of Procedure - one of the 32 Members who have requested a quorum leaves the Chamber, they will still be included.

This is the quorum provision as it stands at the moment and this is the one I am applying.

Mr Bourlanges said that we carry on voting if there are fewer than 32 Members in the Chamber. This is not the case.

The Rules of Procedure stipulate that if there are fewer than 32 Members in total present in the Chamber, then there is no vote.

Mr Posselt, there are many points of order to cover.

I am giving you the floor for the last time.

Mr President, I am very sorry but we did announce this action six weeks ago - it has not exactly appeared out of the blue.

We have given everyone, including the Presidents, the opportunity to change the agenda if this was considered necessary.

Nobody acted upon this. I have not heard of any action to change the agenda, even on the part of the Members who are now complaining.

This action, the quorum action, will continue, not only today, but every Friday in Strasbourg, until we have achieved our goal.

One of the options is a full Chamber, because one thing that creates the bad image which Mr Bourlanges is talking about is people signing up here and leaving without doing their work.

I have also done my homework and I do not want to mention any names, but we will be able to do this in future.

We will challenge the quorum for each item on the agenda today. This will cause some irritation.

It seems more sensible, therefore, to move all votes for today. We then do not need to continue with this and we can carry on with the debates and ask the Commissioner important questions.

Mrs Van der Laan, I understand that you would like the quorum to be checked.

According to the Rules of Procedure, a vote is to be taken on this.

We need to check whether there are 32 Members who wish to support you.

(More than 32 Members rose in support of this request) (The President established that there was no quorum)

I am just so tired of being accused of not wanting to do my job because I am taking part in this action.

If this Parliament is to be taken even a tiny bit seriously in Europe - and it is touch and go whether it will be, given that only 50% of citizens voted at the last European Parliament elections - then it must take itself seriously, and we are not taking ourselves seriously by sitting and discussing cases when there is nobody here.

That is not a serious way of doing things.

If Parliament has to work on Friday, then people must be here.

What we are asking for is simply confirmation of whether we are observing Parliament' s own rules.

That can hardly be called frivolous.

Mr President, the action which was taken is permitted by the Rules of Procedure, and therefore, those who, like me, acted in this way take political responsibility for it.

I do, however, consider that it is not right to criticise those who use an instrument which was adopted by democratic vote, such as the Rules of Procedure, for purposes which all may not support, but which are nevertheless permitted by the rules which we have established for ourselves.

If the rules had been different, we would have acted differently.

I would ask, rather, why it is that many Members voted in favour of working on Fridays in Strasbourg and yet are not in Strasbourg today.

It might have been better and made more sense to vote not to work on Fridays: in fact, I put it to you that to vote in a certain way and then act differently is a display of blatant disregard for our institution.

Mr President, with regard to Mr Medina Ortega' s intervention a few moments ago, which you responded to by saying that his interpretation was incorrect, I must tell you that your reply was not correct either.

Please do not ask me to name any particular Member, but I guarantee that some of the 32 members who voted in favour of the request for a quorum are no longer here.

Therefore, some of the 32 Members have violated the Rules of Procedure.

Report by Mrs Thyssen (A5-0077/2000), on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, on the draft guidelines on vertical restraints [C5-0009/2000 - 2000/2003(COS)]

Mr President, you will understand that I would like the quorum to be checked, but I think that there are clearly not enough people present.

I would therefore suggest moving all planned votes to the next sitting and proceeding with the discussion with the Council.

This is not the way things are done.

You can ask for the quorum to be checked but the vote is on the agenda.

Would you like to get the quorum checked now?

(More than 32 Members rose in support of this request) (The President established that there was no quorum)

Mr Mayer, I can assure you, it is not just me who casts my eye through the Chamber.

I also have people behind my desk who help me in this activity.

We can monitor all corners of the Chamber.

I actually think that I have not made too bad a job of it.

Concerning night flights, these will be discussed in a moment.

We will see how the point on the agenda unfolds.

I am now giving the floor to Mrs Flesch.

Mr President, I am indebted to my esteemed friend, Mrs van der Laan, for making it clear, the last time she adopted a position, that she and her friends intended to repeat the manoeuvre every Friday morning of a Strasbourg part-session.

I am grateful to her for clarifying the purpose of this action and I agree with Mr Jacques Poos' comments.

I would also like to express my disappointment at the absence from the Chamber this morning of Members whom I believed to be as concerned as I am for the interests of the town of Strasbourg.

Mr President, I would just like to ask all those who stood up to request checking the quorum what they think of the fact that, thanks to their action, we are not now going to vote on emergency aid measures for Ethiopia. In all honesty, I think we need to make journalists aware of what we think of this kind of action.

Everyone is, of course, free to act as they like.

The next item is an oral question to the Commission (B5-0008/2000), on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party, on the EU' s information and communication strategy.

Mr President, the Union is faced with major tasks and its further development depends to a great extent on what we do here and now.

Enlargement to include the countries of Eastern and Central Europe is the biggest challenge in the Community' s history, and if we do not tackle the issue correctly now, we are putting a lot at risk.

It is extremely important that we explain to the Union' s citizens, and the citizens of the candidate countries, what the Union stands for.

An information and communication strategy must, therefore, be high on our agenda.

I am looking forward with great interest to hearing your answer, Commissioner Reding, because I know that information is also of great interest to you: an interest which we share, moreover, because we are both journalists by profession.

I believe that we also have the same interest in the Union' s communication and information activities being organised in as close proximity to the citizens as possible and in our applying the policy so that the various groups in society get the information which they most need.

The keywords are coordination - partly when it comes to sharing information between the Commission and the Parliament - decentralisation, targeting and optimum exploitation of the available information technology.

I am curious as to how the Commission will go about the task. I imagine that the Commission' s offices in the major European cities will be involved and that they will be assigned tasks and responsibilities and given resources to contact and inform the public at large.

The experts, the authorities and those who are genuinely interested in the EU should not have problems getting information, and I must admit that I am a little sceptical when I hear about an "interinstitutional" library in Brussels or similar central functions.

I would much rather that the Commission' s office in Copenhagen was a little more accessible.

It is the Commission' s local offices, in cooperation with Parliament' s local offices, which must meet the man on the street, the man who always thinks that Brussels is so extremely far away.

He must understand that Brussels means all of us together, as Commission President Prodi put it.

It is a very difficult task because, in my opinion, the gap between the citizens and the institutions is wide, and with the major challenges which the Union is facing the task will become no less great.

Enlargement, the Commission' s ambitious 5-year plan, the Commission' s plans for reform, the Intergovernmental Conference: there is a lot to provide information about, and I think that this is an urgent matter.

I believe that you share many of my views, Mrs Reding.

Mr President, I should like to thank Mr Andreasen for his question since it gives me the opportunity to express the extent to which I share his views, as, indeed, I emphasised during my hearing before this House last September.

It is true that there is a gulf between the citizen and Europe.

It is true that we have all, not just the Commission, but also Parliament and the Member States, made many mistakes in our information policy in the past.

We must all, not just the Commission in isolation but the Commission in collaboration with the Member States and with Parliament, proceed to examine the matter in depth and develop a new information policy.

Moreover, let me tell you quite explicitly that I have taken careful note of the problems which exist.

I must tell you, too, that there are some things which are working well; it is not all bad.

For instance, we have just started up 'Europe direct' , a new access facility for citizens looking for information about Europe.

We have our Euro-info-points and information outlets in the Member States, which, generally speaking, are very successful.

Along with the honourable Member, I admit that we might be able to improve the way they operate, and I shall indeed make every effort to achieve this.

The honourable Member also mentioned modern technology.

Obviously, the new information policy which we are going to be implementing will have to optimise the use of all the information and communication possibilities which this new technology makes available to us.

In my opinion, one of the major mistakes of the past, in our information policy, was the fact that this was often top-down information identified, wrongly, I must say, as propaganda.

That must be taken into consideration.

We must take the psychology of the public into consideration and we must ensure that dialogue is established.

Moreover, I would draw your attention to the fact that my fellow Commissioner, Michel Barnier, and myself, have initiated dialogue on the Intergovernmental Conference which is to follow this new approach, i.e. making contact with the public, with young people and opinion formers, and discussing matters with them, and also approaching locally, regionally and nationally elected representatives on behalf of the Commission, not to make fine speeches, but to discuss things with them and to gain some idea of their general expectations.

I am, of course, counting a great deal on Parliament to play its part in this citizen information campaign. Parliament is the body which is closest to the citizens, and if all the Members of the European Parliament fulfil their task of informing citizens - and I shall assist them as much as I possibly can to do so - this will enable us to change mindsets.

We have once again started to work within an interinstitutional working party on 'information' , in which Parliament is represented, and as part of this work, which is a tripartite effort involving the national states, the European Parliament and the Commission, I plan to present a communication to you in the near future outlining a new approach which I shall first present to the Commission, some time before the summer, and which I shall then discuss with you.

I cannot give you any details at this early stage of the actual proposal, as it is still being drawn up, but I can assure you that the main pillars of this new approach will be decentralisation, subsidiarity, closeness to the citizens, the coresponsibility of the European institutions and the national administrations and also the increased participation of civil society.

I also think we must all clarify our respective roles.

Obviously, the Parliament' s role is different to that of the Commission.

I am deeply convinced that Parliament' s special role must continue.

Any collaboration in the field of information must allow for the specific character of each institution.

It is possible to cooperate without the parties involved losing their own identities, but we should nonetheless all work in the same direction and we must know that the closer we are to the citizens, the greater our chances of being comprehensible, credible and effective.

In order to do so, we must seriously examine the way we are organised, the instruments and procedures we select, what is being done at the various levels, at institutional, national and regional level, and how tasks are divided between the three institutions.

We must also, openly and objectively, look at our own way of working and examine how we can avoid repeating the mistakes of the past.

That, Mr President, is what I wanted to say for the time being.

Obviously, the discussion is only just being initiated and will not be completed today, because in the very near future we shall be presenting a communication on our new information policy which we are going to discuss in detail with you.

Mr President, I would like to thank Commissioner Reding for her response to Mr Andreasen.

We have a very committed commissioner in Commissioner Reding.

She has a really tough task on her hands but I am sure that she will get the full support that she recognises that she needs from the European Parliament.

I find myself totally supportive of this motion in addressing the information deficit of the EU.

The information deficit is actually more serious than the democratic deficit that we often talk about.

In a sense, the information deficit and the democratic deficit are part of the same problem.

In the recent past, we have had the Oostlander report in 1993 and the famous Pex report in 1998.

They have analysed the problem, suggested improvements, but sadly little has been achieved.

I wish Commissioner Reding well in getting on with this problem.

This week I had a visitors' group from the Winchester Probus Club, mainly retired people and, in general terms, well informed about world affairs.

However, you could write what they knew about the aims of the EU on the back of a one euro note.

Before anyone tells me that euro notes do not exist, it would not make any difference: they could not write anything.

When I speak to British groups, I often start with the question: do you want to be in the European Union?

The immediate response I got this week was: "No".

Five or six years ago, the response would have been: "Yes, but we do not want too much interference".

I know that it is a particular problem for the United Kingdom, but it is not exclusive to the United Kingdom.

It is getting worse right across Europe.

We only have to look at the turn-out in the European Parliamentary elections to see that.

Why this lack of enthusiasm for the EU?

To begin with, we must remember that the best advertising in the world will not sell a poor product.

Even if you have a first-class product, if you do not market it properly it will not sell.

We must make sure that the product is good first and then make sure that we advertise it effectively.

I fear we are doing neither.

There can be no doubt that, when history is written, the greatest achievement of the 20th century will be seen to be the creation of the EU.

It has delivered peace and prosperity for half the continent for half the century.

Now the other half of the continent is queuing up to get in, yet my constituents want to get out.

I am not an expert in marketing; I know there are no simple solutions; I certainly know more propaganda leaflets are not the answer.

Let me just suggest a few possibilities.

What happened to President Prodi's idea of a rapid rebuttal unit?

If it is in existence, it does not appear to be very effective.

If they are giving answers, can I suggest that they e-mail their answers to the MEPs as well, so we can use the information, not just to the press, who often just spike it.

The Commissioner said quite rightly that new technology is good.

We must make more and better use of it.

We must make sure that our website address is known. we could maybe spend some of the Socrates money giving every student in Europe a computer mouse mat so that they can see the website address of the European Parliament.

With the plethora of new TV channels, with digital TV, have we got anywhere with a Parliamentary TV channel?

I can watch the US Senate on television gavel-to-gavel. But not the European Parliament.

We must emphasise the good-news stories of when we help the citizen.

We have a Committee on Petitions that addresses a thousand petitions a year.

When did the information departments of the Commission or Parliament last attend a meeting of that committee?

When did they past publish any of the good news that comes from that committee?

Finally, I have to address the problem of Parliament in Strasbourg.

I understand that Strasbourg was the symbol of peace and unity of our continent, but that was a symbol of the 20th century.

In the 21st century, I am afraid it is a symbol of waste and inefficiency.

I ask Parliament, Commission and the Council of Ministers to address that problem.

Mr President, Commissioner, firstly I would like to thank you for your interest and dedication to the European Union' s information activities.

We have known you for many years and we know of your commitment and dedication, not only to what we could call the European cause, but also to ensuring that the European cause really reaches the citizens.

In your political activities you have always paid special attention to the most sensitive groups: young people, elderly people, the workplace, and you paid special attention to the media.

We support the general lines which you have put forward here and which will be specified in the document which you will present and which the European Commission must approve next June.

You have mentioned two aspects which I would like to stress: the regional dimension and efficiency.

The aim of the information policy is to reach the citizens.

In order to do that properly it is necessary to take account of the regional dimension, because it is one of the fields which is a subject of great sensitivity in terms of society and its problems.

Therefore, so that the citizens may understand and participate in European construction and not see it as a superstructure reserved for politicians and technocrats, it is essential that the work of providing information is done at the level of the regional institutions and in conjunction with them.

This goes hand in hand with efficiency.

In your review of information policy, I would ask you to bear in mind the experience of certain Member States.

For example, during the euro campaign, there was an agreement at the time between the European Commission and the government of a Member State.

That government' s decision was to commission an information campaign on the euro from a very important advertising agency.

That advertising agency made some very nice advertisements and hundreds of thousands of leaflets were distributed.

However, that it is not the way to reach the public, nor is it efficient.

It is perhaps very pleasing to the government, which gets to make fine speeches, and to the relevant Minister, who gets to appear on the television and in the newspapers, but that does not reach the public.

Therefore, it is necessary to ensure the maximum possible degree of decentralisation.

Mr President, those of us who represent Scotland in this House were very grateful when this year the Parliament decided to make its office in Edinburgh permanent.

The Commission has long had an office there.

The Commissioner has mentioned the importance of national regions, as well as the states, in its communication policy.

I am sorry to say that this week it has been announced that The Scotsman newspaper is closing down the office of its Brussels and European correspondent.

It is rumoured that BBC Scotland is about to remove its special correspondent from Brussels.

It is not just the Commission and Parliament which need to think about their role.

Our own media also need to look seriously at the problem of adequately reporting to their citizens the issues of Europe.

May I mention one other sad case, which is of importance in the area of information and communication.

I want to draw attention, yet again, to the case of the Italian language lecturers.

New developments in the case have shown that the quality of openness in information and communication by the Commission on this sort of issue leaves much to be desired.

In these proceedings it is vital that the interested parties are fully informed by the Commission, but the practice fails to honour that ideal.

There has been some evidence this week that the former Commission has actively misled parties in cases of this kind.

During the current Parliament, I have had a number of assurances that the Commission is serious about upholding rights derived from Community law on behalf of lecturers in all issues involving non-discrimination.

That really must be taken seriously.

It is a point about openness, about being ready to communicate what is going on and about informing people how seriously we take rights arising from Community law and how seriously we take the need to demonstrate to our citizens and our public the importance of what is accomplished here.

I am glad that the Commission and Parliament have helped to make information available in Scotland and I wish our own media would do likewise.

Mr President, a distinction must be made between information and propaganda.

Mr Prodi' s Commission has started off badly with regard to information.

I have heard that last autumn it issued an instruction to the national Commission offices to focus on the reporting of political information in place of the former citizens' information service.

This means information and propaganda from above.

Actually, this means the spread of propaganda, not information.

The Commission has started off badly in the most important area of information reporting, that of public accessibility.

The Commission has issued a draft for a directive on public accessibility, which, by any common yardstick, is an untenable document, more conducive to secrecy than increased public accessibility.

This is the Commission' s line on information policy insofar as it concerns public accessibility.

Public accessibility is just as important as information.

It offers our citizens and the media the opportunity to have hands-on access to documents themselves and draw their own conclusions, instead of being dependent on those of the Commission.

There is a very obvious discrepancy between the official documents themselves and the conclusions being drawn.

The documents state that the European Union' s crisis management troops are not a European Army, but the President of the Commission, Mr Prodi, says that whatever you call it, it is one.

In an information context such as this, it is important to have access to the documents and draw one' s own conclusions, as the documents do not always spell things out clearly either.

In addition, the way Parliament disseminates information must be criticised.

Parliament has its own information offices, but the Finnish office apparently has no money to buy copies of the EU Treaty, which would allow Members to familiarise themselves with its contents in their office at Parliament.

To this extent, we could conclude that the officials working in Parliament' s own information office do not know what is going on in Parliament, although Parliament has excellent Internet connections.

To all intents and purposes, it is a war of propaganda that is going on here. In many respects, it is also a civil war.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, firstly I would like once again to point out that Commissioner Reding has announced a dramatic change in the information strategy of the EU and has thus made it clear that there are deficiencies, that fresh efforts must be made and that we must make this issue a focus of our concerns.

Secondly, I would like to point out that we too must ask ourselves whether this morning' s initiative to prevent voting was a positive information and communication strategy for Parliament outwardly as well as inwardly?

I do not think that it was!

The homework which we have to do we must do ourselves and we must not confuse information and communication within the framework of our work with self-promotion.

It is a matter of Community promotion and not self-promotion.

In this regard we should all resolve to understand that one of the causes of the problems of the political parties and of the institutions is a problem of communication and information.

We, and I say that very clearly, the institutions of the European Union, the European Parliament and the delegates cannot bear sole responsibility for providing information on Europe.

Without the support of the Member States, without the support of the public representatives at borough, county and national level, without the support of all the institutions, we will not get directly to the citizen, because either we are here doing our work or we are involved in communication and information processes with our citizens.

We cannot do both at the same time within the meaning of Maastricht and Amsterdam!

Commissioner, I am waiting for your master plan, your schedule, your specific measures for implementation.

The public mandataries, all persons and institutions who receive money from the EU, should be involved in this implementation.

We must increasingly involve the visitor groups and also two areas of activity which, in my opinion, are in your sphere of responsibility, i.e. schools and youth, and the staff in the offices of the Community institutions must be equipped accordingly.

Please submit to us a specific plan of action and a schedule.

This is probably the first time I have heard delegates referred to as soldiers, but we know what role we are playing here.

Mr President, in the heated debate on the matter of the quorum I did not get a chance to speak before about my motion for the Rules of Procedure.

Yesterday, there was a question from Mr MacCormick on the postponement of the vote on the COM for bananas.

I share the concerns of Mr MacCormick.

We requested the postponement so that we could remain involved as a Parliament in the communication process with the United States within the WTO.

Had we voted in accordance with our Rules of Procedure, we would no longer have been involved.

That is how it was, Mr MacCormick - he is no longer here.

I would like this to be recorded.

It is to do with the fact that we as a Parliament no longer have the right to codecision in the agricultural sector and so we had to choose this path.

I am taking note of this.

This will be taken care of.

I am now giving the floor to Mr Beysen on a point of order.

Mr President, I have noticed with some degree of satisfaction that the subversive action staged by some of the Members with a view to sabotaging procedures has ground to a halt.

This will probably be because they have come to realise that they cannot count on the support of at least 32 delegates.

I would just like to say, Mr President, that some strange selectivity is being practised here, that certain Members stage little acts and, after the act is finished, they leave and the game is over.

I did want to point this out because Parliament should not be mistaken for a kindergarten, and this is the feeling I will have when I leave this Chamber today.

Ladies and gentlemen, I would like to start the debate.

Let us not enter into discussion.

I will tell you what the Rules of Procedure are so that we all know where we stand.

I am now giving the floor to Mr Van Hulten.

Mr President, our action is not finished.

I simply want to refute that our sole aim would be to disturb proceedings.

What we do want is to make sure that this Parliament can work more effectively and be more credible for the next five years. This is what we are doing.

We hope that we can count on the support of all MEPs to arrange the agenda in such a way as to actually make this happen in future, as you explained so well on television this week, Mr President.

Mr President, I may have been accused of being subversive, but other people appear to disregard the Rules of Procedure. A request to test the quorum should not be made at the start of the debate but when we vote.

Mr Speroni, let us be absolutely clear about this.

According to Rule 126(1) of the Rules of Procedure: "Parliament may deliberate, settle its agenda and approve the Minutes of proceedings, whatever the number of Members present" .

We will shortly proceed to the vote (details will follow), and we will then see what happens.

I am presiding over the meeting according to the agenda as it is before us.

I am now giving the floor to Mrs Gebhardt and I hope we will then proceed to the next item on the agenda, which is night flights.

Mr President, I would like to ask a question, tongue-in-cheek, in the style of Loriot.

Where are they then? Where are they then, those who say that we should do proper work here, who are always putting the question about the quorum and, when we are doing the real work here, are absent?

Where are these 32 and more who stood up before and who will stand up again, but who now, when we are discussing matters, are no longer here?

I would really like to know what kind of nonsense this is?

The next item is the oral question to the Commission (B5-0206/2000) by Mr Lannoye, Mrs Auroi, Mr Bouwman, Mr Bowe, Mrs Cerdeira Morterero, Mrs Corbey, Mr Costa Paolo, Mr Deprez, Mr Desama, Mrs González Álvarez, Mrs Guy-Quint, Mr Izquierdo Collado, Mr Jonckheer, Mrs Korhola, Mr Kreissl-Dörfler, Mrs Lienemann, Mrs Lucas, Mrs McKenna, Mrs Maes, Mr Martínez Martínez, Mr Papayannakis, Mrs Patrie, Mr Arvidsson, Mr Puerta, Mr Ries, Mr Rod, Mr de Roo, Mrs Sandbæk, Mrs Schroedter, Mrs Sornosa Martínez, Mr Staes, Mr Sterckx, Mrs Terrón i Cusí, Mrs Van Brempt, Mr Vander Taelen, Mrs Van Lancker and Mr Ducarme, regarding night flights and noise pollution around airports.

Mr President, to get back to the root of the problem, it has now been established by the various different institutions responsible for assessing disamenities and their impact on the people that the people' s greatest concern is noise pollution. This is completely understandable if we consider that the majority of European citizens are exposed to uncomfortably high levels of noise.

Under these conditions, the European institutions' delay in legislating is highly regrettable, particularly the Commission' s failure to propose practical measures to combat noise and to set limit values for noise exposure.

A Green Paper was presented in 1996 and nothing else has happened since.

It is true that the noise problem is largely due to transport, particularly road transport, but air transport is a factor which is also giving increasing cause for concern.

The peak levels of noise during take-off and landing are specific to air transport and, of course, this problem is exacerbated by the effect of the noise at night, for it must be admitted that night flights, or rather aircraft taking off and landing during the night, make sleep almost impossible in some areas near airports.

What has been done to regulate aircraft to date?

Standards were last established by the International Civil Aviation Organisation in 1977.

Therefore, there has been no progress in this area for 23 years, and it is clear that aircraft replacement policies are not in any way motivated by the introduction of more stringent standards, to the extent that our aircraft are extremely outdated.

The recent Commission communication on air transport and the environment defines a noise reduction strategy based both on economic factors, such as improving air traffic control and airport access, and on fostering progress in technology.

This is a good strategy which will limit the increase in noise pollution, but in my opinion and, I would argue, the opinion of a good number of Members, it will not allow us, in the short term, to reach our objective which is that nobody is exposed to dangerously or uncomfortably high noise levels.

Faced with this situation, a number of countries and regions have taken steps to restrict access to airports at night.

Unfortunately, they have not been very organised about it, with the result that some firms, particularly courier and freight companies, have reacted badly - to my mind, dangerously. They are threatening to relocate and this is creating economic insecurity in the regions concerned.

I therefore feel that harmonisation at European level is imperative. Of course, this does not mean demanding uniformity, for regional differences must be taken into account, but there must be a common core in the approaches of the different Member States of the European Union.

I also feel that the organisation of night air transport activities, which are inevitably going to be noisy whatever the level of technology employed, is certainly something which must be restricted and coordinated.

I therefore call upon the Commission to take action in this area.

I made no contribution to this morning' s debate and, with your permission, I would like to say a few words now regarding the vote.

Personally, I would prefer a vote in which a large number of Members take part to a vote which takes place at noon on Friday in which only thirty or forty Members participate.

Frankly, that distresses me, for a resolution voted in by only a small number of Members carries very little weight.

I took part in this morning' s action and I did not appreciate criticism from Members who interpreted it as an anti-Strasbourg manoeuvre.

I am not at all against Strasbourg: quite the opposite, and I have proved it many times, despite the fact that I am Belgian.

I do not wish to see Strasbourg cease working normally from Monday to Friday.

Mr President, I would like to thank Mr Lannoye for this initiative and for launching the debate in this Chamber on this very important matter.

One of the goals of the Commission communication 'Air transport and the environment - towards sustainable development' is precisely to launch the debate on the suitability of establishing a Community framework for decision-making procedures concerning the operational restrictions to be imposed on airports in the Union for environmental reasons.

In the course of this debate, which will be held in the different institutions, the Council of Ministers and Parliament will have the chance to express their views on this communication, both in general terms and with regard to specific aspects such as night flights.

As pointed out in this communication, the Commission does not see how uniform and restrictive rules governing restrictions on use, which would apply to all Community airports, as would be the case, for example, for the general ban on night flights, could provide the most balanced solution to the issue of noise pollution attributable to certain airports.

The Commission is of the opinion that decisions should continue to be taken at local level.

However, it also considers that a common framework is necessary to coordinate the procedures adopted in order to reach these decisions so that when a region decides to ban night flights, for example, it does so in the same way as a similar region somewhere else.

And this framework could make it compulsory for all the interested parties to be consulted, stipulate an appropriate timeframe for adaptation to the new restrictions and establish a common basis for assessing the efficiency in environmental terms of the envisaged measures restricting operations.

I would also like to touch on the subject of hushkits.

With regard to speeding up the withdrawal of the noisiest aircraft, the Commission is committed to the work currently in progress within the International Civil Aviation Organisation on drafting a new standard on noise and rules for the withdrawal of the noisiest aircraft.

If, as we hope, all goes according to plan, this work will result in the 33rd Assembly of the ICAO adopting new, binding international noise regulations in September 2001.

Compared with the hushkits regulation, which is content to put a freeze on the current situation for aircraft whose certificate has been renewed, genuine international rules requiring the progressive withdrawal of these devices would have greater effect in terms of environmental protection.

Meanwhile, in view of the United States' refusal to back down over the hushkits regulation, the provisions of this regulation on banning the attachment of these devices will enter into force on 4 May next.

Given that the provisions governing the banning of aircraft registered in third countries will only come into force on 1 April 2002, the Commission' s interpretation of the conclusions of the 33rd assembly of the International Civil Aviation Organisation will provide all the elements necessary to decide whether it is appropriate to replace the hushkits regulation with rules for progressive withdrawal adopted at international level.

All this is in the pipeline. The Commission is working on it and would like to thank Parliament for its cooperation on this matter.

I have received four motions for resolutions in accordance with Rule 42(5) of the Rules of Procedure.

The vote will take place after the debate.

Mr President, noise pollution caused by aircraft is a very topical issue.

We talked about hushkits not so long ago.

I understand from the observations made by the Commissioner that the regulation as it has been laid down will enter into force on 4 May next.

Mr President, it is not only hushkits which are causing us considerable concern.

In broader terms too, we have to establish that, on account of the increase in air traffic, noise pollution is growing at an alarming rate, especially for citizens who live near busy airports.

At night time, in particular, this level of pollution is out of all proportion.

The number of night flights should therefore be significantly reduced.

But what is meant by night?

At Düsseldorf airport, night falls at 10 p.m., according to Mr Florenz.

We in the Netherlands are far more flexible in this respect. Night does not set in until 1.00 a.m. and we do not actually term it night, we refer to it as the brink of night.

Mr President, whatever time we are talking about, it means that we need a coherent approach to noise pollution caused by the transport of civilians and freight by air, as the individual Member States are applying very different rules.

These lead to the direct and undesired effect that airports start to compete with each other. They reason that as long as they are flexible enough, they will get a lot of freight traffic.

But, at the end of the day, it is the people living near airports who suffer.

Mr President, so what needs to happen?

First of all, all noise pollution, including pollution generated by aircraft, must be tackled at source.

This means thorough research into low-noise engines.

This means bans and international standards.

But it also means that we need European framework legislation which ensures that measurements are taken, standards set, zonal structures put in place in the same way for all European airports.

What we are asking for - not for the first time, in fact, we did this two and a half years ago in connection with the report on noise pollution which was supported by the late Mrs Carmen Diez de Riviera - is this legislation.

Commissioner and Mrs Reding - you are representing Mrs de Palacio at the moment - you are saying that this is extremely difficult, but I am not asking you for a ban, or even a night ban.

What I do want is to keep the discussion around this issue going and to continue where Parliament left off before.

It was our own amendment, tabled on behalf of the European People' s Party.

Let us thus fight for a European directive which, thanks to Mrs Loyola de Palacio' s new impetus, ensures that we - at long last - can give our citizens what is theirs.

That is peace and quiet at night, but this also implies a proper zonal structure, insulation and sound legislation in Europe.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, the airline industry has become a growing as well as a thriving industry within the Union.

This undoubtedly brings many benefits, but there are also many drawbacks.

I would like to make it clear straight away that, if Europe does not intervene, aspects such as quality of life, the economy and social factors will very much be in the balance.

The key question is, do we want our citizens to enjoy a good night' s rest, and even day' s rest and, secondly, are we able to give them just that?

If you will allow me, I will dwell for a moment on the problem of noise pollution suffered at my own country' s national airport, an airport which, by the way, many of you frequent very regularly.

The noise pollution at Zaventem has exceeded the permitted levels for a long time.

The quality of life - and sleep - of the people living in the vicinity is appalling by any standard.

The solution to this problem has caused great uproar in Belgium and in my government.

As you know, the Belgian Government embraces people from the blue, green and red sections of the political spectrum.

Well, when the green Minister had the audacity to propose a complete night ban, all of a sudden, Belgium was not big enough for the fierce discussion which followed.

Commissioner, you may be red and green in your heart, and I can assure, this is what I am.

I too want to continue to promote life and the quality of everyone' s existence as the supreme good.

This is all well and good on paper, but this can be very difficult to implement in practice.

What is worse? Having a very difficult or bad night' s sleep, day in day out, or suddenly losing your job and your income?

Indeed, the parcel company at Zaventem had threatened hundreds, if not many more, redundancies.

All of a sudden, the trade union and employers joined forces.

Belgium has meanwhile come up with a solution: a combination of measures which involves a restriction of noise at source, strict supervisory measures and a number of infrastructural planning measures, such as offering insulation to the houses affected.

It is an improvement, but not a solution.

Too many people continue to suffer from excessive noise in their bedrooms.

Nonetheless, Belgium, in tandem with other Member States, has taken on a pioneering role in this discussion and the question is then, will that country, with its businesses and people who work and live there, suffer as a result?

We can only avoid this if night flights and noise pollution are tackled at European level.

This is, in fact, what we are asking for and I am delighted to see that people of all political persuasions in this Parliament are asking for the same thing. I therefore hope that the Commission will be receptive to this.

Europe will need to resolve the false dilemma that exists of having to choose between the economy and social and environmental considerations.

We would like a standardised method to measure noise pollution within the Union.

In this connection, we would also like uniform standards and an effective costing rule.

In addition, we would like criteria which determine when a night ban should be instituted within the Union.

In a recent communication from the Commission on air transport and the environment, an initial strategy has already been outlined.

This is to be welcomed, but it is not enough.

Firstly, this does not solve the current problem, as Mr Lannoye has already pointed out.

Secondly, this is simply a communication, but we want hard legislation from the Commission, so that everyone knows where they stand.

I regret that the Commissioner - the Commissioner who is standing in for Commissioner de Palacio that is - is of the opinion that it is very difficult to institute a night ban.

I think that, with a little good will, this should be feasible.

I am looking forward to her reply.

Mr President, Commissioner, Mr Lannoye stated a moment ago that noise is a problem with all forms of transport, but the problem with aircraft is very specific because it is so concentrated.

In its communication on airports and the environment, the Commission mentioned a few things about noise, one being - and you also echoed this yourself - that the principle of subsidiarity applies to noise. In other words, it must be possible to implement at local level without the European Union having to regulate everything.

I would, however, like the Commission' s guarantee that distortion of competition is ruled out. An interesting concept in the communication is the drafting of classification lists, not only for aircraft, but also for airports.

This would mean that noise-sensitive airports would be distinguished from others and that certain activities could not take place at such airports but could possibly take place at less noise-sensitive airports.

Mrs Van Brempt already pointed this out: we are faced with a dilemma.

It is clear that certain businesses and a certain economic sector totally rely on night flights. If we asked them what would happen if there were no night flights, they are bound to say that they would have to close down their businesses, their activities would become pointless and they would no longer be able to offer their services.

Our question is, therefore: how can we marry the two together?

The Commission should then legislate against distortion of competition between different airports in different Member States.

Mrs Van Brempt clearly stated what the dilemma was for the Belgian Government.

It is caught between the devil and the deep blue sea.

As it happens, the Belgian Government has taken a number of measures, but would it not be useful, for example, if the Commission were to compile some sort of list of good and bad airline companies in terms of noise, if it were to draw a distinction between those who do invest in combating noise, those who can present a good record in combating noise and those who cannot, those who do not try their best, and then combine this with measures.

Because one thing is clear: noise must be penalised.

Accordingly, it should be more expensive to fly certain aircraft and it should be impossible to fly certain aircraft at night for example.

A total ban would be ideal, of course, but can we afford this and where could this be done?

We would like to have these questions answered by the Commission.

A European framework is lacking at the moment - and you say yourself that a framework should be in place, but when?

We have a communication at the moment and shortly we will have the report by Mrs Lucas on aviation and the environment, but when are we getting legislation, when can we expect a framework which is sufficiently clear for each Member State, so that distortion of competition is ruled out?

Would it not be useful, for example, to look at 'best practices' at this stage - to use a buzz word - so that we know what certain airports get up to?

For example, at Schiphol, there is a kind of complaints desk for noise.

Other airports do not have this but could possibly do with one.

So why not exchange ideas between the different EU airports, where all of us are faced with the same problem?

I would ask the Commission to speed up its process and not to wait for the legislative measure alone, but to set up other initiatives in order to bring people closer together.

Mr President, Commissioner, yesterday the inhabitants of Strasbourg forced decision makers to reject the well-known air courier firm, DHL' s, plans to set up a base at the Strasbourg-Entzheim airport.

Now the company is trying to worm its way into the Nancy-Metz regional airport, which it has targeted because of its rural location where, due to the lower population density, there might appear to be less public opposition.

But this is not the case at all.

When it comes to noise pollution from aircraft and public health in general, it makes no difference whether an airport is situated in the town or the country: all citizens have the right to a peaceful night' s sleep.

I could also mention the inhabitants of the areas surrounding Roissy, Satolas and Milan who are protesting. Milan has fallen into the clutches of Trans-European Networks which have failed to take into account the detrimental effect of their activities on local inhabitants' standard of living.

With air traffic booming and the new economy expanding rapidly, I can foresee a fresh increase in freight in the future.

The Union must react and the Commission must propose tangible measures in response to the legitimate concerns of our fellow citizens.

The entire transport policy needs to be revised in order to curb, or even reduce, air transport and related noise pollution.

No research has been carried out into noise pollution from airports.

It is essential to transfer short-haul air freight transport to the railways.

And personally, I am in favour of banning night flights in order to respect the local inhabitants' need for a peaceful night' s sleep, for they already have to put up with excessive noise all day long.

These three matters genuinely require urgent consideration.

Mr President, Commissioner, for some time the populations living close to Barajas Airport in Madrid have protested every time there has been an extension of the airport, for various reasons, but mainly because of noise pollution.

I imagine that other populations living near any airport in any large city will have the same problem.

I know that in the last two months the Government of Madrid has proposed a reduction in night flights, after 11.00 p.m., but I also know that the measures that have been taken have not had any significant effect on the quality of life of the population.

Let us hope that it will improve.

Hence the opportunity for this debate, which we should thank Mr Lannoye for.

From the joint motion for a resolution, I would like to highlight some of the proposals - please excuse any repetition - which I believe the European Commission should take note of if it wants to reduce noise pollution: a global and integrated framework for reducing noise pollution which should lead to a framework directive with concrete and binding measures; the uniform application of those measures in all Member States so that there are no distortions; a Community framework for the classification of noise which will allow measures to be taken with the rigorous allocation of slots and a reduction in flights; and progress towards the establishment of a common air space, which is not in conflict with local and regional measures.

In the fifth framework programme for research it would be necessary to carry out an investigation into the design of aircraft, with a view to reducing its influence on noise pollution.

We should also work towards the reduction and disappearance of night flights and the promotion of the railway.

In truth, Mr President, if everybody disliked aircraft as much as I do and travelled by rail as much as I do, perhaps we would have fewer problems.

All of this work should be done in conjunction with the populations and residents' associations which are already pushing, throughout the whole of Europe, as in Spain, for a reduction in noise pollution, other types of pollution and a reduction in the enormous demand for air traffic.

We should also cooperate in the creation of a noise map in local areas which would lead finally to a serious piece of work on the part of the European Community in favour of a reduction in noise pollution which is increasing as a result of demand.

Mr President, I live 10 kilometres from Malpensa airport as the crow flies and I spent all my working life as part of an aircraft control team, and I therefore feel very strongly about this issue.

First of all, I must say that many of the problems are the result of bad planning or no planning at all.

The airports were built haphazardly and no practical assessment of the environmental impact was made as the towns, or certain parts of them, grew up around the airport structures.

Regional planning is only a recent introduction, whereas airports have existed for a long time.

The first flights to operate from Malpensa, for example, began as early as 1910.

Of course, there are other structures which are public nuisances - landfill waste sites, for example, which are created from old quarries with no planning - but, in the case of airports, we see the consequences every day, or rather we hear them, for they fill our ears rather than offending our eyes.

In addition, provision of information is poor.

For example, many fingers are being pointed at cargo flights.

Cargo flights generate neither more nor less noise than passenger flights. The amount of noise depends exclusively on the type of aircraft, not on what is being transported: a cargo Boeing 747 produces much less noise than a passenger Boeing 727.

Consequently, a thorough knowledge of the facts is necessary even for debating purposes.

Then the legislative framework is also fairly complicated. Here, we have an example of the application of the principle of subsidiarity in its entirety, even extending beyond the European Union, for the standards are established by the International Civil Aviation Organisation, which is a supranational body.

I welcomed the Commission' s remarks regarding a European legislative framework.

For example, as has already been said, we need to establish what is intended by the word "night" . Does night start at 10 p.m. or at midnight?

Does it end at 5 a.m. or at 7 a.m.?

This is something to be taken into consideration.

Another factor is the involvement of the local authorities, for every airport is different. The noise impact differs even within the same airport according to the runway used.

For example, runway 25 of Fiumicino airport is next to the sea and hardly disturbs anybody at all, whereas if an aircraft were to take off from the right-hand section of runway 16 it would disturb half a million people or so from the Ostia and Fiumicino communities.

Local authority involvement is therefore important, although, I must stress, it needs to be within a general European legislative framework.

In my opinion, it would, on the whole, be feasible to eliminate night flights and ban them, although, I must stress, this must be done by taking specific local factors and also the type of aircraft used into consideration.

It should not make much difference whether an aircraft has a built-in silencer or whether its silencer is fitted subsequently: the engine noise can be measured and an assessment made of whether the aeroplane is excessively noisy or not, irrespective of the date of manufacture or the type of silencer used.

In any case, I would stress that we must not just concentrate on the individual factors in isolation but view the issue as a whole.

Mr President, noise pollution caused by aircraft is mainly a problem to those living near airports.

This is, in principle, a localised problem which should, as such, be solved by the competent authority of the relevant airport.

Different airports are already working on this by issuing flight bans to the noisiest aircraft or by banning certain night flights.

This solution, however, is not sufficient, since aircraft are produced on a global market.

Competition hinders such solutions, and creates the side-effect that more noise will be produced at other airports.

In short, we are simply shifting the problem.

Technically speaking, the problem is not that enormous.

By using state-of-the-art technology, it is possible to produce aircraft which generate six times less noise than aircraft thirty years ago.

Since the life-span of aircraft is about thirty years, the effect of these technical improvements are not felt for a long while.

The question is whether this long wait is desirable. I do not think so.

If we actually want to do something about aircraft noise, technical improvements will need to be implemented more quickly.

The extra cost involved will obviously be passed on to the user, who will pay more for their airline tickets.

The user should be fully aware of the actual costs of flying, including all environmental costs.

For the sake of fair competition, this should be done on a global scale.

The proposal from the resolution, which, among other things, presses for making information on the level of noise pollution around different airports available in a readily understood format, is a step in the right direction.

I also back the other proposals to reduce noise pollution.

It should be clear that, ideally, the actual environmental costs should be brought into the equation.

Mr President, Commissioner, your comments this morning on both subjects showed that we need not only rapid data highways, but also efficient air transport in Europe to remain competitive.

It is obvious that this will lead, in our densely populated States, to increasing noise pollution for citizens.

I support all those who have stated here that solutions can only be found jointly.

I come from the region around the Cologne-Bonn airport, an extremely densely populated region.

We have tried to restrict the noise pollution for citizens.

Every major attempt was simply answered by the companies with the announcement that they would switch to another airport.

The airports of Liège and Maastricht are within a radius of almost 200 km.

The companies are really not bothered about where they start and land their cargo planes, in particular.

For this reason, I would like to urgently request that we find joint solutions which achieve both objectives: a competitive airline industry in Europe and adequate noise protection for our citizens in the vicinity of airports.

However, I have surmised, Commissioner, from the Commission' s report that some basic conditions for this have still not been met.

Firstly, it is obvious from the report that there is still no common method for calculating aircraft noise and, secondly, there is still no common method for monitoring basic data.

I therefore come to my request: you have proposed specific measures to the Commission in your report.

You have also set deadlines: the year 2001 for expiry of the old specification on noise emissions for old aircraft equipment.

You have announced a strategy, which I welcome, for how the burden on particularly busy airports can be eased on the basis of objective data.

However, you have not set any deadline for this.

My request to the Commission is that, together with the regions, you set deadlines, in the interests of both the companies and the citizens affected, which we can all work towards in a team effort.

Commissioner, Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, this matter of night flights and, more generally, noise pollution from aircraft taking off and landing at airport complexes is an extremely sensitive issue and embraces several areas of concern which require attention.

This sensitive issue takes us back to a recurring problem faced by all decision makers and politicians, whether they are local, national or, nowadays, European, and that is the problem of how to reconcile economic development with the need to safeguard the health and the standard of living of our fellow citizens.

In effect, this embraces the three fields of technological, economic and regulatory considerations.

Although progress has unquestionably been made on the technological side, further progress is still essential in order to renew fleets of aircraft, particularly freight aircraft.

The European Union must continue with its endeavours in the areas of research and technological development, equip itself with the means it needs to produce the standards envisaged, and give financial and technological support to all studies and programmes which make shared information available and which facilitate the modernisation of equipment with a view to limiting environmental disamenities.

However, at the same time, we have to take into account the economic aspect of the issue.

Airport complexes are hives of intense economic activity and appeal; our intention to preserve jobs, reasserted in Lisbon, means that we do not have the right to avoid this issue.

Any use of existing structures and the establishment of new infrastructures must conform to the legal instruments - the area-specific land use plans and national and regional development rules.

Finally, in terms of regulation, in the absence of standardised European rules, strict harmonisation of air traffic control and restrictions must be achieved in order to prevent dumping within the Union, a phenomenon familiar to us, which is governed by decisions taken simply at local level.

We cannot allow this to continue. The citizens are waiting for decisions to be implemented within the relatively near future.

Mr President, Commissioner, I would like to make a few brief comments with regard to our joint resolution.

We are discussing night flights, noise pollution and especially sleeping disorders.

As a researcher who has examined the social effects of industrial labour, especially shift work, for years, I appreciate - and this has also been adequately proven scientifically - the seriousness of sleeping disorders and lack of sleep.

Against this background, the entire discussion is relatively serious, bearing in mind Mrs Oomen-Ruijten' s comments on "the brink of the night" and the way we are discussing noise pollution, and the lack of harmonisation.

In the foreseeable future, we will discuss at great length the more general aspects of aviation and the environment within the committee, including the common noise classification schedules, how to provide economic incentives in connection with noise and how to achieve aircraft noise standards.

However, one thing is still lacking from the discussion, namely that we will need the political courage to talk about restrictions, bans if necessary, for night flights during a certain period and reach common agreements on this.

Mr President, it is certainly not a coincidence that so many Belgian Members have taken the floor during this debate today.

The problem of night flights in a densely populated country such as Belgium is a very topical and extremely sensitive issue, especially since the Belgian Transport Minister issued a ban on night flights in Zaventem which, following a hefty row within the government, was withdrawn soon after.

I believe that Mrs Van Brempt has outlined the dilemma very expertly.

Tens of thousands of people live and sleep a stone' s throw away from the runway.

15% of the population are suffering as a result of the noise pollution generated by aircraft.

Medical reports have shown that people living near airports are having to deal with health problems of an unacceptably serious nature, such as insomnia, high blood pressure, stress and depression.

Needless to say, it makes no sense to ban night flights in one Member State alone.

Businesses, such as DHL, will then simply move to airports in other Member States.

As a result, we are at risk of finding ourselves in a downward spiral, where the citizens' quality of life is pulled down with it.

Mr Sterckx has already pointed out, with good reason, that measures to reduce the effects for those living near airports should not promote distortion of competition.

The increase in the number of noisy, obsolete and unlisted Russian aircraft, in particular, is the cause of unacceptable noise pollution, not to mention the risks for the environment and safety which such aircraft pose.

In my town, Ostend, where the airport is situated in the centre of town, there have already been over 50 incidents, so far only leading to material damage.

I therefore concur with Mrs Oomen, who advocates uniform framework legislation, which will reconcile the economic and employment interests with the care for public health, the environment and safety and which will apply to all airports within Europe.

The much publicised and promised common framework for noise classification of aircraft could not be here soon enough, Commissioner, especially given the Russian situation.

I also hope that the European Commission will not budge one inch from the position it has adopted with regard to hushkits and will not succumb to American pressure.

Finally, I would like to ask that special attention be paid to the specific problems which smaller, regional airports have to contend with.

They are fighting to remain profitable and are even unable to make the necessary investments to reduce noise pollution.

This is why I would ask Europe, where possible, to help out in order to guarantee the viability of airports, but especially the quality of life of those living near them.

Mr President, I have taken careful note of all the comments made by the Members and I will pass them on to the Commissioner responsible for transport.

Parliament' s message was very clear, as might have been expected, for most of the Members who spoke represent the interests of citizens who live very close to airports.

On the other hand, it was pointed out, and very rightly so, that airports represent major economic factors and that, if we start to impose bans, there is a serious danger that this will have adverse implications for employment.

Of course, the question which arises is how to reconcile economics with preserving the standard of living.

Clearly, the level of noise pollution from night flights varies from one airport to another, according to the topography of the areas and population density.

This is why, for the time being, the Commission is not going to place a blanket ban on these flights.

Moreover, very few airports in the Community impose a full curfew: Paris-Orly is the only one to impose a total ban on night flights.

Munich and Berlin-Tegel limit night operations to mail freight.

A general ban on night flights would therefore seriously disrupt air transport activities.

Most large airports place restrictions on the use of the noisiest types of aircraft or employ economic instruments in order to limit their use.

There are, effectively, a number of alternatives to banning night flights used by various airports, all compatible with Community legislation on market access.

A notable example is the use of a noise quota system such as that employed by the London airports, or a ban on using the noisiest runways during the night, which one very well-informed Member referred to.

In addition, the use of flight paths which generate less noise pollution, avoiding sensitive districts during take-off and landing, and the application of differentiated airport tax, calculated according to the environmental characteristics of the aircraft, are some of the solutions currently employed.

The question now arises of how to proceed in the future, and, most importantly, when to act.

Pages 34 and 35 of the communication on air transport and the environment contain an action plan setting forth a precise schedule.

I will not bore you with the details.

You have the documents in your possession.

The Commission has absolutely no intention of postponing decisions on this matter indefinitely.

It has committed itself to precise deadlines.

With regard to the regulatory framework, we aim to present it at the end of this year, or early next year at the very latest.

This harmonised framework could include common reference points for measuring the operational noise levels to be limited or prohibited, a provision allowing operators sufficient time to come into line with the new operational restrictions and the establishment of a right for people living near airports to request consultation and negotiations on noise reduction objectives.

The economic measures proposed also provide for differentiated treatment of airlines according to the characteristics of their aircraft.

In addition, the Commission envisages the development of a code of conduct based on current best practice.

I would also like to reply to the question on the drafting of a new noise standard.

The ICAO is currently working on drafting a new standard, and this is long overdue, for the present standards date from 1977 - ages ago.

Given the long life of an aircraft - thirty years - clearly, the effects of a new standard will only be seen in the long term.

This is why we are insisting on the fact that these new standards should be sufficiently ambitious to counteract the environmental effect of the fast-growing air industry.

In the short term, the Commission considers that rules stipulating the progressive, but rapid withdrawal of the oldest and noisiest aircraft are the best solution, especially for airports whose capacity is restricted by environmental constraints.

And the best way to ensure the environmental efficiency of these rules is to act at a worldwide level within the framework of the International Civil Aviation Organisation, as the Commission is doing, in tandem with decision making at a purely European level.

Mr President, in principle, we should proceed to the vote.

It appears that the joint motion for a resolution is approved by all the political Groups.

There are therefore no complications and there are no amendments.

I would, however, like to request that the vote be deferred, if only out of a desire for consistency with this morning' s events, and also because it would be fitting for a resolution as important as this to be voted in by more than 40 or 50 Members.

Mr Lannoye, I understand that you are moving that the vote be adjourned.

You know very well that this motion is to be made either by 32 Members or by a group.

Are you moving this on behalf of your Group?

Mr President, I am, of course, making this request on behalf of my Group.

In this case, Rule 146 of the Rules of Procedure applies.

This means that one speaker in favour and one speaker against may take the floor in respect of Mr Lannoye' s motion to adjourn the vote, and the majority here in the Chamber will then decide.

- (PT) Mr President, I would like to support this suggestion. I do not wish to be associated with the sabotage that was perpetrated today.

I think that the person who decided on this course of action should have said whatever he wanted to, but he ought to have allowed the sitting to continue normally. He ought to show respect to his fellow Members such as myself, a Portuguese person, who will put up with a lot, but I am here to work.

I do not understand at all how, after what happened, this House can have chosen not to vote on the resolutions on Ethiopia, which are urgent, and have allowed itself to proceed to other votes. I find this quite incomprehensible and I think that it makes this Parliament and us look ridiculous.

This is a matter which has extremely serious political repercussions!

Is there anyone who would like to speak in favour of the motion?

I am giving the floor to Mr Blokland.

Mr President, I would like to back Mr Lannoye' s motion.

I think that if there are fewer than fifty Members in the Chamber, it is unfair to vote on such a significant issue.

This is why it is important that this Parliament make a clear statement, and a clear statement is only possible if a large majority of this Parliament is present, and not just fifty Members.

We have now had a speaker in favour and a speaker against.

We will now proceed to vote on Mr Lannoye' s request to adjourn the vote on this item on the agenda.

(The request was rejected) We shall now proceed to the vote.

Joint motion for a resolution on night flights and noise pollution in the vicinity of airports.

Mr President, various Members, such as Mr Beysen, who has disappeared and reappeared in the meantime, and Mrs Gebhardt, have already remarked that there are fewer Members in the Chamber than earlier this morning.

It is clear to us too that there are now even less than half of the Members here than there were earlier on.

The Members who have left are a mixture of Members who supported me in my request for a quorum and those who heavily protested against it.

It seems to me to be a good thing that this debate has got under way and I would like to extend warm thanks to the Members who supported me in this.

I also welcome the fact that, clearly, the choice is not about retaining or abolishing Fridays, but very much about improving the present situation.

Mrs Buitenweg, we are voting at the moment.

We will not enter into a debate on Friday sittings.

If you have a request on a point of order, I would ask you to submit it now, if not, I will now proceed to the vote.

Mr President, I accept the vote which has just been held and that a decision has been taken to vote now.

I would like to point out, however, that the voting will be by roll-call.

This is very important because it will then become clear how many Members were present and, more importantly, how many have left.

Ladies and gentlemen, we will now attempt to hold an orderly vote.

This seems to me to be in the interest of the good Rules of this House.

We are going by the Rules.

Mr President, I would like to say something about the Rules of Procedure which I think is very important given that the MEP, when she asked for a quorum, cited that it is her right under the Rules of Procedure.

That is correct, even though I do not approve of her behaviour politically.

But she has now said something which must be objected to in respect of the Rules of Procedure, namely that we will now see from the numbers how the importance of this vote is to be assessed.

I do not consider this acceptable.

Under our Rules of Procedure a vote is fully valid if it has materialised in a proper fashion, even if those who requested that the quorum be determined were no longer able to do this because there were no longer enough of them.

Even then a vote is fully valid.

Mr Posselt, you are absolutely right.

It is a fact that all votes are valid, irrespective of the number of those participating.

The legality of this vote is thus beyond dispute.

Mr President, we all have experience of trade union movements, national parliaments and so forth.

The reason for rules of procedure is that they guarantee democratic principles and obviously if, at some time, someone wishes to highlight a particular political problem, then they are perfectly within their rights to do so.

If, however, a right is somehow abused, I am not sure if that abuse has anything to do with democratic ethics.

I am speaking on a more general note here.

In other words I am not sure if, in the final analysis, it has more to do with being obstructive than with proving that there is indeed a genuine problem.

What causes me particular regret is that we all have experience of national parliaments and so on and this sort of abuse rarely takes place.

Mr President, I have already asked for the floor four times this morning in order to point out to those Members who expressed irritation at this morning' s events that, ever since the first day of the new parliamentary term, we have requested more clarity regarding Fridays, i.e. to have either a proper meeting or no meeting at all.

I think that the problem could be solved very quickly if we could schedule the votes for the end of the session, like all the other days, and ask for everyone to sign the attendance register at the end of the day.

It would then become clear if we would be prepared to consider this a proper meeting or not.

I therefore recommend that this problem be raised in later proceedings so as solve this Friday problem once and for all.

Mr Meijer, I would thank you and other Members for their creativity in coming up with solutions to this problem.

This will not help us any further this morning.

All that remains for us to do this morning is to apply the Rules of Procedure in an honest and transparent way and, as such, I am at your service and at the service of the Rules of Procedure.

Needless to say, I will refer this morning' s course of events to the President and the Bureau, upon which the competent parliamentary committee will deal with this matter further.

This is clear enough, I think.

I would now like to proceed with the discussion of the next item on the agenda, so that we can debate its content.

Let us move on to the next item.

The forestry sector after the December 1999 storms

The next item is the joint debate on the following oral questions to the Commission:

(B5-0217/2000) by Mr Savary and Mrs Gebhardt, on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists, on the problems in the forestry sector following the storms in December 1999;

(B5-0219/2000) by Mr Daul, Mr Martin and Mr Redondo Jiménez, on behalf of the Group of the European People' s Party (Christian Democrats) and European Democrats.

Mr President, I welcome this point of order, for foresters and the forestry sector cannot wait for the outcome of these rather irregular debates which can only have one effect today, and that is to send out a message proclaiming that the European Parliament is made up of absentee Members, whereas most of our fellow Members, including those here today, are certainly not relaxing in front of their televisions but are working in the field.

The issue is wider than that.

In reality, this is nothing more than a feature of the anti-Strasbourg sniping which has developed. Let us be completely clear about this and not try to pretend it is otherwise or to evade the issue.

Thank you for giving me the opportunity to speak on the forestry sector.

As it happens, we already expressed our sympathy, as we are wont to do, in a resolution of 20 January 2000, and requested that the Commission supply us with certain information and undertake to help those of our citizens - and they were numerous - who were in difficulties, for this disaster affected the whole of Europe.

Now, four months later, we are sufficiently removed from events to be able to learn both from what has been done and what has not, and we are expecting a tangible response from the Commission to this question.

Did we actually intervene? Did we employ the means available to us?

This time, we are not claiming appropriations for exceptional circumstances under the "natural disasters" heading.

The sector is simply assessing the extent of its difficulties and the resulting risks - economic risks, security risks, that is to say fire risks, and also risks of non-reforestation, for if it is not possible to remove the wood in the coming weeks, many foresters would prefer to leave them where they are, and then the forestry sector will be in permanent difficulties, and with it the primary processing industry.

Four months on, the purpose of this oral question is therefore, Commissioners, to inform you, first and foremost, that the condition of the forestry sector is critical.

In the space of two days, 193 million cubic metres of timber have flooded the market.

The first question is that of price control and regulation of the market, since the cost of removing some low-quality species is now more than the market is willing to pay.

We are familiar with the regulation of the market in the context of the common agricultural policy.

We are not asking you to include timber in that policy, but it appears that Europe could have employed equivalent measures to assist the timber market during this exceptional crisis. It could have temporarily regulated the timber market for a period of several months.

The question has been put to you.

What action are you going to take?

Secondly, what have you done and what have you achieved with the means available?

I refer to the means which allow us to grant exemptions from the competition laws to help exporters, for the cost of transportation of timber which has been exposed to fungal or parasite risk is totally unacceptable, provided that there is a buyer.

If we want to support the market, we must support the transportation necessary for export to places further afield.

Is the Commission prepared to take steps to do this?

To what extent has it implemented Article 87(2) of the Treaty, which allows it to grant exemptions?

To what extent, if at all, has it approached the WTO to request it to grant derogations?

What has it done to set up means of remedying the natural disasters affecting the forestry sector?

These are not virtual instruments. We have rules, such as Article 30 of Regulation 1257/1999.

If it has not done so, what action does it intend to take in the forthcoming weeks?

Finally, I call for the DOCUP development plans to give unequivocal consideration to the forestry sector and the timber industry.

Mr President, I would like to inform the honourable Member that the Commission is quite aware of the extensive problems caused by the hurricanes at the beginning of December 1999 in Denmark and Sweden and at the end of December 1999 in France and Germany, the devastating effect on the entire forestry industries of these countries and the implications for those employed in the industry.

May I refer you to Mr Barnier' s speeches at the plenary sitting of 18 January 2000, when he stressed that the Commission would willingly employ every available means to assist the Member States.

Nevertheless, with regard to forest damage, I must also remind you that the European Parliament, notably in its resolution of 31 January 1997 on the forestry strategy of the European Union, and also the Council of the European Union, have repeatedly stressed that the Treaty does not lay down any specific competence for a Union forestry policy.

Thus, the European Union does not have the necessary means to intervene in the way stipulated by the two resolutions.

In effect, timber is not among the products listed in Annex I of the Treaty. There is no legal framework and timber cannot therefore be governed by a specific market policy, even temporarily.

Although such actions are theoretically possible under WTO regulations, well-defined, solid legal, economic and commercial grounds would be necessary to persuade our trading partners to accept them.

To date, the Commission has not received a detailed analysis justifying its taking such a step.

I will come back to this point in a moment.

It is therefore, first and foremost, national aid to the timber industry which is the most appropriate means, at national, regional or local level, of supporting the worst affected forestry sites in the industry, and the Member States have to decide on the procedures for providing this aid.

The Commission is therefore currently assessing the national aid systems notified to it by the national governments for alleviating the effects of hurricanes on the forestry sector according to the effects on competition at European level.

The departments of the Commission are assessing these aid systems, particularly in the light of Article 87(2b) of the Treaty, which governs the compatibility of the aid envisaged by the Member States in the event of natural disasters.

The aid programmes notified by the French Government do, in fact, contain a general measure supporting the windfall transportation which may result in some of the timber being transported to countries outside the Union.

The Commission stresses that Article 87, paragraph 2b of the Treaty does not constitute an exemption from GATT regulations as such, and we and our legal departments are assessing the compatibility of this measure with the Treaty on the basis of recent information.

The French authorities may be requested to provide further information.

With regard to the joint financing of aid programmes proposed by Member States under Article 30 of Regulation EC/1257/99 on support for rural development from the European Agricultural Guidance and Guarantee Fund (EAGGF), I would further stress that the Commission is prepared to be extremely flexible.

However, it is first of all up to the Member States to amend their initial programmes.

In the meantime, two Member States, including France, have presented their adapted programmes, which now include a substantial section on bolstering the forestry industry following the storms at the end of 1999.

In this context, actions are proposed for the removal, storage, transportation, protection and replenishment of the devastated forests in order to support the sector.

These dossiers are currently under negotiation between the Commission and the Member States, but I can state here and now that the Commission' s attitude is favourable.

I have received five motions for resolutions in accordance with Rule 42(5) of the Rules of Procedure.

The vote will take place after the debate.

Mr President, first of all, I would like to congratulate you on the way you handled the debate this morning.

You encountered a storm and weathered it without the help of the Commission.

But Commissioner, I would also like, and I feel that this is essential, the institutions of the European Union to bear witness to the solidarity which unites the Member States, in particular in the event of exceptional disasters such as the storms of 26 December last which caused such unprecedented damage to a number of forest regions in France, Germany and Austria.

There is an urgent need for us to begin using the instruments available to the Union to assist the affected regions and support the individuals and companies concerned. The need for our support is all the more pressing given that transportation, storage and forest exploitation cannot be delayed without serious consequences in terms of both the quality of the products and the restoration and protection of forest ecosystems.

Thus, in the Alsace region alone, more than 6.5 million cubic metres of woodland has been devastated, which is essentially equivalent to one to three years' harvests.

Clearly, the influx of timber onto the market will send prices plummeting and so further damage the industry' s economic operators.

Once again, the way that the sector is structured may facilitate the search for joint solutions between the upstream operators which manage forestry resources and the downstream operators which exploit them.

The inter-trade system introduced in France can certainly play a major part in the search for, and development of, these joint solutions.

Indeed, since they are designed not to protect the interests of any one section of the industry, they facilitate the protection of the industry as a whole, promote the timber sector and ensure respect for the great internal balances which make it possible to consolidate the whole.

Although regional in scale, inter-trade bodies also have a local impact and are immediately efficacious in critical situations such as that of our forestry companies and the timber industry.

We should therefore favour direct contacts with potential partners, even more so given that inter-trade bodies are also the consultative partners of local governments and national authorities with regard to defining forestry policies and hence with regard to the search for immediate solutions to crises.

They are also able to identify bottlenecks in the implementation of safeguard programmes.

This is why I ask you not to disregard direct consultation with the industry' s operators in your consultation mechanism.

Moreover, regulations can be a constraint which varies according to the State in question, as is, notably, the case with regard to grain storage, in respect of the impermeability of the ground, the water sampling limits, which are set at 5% of the low water discharge in France and 30% in Germany and waste disposal monitoring.

I therefore feel that exceptional measures should also be implemented.

The scale of the disaster shows that the aid pledged by the State or confirmed at local level will not be sufficient to cover the damage reported.

It is therefore essential to be able to draw on the Structural Funds to finance special measures for forests and the timber industry in the case of disasters in objective 2 or former objective 5b areas.

The same applies to rural development measures and other, more specific, economic or environmental programmes, in parallel with actions for using up workable timber, which represents about 50% of the windfall.

It would also be desirable to promote incentive measures for using the poorer quality wood for energy production.

However, the urgency of the situation calls for flexible, simplified procedures to financially supplement the provisions already introduced by the Member States

I therefore call upon the Commission to seek consensus with the industry as a whole and the Member States concerned in order to find effective, immediate solutions, for the greater the consensus, the more effective the solutions will be.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I experienced the storms of Christmas day 1999 in my home city of Paris and only managed with extreme difficulty to return on the same day to Germany, where the forests were unrecognisable.

Further south-west, in France, my parents spent many days in the dim light of the petroleum lamp which I had given to them once as a present.

We do not know when and in what form the next disaster will strike.

Permit me, therefore, to say something about the current problems and to expand on one aspect of the comments of my fellow MEP and friend, Gilles Savary.

It concerns point 8 of the joint motion for a resolution in which we ask the Commission to create instruments which make it possible to take rapid and effective action within the European Union if we are faced with a crisis situation as a result of accidents or natural disasters.

We presently have neither the money nor the infrastructure for this.

We should not in future rely on cross-border neighbourly aid as in the case of the storms at the end of the year.

It was offered on a voluntary basis in an exemplary manner.

It is also a healthy and important expression of solidarity.

However, in itself it does not constitute a European solution.

The European Union must take full responsibility for its citizens.

The Commission must, therefore, quickly rack its brains to find instruments for rapid and effective emergency aid.

We will expect proposals for solutions soon.

We need have no qualms about making these proposals unconventional and bold.

There will certainly be no lack of support from the European Parliament.

The time has come to move on.

But first we must sort out the current consequences of the Christmas storms.

This involves three things in particular.

Firstly: we must not let the timber market collapse and must, therefore, directly intervene on behalf of the many small and medium-sized enterprises.

Secondly: we must, as an exception, also support necessary transportation and exports of valuable timber to third countries.

The Commission must urgently discuss the approval of export subsidies with the WTO.

Thirdly: we must do everything we can to counter the risks of fungus, pest and fire so that the damage does not become even worse.

Commissioner, when you say that national aid is the important thing now, then I would say to you that this also means that, in this instance, you do not want to organise the common European market.

Commissioner, Mr President, it is true that your news and your message are extremely disappointing when we think of the emotional concern shown at the damage caused by the storms last December.

Mr Barnier was very emphatic in his speech, assuring us that the European Union was, in effect, going to do something to help the victims.

By victims I mean the small-scale foresters who have been ruined, but I am also referring to the small seaside businesses who now have to face the influx of tourists.

Well, now we know that forests do not fall within the remit of the European Union.

So we are going to use part of the Structural Funds to finance emergency aid in the event of natural disasters.

Yet we are well aware that this will take time.

And, in this regard, may I say that the European Union' s policy consists of robbing Peter to pay Paul.

We cannot support this policy, for it amounts to depriving some to provide for others, to the detriment of future projects.

In my opinion, this is really not good enough, and we expect tangible measures from the Commission.

The citizens are calling for immediate action.

Mr President, the document on the difficulties faced by the forestry sector following the storms in December 1999 only refers to the damage caused to the wooded areas in order to better illustrate the price drops in the timber sector and the implications for foresters and timber exporters.

The resolutions deal mainly with the regulation of the timber market and export subsidies.

For my part, I would like to speak up on behalf of forestry workers, who receive no mention at all, even though it is their efforts which are keeping the timber sector going.

The storms were more than just an environmental disaster for all of us and an economic problem for the profiteers of the timber sector. They have resulted in a sharp deterioration in the working conditions of foresters and lumberjacks, whose jobs are extremely dangerous at the best of times with the very highest accident rate which will continue to rise.

The discomfort and danger involved in their profession is illustrated by the fact that there were over 100 casualties in the 1990 storms in Germany.

The forestry workers' salary is shamefully low - a mere 6900 francs.

They are calling for a decent salary which offsets the risks involved in their job.

They are demanding to be able to retire at 55 and calling for an improvement in their working conditions, which are still antiquated and result in the physical deterioration and sometimes death of a number of workers each year.

Mr President, in relation to the storms which occurred last December, the Community did not match up to our expectations during the initial emergency period and now it is late in fulfilling its promises of aid.

The Commission has a duty to learn the lessons of the storm disaster, and strengthen the effectiveness of Community texts.

Between the initial emergency period and the current challenges, with problems in the transportation, storage and sale of wood, there is a chronological gap corresponding to a gap in institutional support.

This must be remedied and the States concerned must be awarded logistical support in the follow-up to the initial emergency period.

In its resolution last January, Parliament asked the Commission to submit practical proposals if it were found that the funds available for aid were insufficient.

So what has become of these famous practical proposals?

The Commission should use these proposals to prioritise its reaction to the slump in wood sales, for what we had feared is actually taking place, and it is becoming impossible to sell wood.

And what measures has the Commission taken or planned to promote the immediate cultivation of damaged plots of land, without which the effective reconstruction of our forests cannot begin.

Sadly, one merit of this ordeal is that it will have reminded us that wood is an industrial raw material, one that is, furthermore, essentially renewable.

The sustainable and efficient management of our forests requires an economically viable forest.

Similarly, only sustainable forestry can provide a proper foundation for a competitive wood industry, while making a crucial contribution to the development of rural areas.

The Member States are, and must continue to be, the main operators in forestry policy in Europe.

This must not, however, stop Europe pursuing the coordinated management of forestry issues.

The sometimes extremely binding regulations governing the single market apply to forestry products.

In return the Community must provide support for these products, especially at times of crisis.

Community action in favour of the forestry sector is appropriate inasmuch as it creates added value for the national action which has been undertaken.

This is an ideal justification for the principle of subsidiarity, for instance in matters of protection against atmospheric pollution and forest fires, or forestry certification, and also in matters of support for the implementation of a world convention on forests.

I support the Community initiatives in favour of the tropical forests, but I am astounded that there is not the same enthusiasm to come to the aid of our own devastated forests.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, it is now some three months since Hurricane Lothar caused devastating damage to forests in Europe, and in particular France and Baden-Württemberg.

In Baden-Württemberg alone the accumulation of storm wood runs to about 25 million solid cubic metres.

This equates to three times the average annual felling and this has already led to 30% lower timber prices.

Just the cost of remedying the damage in Baden-Württemberg, the area for which I can speak as the delegate, runs to about DM 1.5 billion, of which DM 300 million are needed simply for reforestation.

However, Hurricane Lothar is not a problem specific to Baden-Württemberg.

France and other EU States have also been greatly affected.

Nevertheless, the Commission has so far refused to make additional budgetary allocations available and prefers to cite, in this instance represented by Mrs Schreyer, the fact that final agreement has already been reached in the European Parliament on Budget 2000 and that the requirement for additional funds should be covered by the Member State in question from the funds already allocated.

However, the redistribution of funds was made subject to approval and this approval has not yet been given.

I consider the argumentation of Mrs Schreyer to be somewhat cynical when you consider that, only a few days later, she announced that the additional financial requirement of EUR 300 million for the EU Balkan commitment, which is undoubtedly important, would be covered by EUR 300 million from the agriculture budget without the farmers noticing it, and this includes forest owners.

I would like to stress once again that we are dealing here with extremely long-term damage which may also have ecological implications.

Tidying up, storage and reforestation all involve intense physical work.

Commissioner, I know what I am talking about.

I have seen how the hurricane took the roof off our stable and I have seen the state our private woods are in.

We were able to put things right ourselves but, by and large, this is not the case for all areas, all persons, all communities.

But that this is done quickly and efficiently and, above all, is sustained long term is an ecological necessity.

During his visit to the Black Forest on 16 February, the Commissioner for Agriculture, Rural Development and Fisheries, Dr Fischler, indicated broad flexibility within the existing financial framework for measures for rural development.

He indicated, as you have today, Commissioner, that you are willing to give consideration to, to help ...

(The President cut the speaker off)

Mr President, the natural disaster which overtook European countries was tragic.

I am in complete agreement with the Members who have spoken on the matter and, believe me, the Commission would love to be able to do something about it.

Yet neither the Treaties nor the budgetary regulations provide for this possibility.

As I said before, no Community framework exists which would allow the Commission to adopt initiatives to provide direct aid to the forestry sector.

Moreover, the same applies within the framework of Regulation 1257/99.

It is the Member State itself which has to adopt the necessary initiatives and provide for appropriate aid.

According to the principle of subsidiarity, the Commission cannot direct resources from the rural development programme towards channels supporting the timber industry following storm damage.

The Commission cannot apply competition regulations to authorise national aid or joint financing initiatives under the provisions of Regulation 1257/99.

Moreover, negotiations are in progress with the Member States and I have made it quite clear that, within its institutional and legal capabilities, the Commission is doing everything in its power and more, and is being as flexible as it possibly can.

It is unfortunate that the institutional authorities have decided that forestry policy is to be governed by subsidiarity, and that it does not fall within the competences of the Commission but is wholly the responsibility of the Member States.

This is something which the Commission cannot change for the moment for that would mean amending the Treaty, although reform of the Treaties is currently being discussed.

I therefore call upon all Members who are convinced that subsidiarity should not apply to forestry issues but should be the remit of the Community to make representations to their national governments to this effect.

Commissioner, you have been extremely active this morning.

We shall now proceed to the vote.

Joint motion for a resolution replacing the resolutions on the economic effects of the recent storms on the forestry sector in Europe

Declarations of vote and other declarations

Mr President, I would very quickly like to go back to the events which took place during the explanation of votes or during the point of order this morning.

I am very new to this Parliament and I would just like to express my deep disappointment at the incident.

Of course, I respect the Rules of Procedure and democracy, but the strategic, political action of a mere forty or so Members has prevented us from voting on Ethiopia.

On behalf of this Parliament, I would like to apologise to the people of Ethiopia, to the men, women and children who are suffering in a tragic situation and in relation to whom Parliament was prevented from adopting a position this morning.

We were able to vote on the last two items, which were also urgent, but, in all honesty, I would have preferred to have voted for the people of Ethiopia and to have lent them the support of this Parliament.

Once again, I apologise to the people of Ethiopia.

Mr President, I would like to support what Mr Daul has just said.

For me also the timber trade is something of great importance, but then our aid to Ethiopia is equally important.

For this reason I would like, and I attach great importance to this since you did not previously allow me to speak again when Mrs Buitenweg falsely quoted me, once more to clearly ask: where are those who this morning arranged this whole theatre?

Why are they not here now at the end of the session, proving that the work of Parliament is genuinely important to them?

Mr President, like everyone else, I am deeply concerned about the situation we have landed up in.

I find it disagreeable to have taken part in the votes we have had when there are so few of us.

In actual fact, I abstained from voting in all our votes this afternoon because I did not think that I wanted to be involved and participate in making decisions which are as illegitimate as I believe they must be when there are so few of us.

I support the protest action which has been taken here today.

I am a new Member and therefore a little shocked when I hear that the unsatisfactory state of affairs which prevails on Fridays has been going on for years, unchanged.

If that is the case, vigorous protests are certainly needed so that we can bring about a change, for matters cannot continue like this.

We shall be a laughing stock throughout Europe.

I notice that, today, we are concluding this sitting with approximately fewer than 40 Members here to make decisions.

Mr President, firstly, I voted in favour of the last motion and the amendments thereto.

That was the formal declaration of vote.

I would like to rid certain people here of the misconception that those who took the initiative for quorum counts are no longer present.

It is true that some have left.

But I am one of the people who took the initiative and I am still here, just as I am here every Friday.

I have noticed that some people say that there are people who are after a four-day week, but I am certainly not one of them.

I am, however, of the opinion, that we need to work a proper five-day week, which is not happening at the moment, if the number of MEPs in attendance today is anything to go by.

And this is why the problem has arisen.

If Fridays were like Tuesdays or Wednesdays, then it would not have been necessary to have this debate and the counts here today.

This will now have to be carried through to the moment at which Fridays either run in the normal way or, due to a lack of interest, they are abolished, which is once again a likely scenario.

- (PT) Mr President, I would firstly like to explain why I voted the way I did: I voted in favour of the joint motion for a resolution because I agree with the serious concerns and actions it puts forward, although this does not represent a change in my Group' s position. Our position is that we have concerns about the Union' s courts having responsibility for forestry policy.

Nor can I fail to mention the fact, which has already been referred to here, that the saboteurs of this morning' s sitting did not take part in the vote, and I am delighted that the PPE has suggested a nominal vote, which will clarify the matter.

There is a French saying about the arroseur arrosé - the biter being bit. Here we have the saboteur saboté - the saboteur hoist with his own petard.

It is deplorable that we have been involved in this circus. Those concerned could have made a point of order, since it is an important issue that the Bureau and the Conference of Presidents have to address.

But they went too far. They showed no consideration for Ethiopia and sabotaged the votes.

They then suggested a nominal vote so a count could be taken.

As we can see, however, when we take a decision here on an issue related to storms, disasters or Europe' s interests, that is, serious matters, they are no longer present.

Almost none of the 32 gladiators were present for the final vote, which is utterly deplorable and which clearly reveals the true intentions of those who destabilised this morning' s sitting.

Mr President, I would like to say to Mr Daul and Mrs Lulling that, in debates on the Rules of Procedure, you must always bear in mind that there are also tactical and strategic aims coming into play.

It is no different for you than for those colleagues who tried what they did.

For the first time this morning I joined in the request for the quorum to be established.

I am a supporter of Strasbourg and a supporter of Fridays.

However, I am of the opinion that those who wish to ensure that the work of Parliament continues to be carried out should also be present.

I therefore thought to myself that a warning shot was in order; what then happened I thought went too far and I did not want to fall into line because I thought that it was about Strasbourg and Fridays.

For that reason, I did not go along with it any further.

But the fact that those delegates did what they did you have to grant them.

You then have to respond accordingly.

The Rules of Procedure, and I would like to pay my respect to the President here, were sensibly interpreted this morning with great composure and great calm.

The votes which were carried out are proper votes.

They are no less valid because only a few delegates participated.

I consider that, by exhorting our colleagues, and also the Groups, to be present, we should try to rescue these Friday debates and these Friday votes and to bring about a positive outcome.

Mr President, I would first of all like to thank the President of this eventful sitting, the Members present and Mrs Reding.

Commissioner, with regard to the forestry issue, I would like to say that, although your openness has sometimes made your words difficult to accept, you have, at least, been frank, in contrast with those declarations made at the time of the incidents, which may have been rather rash.

I sincerely feel that your approach is far more beneficial to the credibility of the European Union than the tone of the declarations made when the issue first arose, which led us to believe that Europe was much more involved than it actually intended to be.

The subject of the forestry sector is now open to debate, and we must take up the issue of natural disasters as well, for we cannot endeavour to draw closer to our citizens and then explain to them that we are unable to help them when they are in trouble, while, at the same time, we are sending task forces abroad.

This is a matter of genuine symbolic and political significance.

I would like to express my support for the comments of Mr Daul, who worked together with Evelyne Gebhardt to draft this resolution on the timber industry, and to express my regret and shock at the fact that we have exploited the plight of the people of Ethiopia to further our petty games.

Petty games which are not acknowledged, moreover, for although, effectively, the right does exist to request that the quorum be tested and also to bring up the issue of Friday working, it is blatantly obvious that this morning' s events were an attack by the anti-Strasbourg faction.

And, even more seriously, it appears that this incident may well be repeated every Friday.

We do, however, have one small consolation in that it will not be long before their refusal to participate affects those who were conspicuous by their absence today and who managed to derail this morning' s sitting.

We simply need to return to the issue of the agenda again as soon as possible.

It is a well-known fact, and I am publicly admitting it before all those here today, that the Chamber is never full because Parliament' s work is specialised.

Nevertheless, we must stop trying to hide...

(The President cut the speaker off)

Mr President, I would like to remind the House that, several months ago, Parliament rejected an amendment calling for Friday sittings during plenary sessions in Strasbourg to be abolished. At the very least, one would expect Members to abide by their vote.

This amendment was rejected by a large majority.

Therefore, we cannot now make any changes to our practices for the year 2000.

Finally, I would like to join the Members who have spoken in expressing my profound shame at the incident.

Parliament was prevented from voting to send aid to Ethiopia by petty political issues.

Mr President, I, too, regret the actions which prevented this House from working this morning.

However, I welcome the fact that all those who have spoken before me also condemn the manoeuvres and they are the hardest-working Members of this Parliament.

I feel that we must be constructive in learning from this morning' s events.

In the first place, we have a Treaty and positions of the European Parliament in favour of Friday morning sittings. We must enforce the Treaty and the European Parliament decisions.

I call upon Parliament' s Bureau to charge the relevant Committee to examine the Rules of Procedure and any practices of the European Parliament which might penalise Friday morning meetings in Strasbourg, for we should, on the contrary, be making every endeavour to enhance their status.

Mr President, I too would like to congratulate you on the way in which you have conducted this difficult session and I would just like to say something factual to my colleague, Mr Meijer.

I have been in this House for 21 years in all, although only 6 of those as a parliamentarian.

I have taken part in every Friday session for 21 years, even when I had another job and was not a delegate.

In this regard, I would also like to thank the staff who work so exceptionally on Fridays.

However, irrespective of that, I would like to say that I have repeatedly seen such attempts over these 21 years.

For this reason we introduced a quorum for determining the quorum because we wanted to rescue Fridays.

That is how all this came about.

However, I would like to say to Mr Meijer that at some point it was also decided that we would pass legislative resolutions from Tuesday to Thursday and not on Fridays, for which the quorum is not prescribed as compulsory, when we would deal with issues which are not controversial so that resolutions which are not controversial, but important nevertheless, can be passed.

That was the consensus, and this consensus was reached here.

Perhaps it is a healthy shock and Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf is perhaps right.

But I would ask you to clearly understand that Friday was never intended for legislative resolutions.

They are, however, important and they are consensual. We should therefore be able to pass them peacefully and in a dignified manner, and that is why, at the end of the day, we have passed them peacefully and in a dignified manner.

I declare the session of the European Parliament adjourned.

(The sitting was closed at 12.25 p.m.)

I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Friday, 14 April 2000.

Madam President, I would like to make a statement on this International Press Freedom Day on the situation in Tunisia and request that you intervene.

I will do so when you consider it to be appropriate.

I have taken note of your proposal.

Madam President, I rise to speak on the same matter.

We have just learnt that the brother of Taoufik Ben Brik has been sentenced to three months in prison.

Everyone here realises that this decision makes the situation critical as the Tunisian journalist had announced his intention to continue his hunger strike until he died if his brother were imprisoned.

I have just read the piteous appeal that Taoufik' s young brother has made to the Tunisian journalist to urge him nevertheless to end his hunger strike.

I therefore feel that the immediate future could be decisive in terms of reminding the Tunisian authorities of their responsibilities.

That is why I join my friend, Mr Barón Crespo, in urging you, as I did in a letter yesterday - and the situation has become even more urgent given recent events - to use your influence and your authority to obtain a fair and speedy solution to this tragic case of the violation of human rights and freedom of the press.

Madam President, I am going to raise a point of order in the literal and true sense of the word.

I am referring to the disarray in Parliament' s calendars and agendas, at least for this current year.

For example, on 19 April, I received an e-mail from the Quaestor, Mr Richard Balfe, which stated that that day was a restricted day and that the meetings planned for that day were cancelled.

On 13 April, we had received a departmental note stipulating which days were holidays and which were not.

I would ask Parliament' s competent bodies to plan and draw up timetables a year in advance, although I understand that unforeseen circumstances may require subsequent changes.

However, to change dates, as this departmental note indicates, to introduce holidays which did not exist before, is a serious lapse in planning in an institution with 600 MEPs and thousands of employees.

I would kindly request a little attention and organisation in relation to annual planning.

Mr Valdivielso de Cué, I promise you that I shall look into these matters very closely, but Mrs Banotti would like to take the floor to answer you in her capacity as quaestor.

Madame President, many colleagues have approached me about misunderstandings relating to signing-in yesterday.

I would just like to say that I propose to raise this matter with the Bureau this evening.

There was definitely a misunderstanding and many colleagues, in order to be here for the plenary today, had to leave home yesterday and incur the usual expenses.

So I hope we can raise this at the meeting of the Bureau later today.

We will have the same situation on Whit Monday.

We will certainly have to keep a close eye on that.

Madam President, I wanted to take the opportunity to inform you and the other delegates of the fact that Mr Paul van Buitenen, the Commission official who, as you know, has played a not insignificant role in the uncovering of the previous Commission' s failure, received a royal honour in the Netherlands last week.

I would like to add in all modesty that at least in the Netherlands, his work has always been - and still is - greatly appreciated.

Madam President, I want to mention the publication of a very important report a fortnight ago from the European Committee for the prevention of torture and inhuman and degrading treatment.

The report is to the Spanish Government on the visit to Spain by the European Committee at the end of 1998.

The report is accessible via the Internet, as is the Spanish Government' s response.

A week ago, a Spanish Court sentenced five former government officials, including a Civil Guard general, to up to 71 years in prison.

The sentences ended the second so-called "dirty war" trial and added weight to allegations that a dirty war, sponsored by the former Socialist government of Filipe González, was waged in the early 1980s.

According to the international agencies, Associated Press and Reuters, two youngsters of 20 and 21 years of age were driven across the border into the Spanish Basque area where they were tortured for several days.

They were both killed by a gunshot to the head.

All seven defendants were absolved of charges of torture and belonging to an armed group.

The sister of one of the victims told reporters that it was shameful that they were not convicted of torture.

It is important to know about this matter.

Madam President, coming back to a point that was raised earlier on: 9 May is, as you know, Europe Day and Parliament will be closed.

There is, however, a meeting of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market being held on that day.

Will members of the public be allowed to attend that meeting as observers or will they be barred from entering the Parliament?

The answer is yes: the public will be allowed to attend the meeting.

Madam President, when, on the last day of the last part-session in Strasbourg, it appeared on several occasions that we did not have the quorum required for voting, I suggested to the President of that sitting, Mr Wiebenga, that, from now on, we ought to carry out all the Friday votes at twelve noon or at the end of the sitting on Fridays, just like on the other days, and not get the attendance registers signed until the Members leave, with a note of the time of their departure.

Mr Wiebenga has announced that this matter will be referred to the President and the Bureau.

My question to you is: has the Bureau looked into this matter yet?

I can tell you that I have indeed received Mr Wiebenga' s letter and that this matter is on the agenda for tonight' s meeting of the Bureau.

As you can see, we have not let the grass grow under our feet.

Mr Barón Crespo, I can tell you that following the letter written to me by Mr Wurtz, I have already drafted a letter to the Tunisian authorities, stating what you and Mr Wurtz wanted.

I think that this is the right time to make your statement, if you want, which we can then append to the letter to the Tunisian authorities.

Madam President, Tunisia is a country which has an association agreement and a very close relationship with the European Union.

Article 2 of that agreement establishes, by common agreement, the importance of respect for human rights and democratic principles.

However, since the beginning of April, we have witnessed a situation involving a hunger strike begun by a journalist, Mr Ben Brik, which is causing a serious crisis of conscience and a violation of the association agreement by the Tunisian Government. It has not only forbidden Ben Brik from writing as correspondent for the French newspaper La Croix, but it has also taken away his passport and prevented him from using the telephone.

I should also add that the Tunisian Government has hindered the work of those journalists trying to cover this situation and has treated them intolerably.

Therefore, Madam President, I believe that we should clearly point out to the Tunisian Government, which is a friendly government and is associated to us, that this behaviour is not only incompatible with our association agreement, but that also, as Mr Wurtz has rightly pointed out, that this situation should not be allowed to continue and is leading Ben Brik' s relatives to endanger their own lives in defence of these rights.

Therefore, Madam President, I believe, given that there is no possibility of making sufficiently quick progress with parliamentary procedures, that this House should trust you to intervene on our behalf in order to put an end to this situation and to make the Tunisian Government see sense.

It goes without saying that before this letter is sent to the Tunisian authorities, I shall discuss the matter with the Chairman of the Delegation for relations with the Maghreb.

I did not indicate my request to speak earlier because one of the administrators of our Group had, before the sitting, already indicated to the President and Bureau that I wanted to table a point of order.

I do not know whether we will be able to include an item in the agenda for this part-session to the effect that we should be provided with information on the state of the euro, which is a cause for concern, or whether we should endeavour here and now to ensure that the issue is included in the agenda for the next Strasbourg part-session.

It was reported in the news this morning that the euro has already fallen below the psychological limit of 90 cents, which augurs even more worrying and serious falls in value.

We cannot continue to put up with a lame currency.

Somebody has to give an explanation and announce measures that can restore minimum levels of psychological confidence in what has now become the common currency of many of the Union' s Member States.

I would like to draw the attention of the President and the Bureau to this point, so that our Group can, in good time, and if it should prove necessary, take steps aimed at altering the agenda for the next Strasbourg part-session.

I have also heard that, this morning, a Commissioner attended the meeting of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs.

Is the chairman of this committee in a position to provide information to the House on the Commission' s views on such a critical situation?

As you will be aware, we have tabled a debate on Mr Duisenberg' s report for the next part-session in Strasbourg.

I think that this major debate will entirely meet your expectations.

Madam President, my Group intends to request that, in the debate on monetary policy, a Commission statement on the information policy that it is planning on the euro be added.

I would like to point out that we must not be influenced by information which is not only alarmist, but sometimes hasty, with regard to the euro, and that we must not focus solely on the progress of the euro' s parity with other currencies, such as the dollar.

We must take account of the state of the European economy and also the possibilities created by the euro.

It seems to me that in this respect we should be as aggressive in our defence of the euro as our counterparts in the United States Congress are in defence of the dollar.

Madam President, I agree wholeheartedly with Mr Barón Crespo' s last-but-one speech on Tunisia.

Furthermore, I am delighted to see that the Socialist Group has finally decided to adopt a rather more forthright position on Tunisia, a position that, moreover, goes far beyond the complex situation of Mr Ben Brik. Nevertheless, Madam President, I did not understand your speech.

As you are proposing to write to the Tunisian authorities, an action I fully support, I feel that you should do so in order to state Parliament' s position on the matter.

I therefore fail to see why you should append the position of one particular group to the letter.

You are quite right, Mr Dupuis, and that is why I said that I would immediately be discussing the matter with the Chairman of the Delegation for relations with the Maghreb so that we can plan an approach which will be both forceful and well coordinated.

Withdrawal of Mr Le Pen' s parliamentary mandate

Thank you, Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi, and thank you for having made yourself and your committee available to us.

Mr Gollnisch, pursuant to which rule do you wish to make a point of order?

Madam President, I would like to speak pursuant to Rule 6, in the first instance, and then, if you permit me, to Rule 7(4)(2), but I shall be brief and to the point.

I think that this does, nevertheless, merit one and a half minute' s explanation.

I think that you could allow me that much time.

In what will, I stress, be purely a point of order on the provisions of our Rules of Procedure, I should like to mention certain matters, which are not related to the crux of the issue, but which are related to the procedure to be followed in this case, which, I am sure you will all agree, is extremely serious.

First of all, I would like to refer to Rule 6.

Rule 6 incorporates the provisions covering the waiver of parliamentary immunity into our Rules of Procedure.

I would simply point out to the House that, in the criminal proceedings that led the French government - wrongly, in my opinion, but that is not the issue here - to withdraw Mr Le Pen' s mandate, in contravention of the French Penal Code, the courts made no request for Mr Le Pen' s immunity to be withdrawn.

In my opinion, through its abusive interpretation of the idea of what constitutes a crime, this action is in violation of the protocol on the immunities granted to Parliament and of Rule 6 of our Rules of Procedure, which I invite you to read and note well, ladies and gentlemen.

You will see that it is a serious matter.

Secondly, Madam President, I would like to remind Mrs Palacio, in particular, although I am sure that she is familiar with them, of the provisions of Rule 7(4)(2).

This provision has recently been incorporated into our Rules of Procedure to cover precisely this type of case, following the precedent set by our colleague, Mr Tapie.

This is what Rule 7 states:

(The President cut the speaker off)

Mr Gollnisch, You have exceeded your allocated speaking time.

You yourself said that you were asking for a minute and a half in which to make your point of order.

Mr Le Pen, who will be heard tomorrow in the Committee on Legal Affairs, will explain the whole case and we will do things in complete accordance with the regulations.

I really cannot let you speak any longer.

It is quite out of the question.

This is not the time to debate this matter, Mr Gollnisch.

Madam President, you have given the floor three times to Mr Barón Crespo, although these interventions were not tabled on the agenda.

I ask you to give me a few seconds in which to finish what I have to say.

If you have any respect for your position and for the rights of Members...

I have the greatest respect for my position.

You yourself said that you were requesting a minute and a half in order to make your point of order.

Mr Le Pen will explain the entire matter to the Committee on Legal Affairs tomorrow.

The next item is the statement by the Commission on the review of the financial perspective.

Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, thank you for giving me the floor to tell you about the Commission' s decision concerning the review of the financial perspective.

Let me begin by taking this opportunity to inform you of another decision which the Commission took today.

The Commission today decided to appoint Mr Carlo Trojan Head of Delegation in Geneva as of 1 September this year and Mr O' Sullivan Secretary-General as of 1 June this year.

Mr Levi, formerly Spokesman for the Commission, has been appointed Director of the Forward Studies Unit.

Mr Jonathan Faull, formerly Head of the Press and Communications Service, will henceforth - and for a transitional period - act as the Commission Spokesman.

All these staffing decisions were taken as part of the reform of the Commission and I think they were the right decisions in the context of the further reform measures that are needed.

The Commission thanked Mr Carlo Trojan sincerely for his activities.

May I add, speaking also as a former Berlin politician, that I too want to thank Mr Carlo Trojan most sincerely for the great commitment he demonstrated during the process of German unification.

Let me make it quite clear here that it was partly thanks to this commitment that the European Parliament and the Commission immediately rendered so much assistance to East Germany.

Madam President, I will now turn to the Commission' s decision concerning the revision of the financial perspective.

That decision was necessary to secure financing for the new political priority, the new highly political task of providing assistance to the Western Balkans region.

Many of this Parliament' s resolutions have emphasised how important the European Union' s commitment to the Western Balkans is to the future success of the EU' s foreign policy, and the Council has also constantly stressed its importance at various summits. That is why now is the time to safeguard this task from the financial viewpoint.

In the financial perspective, the financial plan for the European Union, which the Council decided on in Berlin in March 1999, the effects on the Balkans were not anticipated.

Let me remind you that the Berlin decision on Agenda 2000 was taken on exactly the same day as the outbreak of war in Kosovo.

When Parliament, jointly with the Council and the Commission, adopted the interinstitutional agreement on Agenda 2000, the following statement was annexed to it at Parliament' s instigation: "In view of the development in the Balkan situation, particularly in Kosovo, the two arms of the budgetary authority request that the Commission, when needs have been ascertained and estimated, submit the necessary budget proposals, including, if appropriate, a proposal for a revision of the financial perspective" .

On 16 December last year, at the time of the decision on the 2000 budget, the budgetary authority once again called upon the Commission to submit a multiannual financial plan for a programme of assistance for the Western Balkans and, if necessary, depending on the amount required, to submit concurrently a proposal on the review of the financial perspective.

The decisions the Commission has taken today are a response to the requests made by Parliament and the Council.

The starting point for the Commission' s proposal is the following question: what resources will be required for the programme period - i.e. up to 2006 - to meet the substantial financial assistance needs of the Western Balkans?

By the Western Balkans I mean Albania, Bosnia-Herzegovina, Croatia, Serbia and Montenegro, Kosovo, and also the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.

We need to submit an integrated aid programme, while each country' s participation in that programme will be conditional upon compliance with certain criteria concerning the development of democracy in the region, the rule of law and the will to cooperate.

The programme the Commission is proposing forms part of the stabilisation and association process and is designed to make financing available for the reconstruction and stabilisation of the region, for the promotion of democracy and the rule of law, the development of a market economy and the development of cooperation between the recipient countries themselves and also between them and the European Union.

Let me now give you a few figures, for whenever we discuss the budget we must, of course, quote actual figures.

According to the Commission' s estimates, the financial requirement for Albania, Croatia, Bosnia-Herzegovina, Macedonia and also Montenegro up to the year 2006 will be EUR 1.5 billion, i.e. around EUR 200-230 million per year.

Late last year, we received a very precise study from the World Bank and the Commission regarding the financial requirements for reconstruction in Kosovo, a study which showed that, over the next three to four years, the financial assistance required will total USD 2.3 billion, and the Commission, i.e. the European Union, agreed to fund half that requirement from the EU budget, in other words approximately EUR 1.1 billion.

As I pointed out, the Commission proposal focuses particularly on the need for the regions to cooperate with one other, which is why special funding is to be provided to that end.

The Commission proposal also makes provision for including financial aid for Serbia to the tune of EUR 2.3 billion in the financial plan.

In this regard it is clear, of course, that these EU budget resources can, and must, only be allocated if there are signs of progress towards democracy in Serbia.

The Commission is convinced, however, that if we decide the financial framework at this stage, that will send an important political message to Serbia. It will make it clear that it is not just a question of making promises to the Serbian forces of opposition, but that preparations are also being made to provide immediate assistance on the ground once the necessary changes are in place.

With regard to the amounts involved, let me tell you the following: the Commission estimates the total requirement for the region at EUR 5.5 billion from the EU budget.

The financial plan in Agenda 2000, which was adopted in Berlin, already includes some EUR 1.8 billion; these resources were earmarked for Bosnia-Herzegovina.

Today, the Commission decided to propose reallocating a further EUR 1.4 billion of aid from other foreign policy budget lines to the Balkans.

It therefore proposed and decided to reprogramme the budget for external actions, as I will describe in more detail in a moment.

The view of the Commission is that we will have to raise the external action ceiling here for the next few years by EUR 300 billion a year.

In this connection, the Commission made the following proposal on financing this additional requirement: in the years 2001 and 2002, these resources should be taken from resources previously earmarked for agricultural policy and reallocated to the external action heading.

I have already had an opportunity to discuss this proposal here in Parliament.

At this point let me repeat that this measure does not mean undoing the agricultural policy package decided in Berlin.

And it certainly does not mean curtailing the direct income subsidies for farmers.

Let me point out that, overall, the agriculture budget totals EUR 44 billion, which makes it clear that reallocating EUR 300 million has no impact on the overall agricultural package.

This amount will have to be financed in the year 2001, among others, from the savings resulting from the euro-dollar exchange rate.

After all, the current exchange rate value of the euro means very substantial savings for the European budget with regard to export financing.

For 2003 onwards, the Commission proposes that the decision on financing the necessary resources should be taken in conjunction with the already scheduled mid-term review of agricultural policy.

Let me point out that the Commission is also proposing to the budgetary authority that the external action appropriations should only be increased once resources for Serbia can indeed be allocated.

This is therefore a decision that establishes a framework for the years to come.

In relation to the re-programming of external action appropriations to which I referred, let me summarise the situation as follows: the Commission proposals always took account of the geopolitical importance of each region.

We did not propose any cuts in programmes aimed specifically at combating poverty in the world and the proposals also took into account whether some programmes were not fully taken up in the past, i.e. the administrative activities and the relevant administration' s implementation of these programmes in the areas concerned were examined.

The necessary redeployment is the result mainly of comparable cuts in the TACIS programme for the countries of the former Soviet Union.

But let me point out that, in relation to the Mediterranean region, the Commission proposal provides that in this coming period - i.e. up to 2006 - the resources available for the MEDA programme will be increased overall by 13% compared with the previous period.

Let me conclude by pointing out the following: there is another point where the decision on the revision of the financial perspective also responds to a request by Parliament.

In connection with the 2000 Budget, you proposed that, in future, the appropriations allocated for Cyprus and Malta should no longer appear under the external action heading but be reclassified under the pre-accession aid budget, so as to make it clear that we have a coherent plan here; that these are appropriations that will be spent with a view to the desired accession of Cyprus and Malta to the European Union.

I think that will make the financial planning even more transparent.

In many regards, today' s Commission decisions satisfy some of Parliament' s key requests; we have complied with these requests.

That is why I ask you to support the Commission proposal on the review of the financial perspective and hope you will do precisely that!

Madam President, I thank the Commissioner for that report.

There were not a great many surprises in it and, to some extent, I welcome that.

A question remains, however, in relation to redeployment in Category 4.

I heard you say there would not be cuts against the poverty lines.

You mentioned lines where there was not complete take-up and that there would be cuts in TACIS.

Can you give us some idea whether there will be any across-the-board reductions?

Last year, the Council proposed a 10% across-the-board cut in Category 4.

Is the Commission making selective reductions as you suggested or will they be making any across-the-board cuts in Category 4?

I am still unclear as to what happens from the year 2003.

If you are taking money from Category 1 for the next two years, where do you expect that money to come from in 2003?

Mr Wynn, I can give you a definite answer to your first question as to whether the Commission is proposing across-the-board cuts in the external action heading: no, it does not propose to do so.

I would regard that as the wrong approach.

We have enough criteria according to which we can carefully assess to what extent we need to shift appropriations compared with Agenda 2000.

So these proposals are entirely justified and no across-the-board cuts are being proposed.

On your second question: the Commission is proposing to shift appropriations from agricultural policy to foreign policy for the years 2001 and 2002. Let me repeat that this is simply a question of limiting the increase in foreign policy appropriations, i.e. not of cuts to the budget available today.

The Commission' s proposal for the years from 2003 is as follows: we are looking to increase the amount for foreign policy, which, in arithmetical terms, would, of course, mean raising the overall ceiling.

But the Commission is proposing that both arms of the budgetary authority should try to make savings in particular areas during the annual budgetary procedure in order to find these 300 million.

It could also be that in connection with the mid-term review of Category 1, scheduled for the year 2003, it will be proposed that these additional appropriations be financed over the entire period.

Let me stress once again that, in my view, we can finance this increase in foreign policy resources within the overall ceiling decided in Berlin and that the appropriations for Serbia should only be disbursed once we see real democratic developments there.

Madam President, I was extremely interested and curious to hear what Commissioner Schreyer has just said.

I must say that we would have preferred to be presented with a written text, but it appears that these ideas have been the subject of internal debates within the Commission and that we will therefore be given a more specific text to study at our leisure.

Having said that, I fail to see your grounds for considering that agricultural expenditure is not going to be used in its entirety, as it should, nor how you could release sums, that you describe as minimal, for the heading covering international actions and foreign policy.

During the last financial year, we instead felt palpable tension regarding market expenditure and I do not understand what intellectual grounds you have for considering that too much money is being allocated to agriculture, apart from the fact that you need money for the foreign policy heading.

Secondly, the same applies to the cuts under heading 4.

You tell us that there is such a thing as interregional solidarity.

Fine, I can accept that, but what gives you the right - you spoke of very specific criteria, so tell us what they are - what gives you the right to think that too much money has been earmarked for other parts of the world, apart from the fact that you need that money for Kosovo.

I think that this is a genuine problem.

I will conclude with my third question.

I should like to know whether, in the undertakings concerning aid that we gave at the donor conference, we made commitments in US dollars or in euros?

Given the state of the euro, I should like to know, if it was in US dollars, how you are dealing with the resulting situation and how you plan to guarantee that there will be strict parallelism between the donations made by the European Union and those made by other donors within the international community?

Mr Bourlanges, to answer your last question, the World Bank' s estimate of the requirements in Kosovo was indeed expressed in dollars.

We had an opportunity to go into this in depth during the 2000 budget discussions.

In its proposal the Commission has now allocated EUR 1.1 billion for the period 2000-2006.

It is not therefore charging appropriations already disbursed for Kosovo in 1999.

As for your comment that you need a written document in order to analyse the proposal: you will find the proposal on the financial perspective and re-programming on the Internet tomorrow.

The Commission will decide on the CARDS programme next week, because here there were still some questions that required clarification from the legal service. The key figures will therefore be available to you as from tomorrow.

In reply to what you said about agricultural expenditure, let me point out the following: this year, given the fluctuations in the exchange rates, we will be spending about EUR 500 million less on agriculture and the estimates for next year are that we will need about 650 million less, assuming a parity euro-dollar rate.

You are also aware that the Commission will have to make proposals again next year on various organisations of the market, especially the sugar market, and my colleague, Mr Fischler, has stated that he will make a proposal in this regard, which will lead to savings of EUR 300 million a year.

Of course, I am not saying that there is too much money floating around; as Commissioner for the budget I am aware that money is always scarce, but money is also scarce for those who have to finance the European budget.

That is why, in my opinion, the Commission had to propose financing a new priority, without asking for new money, but rather by examining the possibilities of redeployment within the budget and making the appropriate proposal. And that is what it has done.

Madam President, you came, Mrs Schreyer, to the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development, you presented your arguments there, and you were met with respect.

However, I would like to make one comment and then put a question to you.

You say there was an increase in the agricultural sector and that this increase would be curtailed.

The fact that the percentage rise is so high is a result of the cuts in appropriations that were decided earlier in Berlin.

In fact, these appropriations are urgently needed!

I think we must not give the impression that we can keep using the agriculture budget as a kind of bottomless pit whenever we are short of money in other areas.

That is why I now ask you: do we not need to shift appropriations that might not be needed in export policy to the line for the integrated development of rural areas?

We need substantial funds there, because enlargement, with the accession of the Central and Eastern European countries, will generate enormous problems in these rural areas.

Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf, I fully and wholeheartedly support your commitment to the development of rural areas.

And that will also be very, very clearly reflected in the proposal I will be submitting to the Commission next week for Budget 2001.

It proposes that next year we increase the appropriations to assist rural areas by 10% compared with this year, and that will quite clearly constitute the largest increase in the draft budget.

I can assure you that the Commission did not approach the question of how to finance this new priority, this new task, by looking for some kind of bottomless pit; it simply took a very practical decision for the years 2001 and 2002.

Madam President, first I would like to express my deepest regret that we are debating a review of the financial perspective, and we have not even been presented with an initial written document.

If an issue like this is presented to Parliament, I would have thought that we might have had something in black and white, so we would know what we were talking about.

First of all, I would like to say that, not only are we faced with this bad example of administration, but that the Commission seems to take the view that wars can be waged and expenses incurred, yet the financial perspective cannot be reviewed.

The only way we can bear the costs of war and its consequences would seem to be at the expense of agriculture.

I would ask the Commissioner how this Commission proposal fits in with the decision of Parliament on next year' s guidelines that agriculture could not be the primary source of financing, as it appears that more would be taken out of agriculture than found, for example, by means of reallocation.

On the other hand, I would ask whether the Commission believes it would again be possible to use the flexibility instrument for this financing measure, since the rules forbid the use of the flexibility instrument more than once?

Mr Virrankoski, on your question whether the Commission is taking account in its proposal of Parliament' s decision that the resources needed for assistance to the Western Balkans should not come primarily from the agriculture budget, we have indeed taken that decision into account.

Let me perhaps give you a few very rough figures once again: we estimate the need at EUR 5.5 billion and, overall, 3.3 billion of that will come from the external action heading.

So it is quite clear that the redeployment here is concentrated on foreign policy.

In practice, the Commission proposal means redeploying EUR 600 million from agriculture policy for the years 2001 and 2002.

The second point is the use of the flexibility reserve. The interinstitutional agreement provides that the flexibility reserve can only ever be used for a given purpose for one year, i.e. cannot be used on a continuous basis for a long-term measure.

The Commission proposes that, for the time being, only the EUR 40 million that are also available in the budget this year should be allocated to Serbia for the year 2001, for example, to finance the Energy for Democracy programme.

In the event of a political change in Serbia during 2001, we could also resort to the flexibility reserve.

Regarding your question of when the documents will be available, you will find them on the Internet tomorrow morning.

Madam President, I would like to thank the Commissioner for her report, although a number of points seemed very unclear and could even be described as highly ambiguous.

If I am not mistaken, the total appropriations for Serbia are EUR 2.3 billion. These appropriations are not purely nominal; it is simply that they will remain on paper for as long as the Milosevic Government is in power.

This is neither the time nor the place for me to criticise this government, but I would like to ask the Commissioner whether the Commission took into account the fact that neighbouring countries, as well as the Serbian civilian population, were being penalised when it decided to defer appropriations on purely political grounds.

Without direct appropriations and aid, how does it intend to resolve the issues of industrial pollution, the navigability of the Danube and the Danube' s bridges destroyed by American bombing, which drastically reduced the river traffic of as many as five neighbouring countries?

What contribution is the Commission going to make - not in three years' time but in the next few months - to resolving the issue of the vast amount of pollution caused by the bombing of the Pancevo petrochemical plant, which contaminated huge areas, seeds and harvests with poisonous gases and which, according to the latest United Nations report, even polluted the water tables with dioxins, mercury and other toxic substances?

I would therefore like to ask the Commissioner whether there is any chance, any prospect of taking direct, immediate action on Serbian territory as well, in the interests, and I stress this point, of the neighbouring countries and regions.

Mr Manisco, the Commission regards it as most important to promote cooperation between the states and the regions with funds from the European budget, with your help.

That is why the proposal on the review of the financial perspective specifically earmarks approximately EUR 80-90 million for cooperation projects.

Secondly, as I pointed out, we have allocated EUR 40 million for aid to Serbia in this year' s budget as well, but these funds will only be used in a targeted manner in areas where the democratic opposition forces are currently endeavouring to establish a democratic system and the rule of law.

This year' s budget includes EUR 540 million for the region as a whole.

At the donor conference on the Stability Pact, Mr Patten approved certain projects and made it clear that the Commission can provide practical measures of assistance on the ground.

These EUR 540 million are available in the budget, thanks largely to the very strong support of the European Parliament and its endeavour to genuinely allocate adequate resources to this task.

In this connection, let me once again thank the European Parliament for making such an effort to ensure that the necessary funds are available in the 2000 Budget.

Madam President, Commissioner, I can be brief because, in the end, all the questions have been along the same lines.

We have heard that the figure of EUR 1.8 billion was decided on in Berlin. Today, as you said, EUR 1.4 billion has been decided on, and we keep hearing about the EUR 300 million reallocated from the agriculture budget, i.e. the 2001-2002 agricultural sector.

Commissioner, you had the opportunity to tell us about this in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development, but my question is quite simply this: how do I then explain why the farming community is so agitated?

When you state here today that we are saving a great deal of money thanks to the exchange rate mechanisms, when you and Commissioner Fischler say at the same time that we can save money in the organisation of the sugar market, then surely the reason the farming community is agitated must be that this information has not been properly conveyed to them, that the agricultural associations did not understand it properly!

Or must we always and, on principle, begin with an exchange of blows when it comes to politics?

I would therefore be very happy if we really could allay the concerns of farmers; at the moment, however, that does not seem to be the case!

Mrs Keppelhoff-Wiechert, let me assure you that I have worked very hard with agricultural associations and lobbies over the course of the last few weeks to discuss and explain the Commission' s proposal.

As I have announced, I will be submitting the budget 2001 proposal to the Commission next week. This will clarify the fact that there will be a sharp increase in agricultural appropriations, in line with the decisions taken in Berlin.

I therefore believe that, based on the actual figures, we can make it clear that the farming community need have no fears and that the important decisions taken in Berlin, particularly in relation to direct income subsidies for farmers, are not affected by the Commission' s decision.

- (NL) Mr President, I can advise you how to vote on each of the four amendments.

As rapporteur, I have no choice but to oppose these amendments because each of them has also been discussed and subsequently rejected within the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs.

As such, I would suggest voting against the amendments.

Mr President, your suggestion of pausing to listen to the interesting explanations of votes is not being heeded, but I am, nevertheless, pleased.

I voted for the report on the proposal for a Council regulation amending the regulation on the common organisation of the market in milk and milk products because I am convinced that it represents a positive technical step.

We cannot deny the Commission the chance to intervene in such highly technical matters.

I would nevertheless like to take the opportunity afforded by the explanation of vote to remind the House that there is a need for Parliament and the Council to make radical changes to the legislation on milk quotas as well as to the legislation governing the distribution of agricultural produce, regulated within the European Community, in terms of the quantity produced and how it is marketed.

The milk quota system was full of holes and we need a new one!

Mr President, I am sorry that I am only giving two explanations of vote on this occasion, but I do so with great pleasure, for Mr Maat' s report is of great significance: as we are all aware, it has ensured that the practice of giving free milk and milk products to school children will be continued.

I remember the time when an elderly person came into my father' s bar, where I worked when I was a child, and asked for a glass of milk, saying, 'I drank milk when I was born and I want to die drinking milk!' .

I therefore put it to you - and I voted for the motion - that the European Union should give a glass of milk to pensioners, as well as to students, on a daily basis.

(FR) I do not need to remind you how hard we had to fight to maintain the necessary funds for supplying milk to schools.

In April 1999, the draft budget submitted by the European Commission provided for a 50% reduction in that budget line!

That reduction made it clear that this financial assistance would eventually disappear, which provoked intense reactions within the European Parliament and elsewhere.

According to experts and specialists in child nutrition, milk is indeed essential to the proper intellectual and physical development of children, of all children.

Therefore, children of poorer families, who do not have access to certain milk products having essential nutritional benefits, can make up the shortfall thanks to the meals offered in their school canteens.

A proposal such as this represented a threat to the health of our children.

This was unacceptable, given that public health had been enshrined in the new Title XIII of the Treaty of Amsterdam.

Furthermore, it totally contradicted the conclusions of the Agriculture Council of 14 and 15 June 1999.

Our Ministers had stressed the importance of encouraging milk consumption because of its high nutritional value, especially for children and young people.

It was only after long, intense discussions that the Commission proposed to increase the budget line by EUR 31 million, with the total amount committed to aid for providing schools with milk then rising to EUR 84 million.

This is the situation in 2000.

For the future, the European Commission has proposed to implement a cofinancing system.

A maximum of 50% of subsidies for the provision of milk to schools would be financed by the European Union, with the Member States remaining responsible for the other half.

It was obvious that the Commission' s long-term intention was to dismantle the system of aid for supplying milk to schools.

The European Parliament' s proposal, which I wholeheartedly support, is to make the Community pay 95% of the cost of European subsidies for milk supplied to schools.

This is the only way to ensure that this system survives.

I also welcome the decision to also include drinking yoghurt and milk-based beverages in the regulation.

This must be done to take account of changes in habits and food preferences and to make this programme more attractive to consumers.

I can, today, express my satisfaction at having committed myself to this fight and at seeing that the countless letters to the relevant ministers, the countless questions to the European Commission and the countless press releases have paid off!

(FR) This issue of Community subsidies for supplying milk to schools goes back to 1997 and is generating an increasing amount of interest in each of our Member States, all the more so because it involves issues of public health and economics, issues which are of concern to the European public.

If you need proof of this, you only have to read the countless letters which were sent to us when it became known that the European Commission wanted to end this programme!

That is why I can only urge you to follow the recommendation of our rapporteur, who is seeking not only to maintain this type of programme, but who is also taking a stand against the proposal of 50-50 cofinancing that the European Commission is putting forward.

Such a harsh cofinancing programme could lead to certain Member States refusing to pay their national contribution, thereby leading to discrimination within the Union.

Without denying the need to improve the management of this budget line, I nevertheless feel that improvements to the system can, and must, be made gradually, and I therefore urge you to support the European Parliament' s Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development and its rapporteur by adopting this report.

. (PT) We are in favour of this report because we think it is important that millions of children attending schools in the European Union continue to be given milk subsidised at a rate of 95% by the European Union.

As you will be aware, EC subsidies for supplying milk to schools were introduced as early as 1977.

In 1999, however, the Commission felt that it should put a stop to this programme.

But following considerable opposition, particularly in the European Parliament, the Commission submitted a new proposal, which, whilst maintaining the programme, would reduce Community cofinancing to 50%, with the intention that Member States would finance, wholly or partially, the remaining 50%.

To date, this system has provided for Community financing equal to 95% of the target price of milk, and in the report by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development, the rapporteur proposes that this level of financing should be maintained, rejecting the proposal of 50%. We consider this to be very important, as we reject the idea of transferring the costs of the CAP back to national governments.

- (SV) We have voted against the Maat report which concerns subsidies for the EU' s school milk programme.

In many schools around Europe, milk is provided free of charge to the pupils in order to meet their need for different forms of nutrition.

We are wholeheartedly in favour of children and young people being offered milk, and even food, in school, as they are in Sweden.

However, we do not think that it should be the job of the European Union to subsidise school milk.

In accordance with the principle of subsidiarity, school milk subsidies should be reduced to zero.

We therefore view the Commission' s proposal concerning cofinancing as a step in the right direction.

Since the 1950s, Swedish schools have provided pupils with milk and school dinners.

They have been able to do this without subsidies from the EU.

Sweden' s membership of the EU means that Sweden, too, was informed about the common school milk programme and, today, Sweden consumes approximately one tenth of the common budget for school milk.

For some years now, Sweden has been providing full cream milk instead of semi-skimmed milk, simply in order to meet the requirements for milk subsidies.

This clearly highlights the drawback of the system, as well as the fact that many countries which presently make use of the subsidies really have no requirement for additional resources.

We believe that export and production subsidies under the common agricultural policy must be abolished.

Agriculture ought to be placed on an equal footing with other branches of the food industry and compete in a free market.

Europe is now facing a series of challenges requiring more money to be invested.

The money which is, at present, being spent on agricultural policy, ought instead to be invested in the reconstruction of Kosovo, the enlargement of the Union to include Central and Eastern Europe and aid to the Third World.

. The reason for this intervention is to clarify why this House should oppose the Commission' s proposals to cut subsidies for school milk by half.

I am glad that the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development of this House rejected these proposals by bringing forward these amendments not to cut the subsidies at all and I urge everyone to support these amendments.

There are several arguments for doing so.

By nourishing our schoolchildren we also support our dairy farmers who need our support.

But also we are preventing surpluses like those seen in the past.

The next item is the report (A5-0076/2000) by Mr Hatzidakis, on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism, on the report from the Commission to the Council [COM(1999) 410 - C5-0010/2000 - 2000/2004 (COS)], the European Parliament, the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions: Trans-European Networks 1998 Annual Report pursuant to Article 16 of Regulation (EC) No 2236/95 laying down general rules for the granting of Community financial assistance in the field of Trans-European Networks.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the ELDR Group supports the Hatzidakis report.

Community policy in the field of trans-European networks is of major importance because it is not possible to have a common transport policy without a convergent infrastructures policy, as is stressed in the Maastricht Treaty.

Efficient transport infrastructures are essential for economic growth and employment, as they are for the competitiveness of companies which depend on the movement of persons, goods and resources.

According to this debate, Europe, first and foremost, is that political Europe towards which we are striving, but it is also the result of economic and social cohesion.

It is true that the European Union' s budgetary resources are insufficient and need to be increased, and it is also true that we need to increase the contributions of public bodies as well as public/private partnerships.

In this regard, my Group has drawn the Commission' s attention to the fact that the report does not contain information on sources of funding other than the Community budget and the European Investment Bank, and it has also stressed its concern that as many as seven Essen projects have not been given a guarantee that they will be completed within the timeframes envisaged.

We, too, say 'Yes' to the Brenner Pass and we, too, say 'Yes' to the use of new technologies.

However, the Member States must respect the pledges made, and the Commission must also take into account the guidelines established for the B5-700 budget line - a major budget line established in 1998 - promoting more environmentally friendly models and, above all, taking the different factors into consideration where a trans-European link passes through densely populated areas or highly industrialised regions.

For this reason, we also consider that appropriations set aside for these projects must not exceed 50% and that, after due analysis, the amounts still available for projects on which little progress has been made could be recouped and used for other projects with the same priorities, including environmental priorities.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, as the two rapporteurs, Mr Hatzidakis and Mrs Sbarbati, have already explained, both the competent committee and the Committee on Budgets wholeheartedly endorsed the Brenner project, a project that came at the top of the Essen list of priorities.

However, the original project did not set out a list of priorities, a major shortcoming.

I therefore consider it essential for the Commission to accept the points laid down in this report, and which have been explained by the rapporteur, as they stand.

The Brenner Pass covers a region that includes three countries and, as such, it is a very environmentally sensitive area to which we need to devote particular attention.

At present, 1.2 million lorries cross the Brenner Pass every year.

The growth in the transport of goods far exceeds earlier rates of increase.

The free movement of persons, one of the freedoms in the European Union, cannot be achieved properly either.

Good Friday saw extremely lengthy tailbacks on the Brenner Pass.

We, Mr Jarzembowski, Mr Swoboda and I - as pointed out in the explanatory statement of this motion in the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism - tabled a motion in which we justified this initiative as being a means of achieving an innovative model and approach to project development.

It breaks new ground and can set an example to the European Union.

Under the Prodi government, the Italian legislature had already considered the possibility of cross-financing road - i.e. road tolls - and rail transport and indeed approved it.

I believe that can act as a further model and pave the way to an innovative approach.

That is an absolute must, especially in an environmentally sensitive area, and I hope the Commission will exhibit the necessary sensitivity.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, first let me congratulate the rapporteur, Mr Hatzidakis, on his very sound report.

The report is as good and judicious as Mr Hatzidakis is in his chairmanship of the committee, for which he certainly deserves recognition and thanks.

Let me also take this opportunity to support him when he says that the financial resources for developing the trans-European networks are no longer adequate.

He proposes increasing the budget funding.

According to Commissioner Schreyer today, that will not be very easy to achieve.

That is why Mr Hatzidakis quite rightly proposed in committee that funding should also be procured from private or other semi-public institutions.

The previous Commissioner, Mr Kinnock, put forward several ideas on the subject on the basis of the activities of a working party and I hope Mrs Schreyer will be able to develop and take up some of these ideas, for without an incentive system of extra funding from the private sector too, we will not succeed in achieving what Mr Hatzidakis, the committee and, I hope, Parliament too, will propose tomorrow.

It is quite clear that in view of the additional tasks that we are also confronted with in transport, when we think of Eastern Europe and the candidate countries, it will not be possible to achieve what Mr Ebner has just called for, namely redeployment from road to rail, especially in bottleneck areas.

That is not an anti-roads policy, because it will, of course, free up the roads for the kind of transport best suited to them.

That is why we need this redeployment.

Some successes have been achieved, especially in relation to the agreement with Switzerland; in other areas, however, we have been less successful.

Let me also say a few words on the Brenner base-level tunnel. The European Commission has already financed the feasibility study, in fact financed it more heavily than other projects.

Studies alone, however, are not enough.

That is why we do not yet have any additional mode of transport, why no fewer cars are being driven and why we are not seeing a switch to rail transport.

That is why we must tackle the projects and why we need investment.

We also tabled a motion to this effect on account of our common concern in committee.

The three governments concerned and the Commission really must act now, begin with the spadework and start building, while, of course, at the same time guaranteeing the necessary funding.

I believe the Brenner base-level project is one of the most important European projects that need tackling, with a view to making north-south traffic environment-friendly and efficient.

If we combine that with the additional measures concerning the candidate countries, then, in five to ten years' time, we could see an efficient transport system in Europe, and that is something we urgently need!

Mr President, firstly I would like to thank the rapporteur, Mr Hatzidakis, for his excellent report.

The rapporteur has gone into the matter with great care and raised some very important issues.

Our Group supports him, for example, on the issue of coordinating regional and private funding in the Member States of the Union.

However, I would like to underline a few issues.

The annual report shows that shortcomings exist in the way money spent on the development of trans-European networks is monitored, and insufficient details are available as to the results achieved through the use of funds.

We need more precise accounts of inter alia how the European Regional Development Fund, the Cohesion Fund, funds from financial sources not included in the Union budget and funds from the Member States are spent to improve trans-European transport networks.

We also need a report on the effects of functional transport networks on a sustainable economy and employment.

The rapporteur has quite rightly pointed out that, of the fourteen Essen specific projects, seven still require confirmation of their funding and timetables.

In addition, the Essen projects have devoured a larger proportion of the Union' s funding for transport than was agreed.

In the future, greater care should be taken in selecting such specific projects.

At the same time, it must be ensured that the Member States will commit themselves to them, set aside a sufficiently large share of funding for them, and give them priority in their own plans.

The Annual Report shows that more money is also needed for the development of transport and traffic safety through the Union budget, since transport communications are so vital for the economy, employment and, furthermore, for social cohesion.

In the future we shall have to pay more attention to the coordination of various forms of transport.

At the same time, we shall also have to give consideration to the link between regional policy and transport.

Balanced regional development can help to slow down the trend towards centralisation and reduce traffic congestion.

In addition to addressing the problems of traffic in congested areas, we will also have to ensure that the trans-European networks are extended and that they are also developed in areas where the volume of traffic is lighter - areas where there is less traffic, remote areas, and areas where the physical environment presents greater problems.

Good communications are a vital necessity in these areas.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, we are agreed on one thing: policy on trans-European networks is in urgent need of reform!

The trans-European transport networks, and the 14 specific projects in particular, have not succeeded in any of the aims they were in fact intended to achieve, even though a great deal of money has already been invested.

But two of these aims really are vital to the European Union.

One is the key aim of economic and social cohesion, which holds the European Union together.

These TENs were designed to prevent the drifting apart, or the risk of a drift apart, between poor and affluent regions.

They have not done so. On the contrary, the 14 selected projects have, in fact, driven the regions further apart, and have encouraged a trend towards increased economic activity in the prosperous economic regions, because transport links have been constructed between them, while the poorer regions have become increasingly isolated.

Secondly, it is still a mistake to think that the trans-European networks help reduce mass unemployment.

On the contrary, unemployment has risen: even in 1995, in the ten poorest regions, unemployment was seven times higher than in the richest regions, while today it is eight times higher, and rising.

So I really wonder whether we can afford to continue putting European taxpayers' money in concrete without this having a significant impact on employment.

Is there really any point in investing more money and calling for more money in this case?

Is that not an incorrect response in structural terms, because we could do far more sensible things with the money in order to regenerate employment.

I also wonder whether the value of these projects has not been offset by the environmental destruction they cause.

In fact, they have achieved nothing.

They have destroyed much of the living space of the people of Europe and we should take the mass protest movements against motorways seriously, for they often point the way to more sensible and less destructive options.

Perhaps the people who are protesting are actually right.

Europe needs a considerably more intelligent and sustained transport policy, based on a modern approach that thinks ahead to the next generation, realising that resources are finite.

As regards the 14 projects, the European Parliament' s call for a cost-benefit analysis was not heeded, whilst its call for environmental compatibility checks for all the projects was also ignored; only partial checks were carried out, which conflicts with the relevant directive.

I think we really need to improve goods transport, which must be facilitated by rail in order to be sustainable.

We must revise the TENs policy with a view to combining mobility with sustainability.

Mr President, the trans-European networks are often hailed as one of the key successes of European integration.

This is true to some extent but they also make our society more vulnerable.

They help to strengthen the cohesion between the economies of the EU Member States.

Each country is becoming increasingly reliant on imported energy and a great deal of effort also goes into consultation and legal rulings.

What effect does this have on the people in Europe?

Perhaps an increase in the number of jobs in the short term.

In the longer term, it could be that, quite unintentionally, businesses become more vulnerable owing to technical defects in a costly transport system and that jobs could, at short notice, be moved to areas with lower wages, poorer working conditions and fewer environmental requirements.

Nothing therefore to get too excited about for the time being.

Similarly, the major transport projects are not as promising as the annual report would like to suggest.

For the north-south high-speed link from Berlin to Verona, only a few minor components have been constructed.

In England, the connection of the high-speed link which runs through the Channel Tunnel has been in the doldrums for many years as a result of the privatisation and the splitting up of the railway companies in that country.

Spain has decided not to go ahead with a European standard gauge for the high-speed link between Madrid and Barcelona, which was used for the line from Madrid to Seville.

The construction of the Betuwe line through the Netherlands is becoming increasingly controversial.

Economic experts have calculated that this expensive line would never be a success.

The costs seem to increase daily, the inland shipping industry considers this line to be distorting competition, freight transport by road does not seem to have gone down as a result and environmental activists are thwarting activities on a daily basis.

All in all, a good enough reason to abandon the Betuwe line project.

There is still far too little broad-based, social debate on the priorities set and choices made.

The people of Europe are entitled to more information on the impact of the TENs, i.e. the impact on their livelihoods, the costs involved, environmental considerations and the rate of implementation.

Mr President, I would like to begin by expressing my sincere thanks and appreciation to colleague Hatzidakis for a very fine report to Parliament here this afternoon.

The Commission' s 1998 annual report on trans-European transport networks gives a clear overall picture of the progress that has been made in certain specific projects as well as containing valuable information on the contributions made to these infrastructural projects by the various sources of Community funding.

Clearly, it is absolutely necessary to increase the resources available for developing these TENs.

At present, the funding is decidedly inadequate if we are to attempt seriously to meet the commitments entered into at the Essen European Summit in 1994.

I share the concern of the rapporteur over the fact that seven of the fourteen Essen projects are still facing difficulties because their funding is not totally guaranteed and no timetables have been drawn up for their implementation.

It would be useful if the Commission, in its future annual reports, specified what funding has been provided by national, regional and local public bodies and by the private sector, in addition to European funding, with a view to setting up the trans-European transport networks.

The Commission will shortly undertake a revision of the TEN guidelines.

I hope that in these new guidelines they will accord greater importance to improving access to trans-European network funding for Europe' s island and remote regions.

It is important to place particular emphasis on the promotion of sustainable transport links with these disadvantaged regions if they are to share equally in the benefits of a unified single market.

If the revision of the TEN guidelines were to concentrate just on existing bottlenecks as announced by the Commission in its work programme for the year 2000, this would focus the funding on the more economically developed central regions of the Union, perhaps to the detriment of the outermost regions.

A package of integrated financial measures needs to be deployed in order to press ahead with implementation of the network.

The Commission and EIB therefore should act together with national governments in implementing the TENs packages through the use of loan guarantees and other financial investments.

Mr President, I too would like to congratulate Mr Hatzidakis warmly, in particular because he has produced a genuinely realistic report, but some of his observations, which are rather disturbing, should be of particular concern to us.

It is worth remembering that the decisions that led to the choice of these 14 major projects date back to the Essen Summit, which took place in 1994, that is, already six years ago now.

Six years on from that decision, only half of these projects have made any real progress, and those projects are, by and large, concentrated in the northern half of the continent.

A positive start has been made, but the situation looks pretty grim as regards the other projects and, in particular, for the remote regions, as Mr Collins has already pointed out.

I am particularly thinking of the Southern link, which is supposed to link France, in particular Lyon, together with Turin and Trieste, to the rest of the Balkans that we would like to see firmly annexed to Europe. I am also thinking of the other part of Europe, comprising of Austria, with its specific problems mentioned by other speakers, Hungary, and the other countries of central Europe.

In this context, I would remind you that it is not only about opening up a Piedmont which is hidden away, a Piedmont stuck in the Alps. This is about connecting a whole region of the continent, the Balkans and central Europe, to the southern part of Europe, to France, Italy, Spain and Portugal, and no real progress has been made as regards this project.

So, in response to what Mrs Schroedter said, I feel that we must not lose sight of the fact that what these major projects are mainly concerned with is the development of railway infrastructures.

This particularly applies to this southern axis, which would make Paris only three and a half hours distant from Milan.

There are, however, difficult choices to be made in order to avoid the huge pollution-related problems currently in the news in Austria, as well as in Italy and Germany.

Choices have to be made; there must be investment and this decision, this choice that was made in Essen, is still no closer to being taken, six years down the line.

This concerns Member States, of course, and certainly Italy in particular, which has not supported this project with sufficient vigour, but it also concerns the Commission, as the rapporteur made very clear.

It is the Commission' s duty to come up with measures which encourage both public authorities and private companies to invest in these huge trans-European networks.

I therefore consider it to be crucial that the Commission submits new proposals so that these dossiers, which are still deadlocked, can proceed as quickly as possible.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, there are serious problems with seven of the transport projects decided upon by the Essen Council.

Like the rapporteur, I am disturbed about this.

One of these projects is the extension of the north-south link, and in particular the Brenner base-level tunnel.

Through this project the European Union could demonstrate that it is not just paying lip service to the idea of shifting transit transport from road to rail.

This is an opportunity to reduce the environmental burden on the region concerned and its population.

Moreover, this project will have a positive impact on the competitiveness of the Union as a whole.

Unfortunately, however, there is still a very long way to go as regards its implementation.

The subsidiary of the Austrian Brenner Railway Company and the Italian Railways, which is supposed to complete the project planning within a period of eighteen months, was only set up at the end of last year.

This means that, more than five years after Essen, there are still no concrete plans on the table.

The people of the region cannot understand that.

For it is they who have to live with the ever-growing avalanche of traffic.

The existing rules, under which a maximum of 10% of the total investment can be funded by the Union, are quite simply inadequate and unfair for projects that have enormous implications for the future of the European economy as a whole.

Member States that will benefit from the completion of the Brenner base-level tunnel cannot shrug off their responsibility and leave it entirely to the countries directly concerned, like Germany, Austria and Italy, to shoulder the financial burden.

In the end, that kind of attitude has nothing to do with solidarity.

Mr President, Madam Vice-President of the Commission, ladies and gentlemen, first let me very firmly reject Mrs Schroedter' s across-the-board criticism of the TENs.

In fact she has insulted us as well, for Parliament and the Council adopted the 1996 guideline by codecision on a proposal from the Council.

If that was such a terrible thing, the Greens should have opposed it at the time.

Let me just mention two projects that have been successful.

I think that, from the environmental standpoint, the rail link across the Øresund was precisely the right thing to do.

We want railways and we want links with remote regions.

The new Anglo-Irish rail links are of great benefit to the environment and the region.

The Greens are quite simply wrong to criticise the TENs as benefiting only the central and most densely populated states.

Secondly, I agree with Mr Ebner and others that, as far as the Brenner base-level tunnel is concerned, we have to think up some new ideas.

Our committee proposes a four-sided agreement between the three states concerned and the Union.

The Brenner base-level tunnel is an unusually large-scale project, and also a project with an unusually significant impact on the environment, for the Alps cannot be compared with the lowlands of the Netherlands or Friesland in Germany.

The environmental situation in the Alps is particularly problematic.

Quite simply, the way the noise and the stench of cars remains trapped in the valleys is quite different from conditions on flat ground.

Something therefore needs to be done in this regard.

Above all, we must persuade governments not to shift the blame onto each other.

The Italians say they will start building when the Austrians build.

The Germans say they will begin building once the Austrians are building.

The Austrians say they will start to build once the Germans and the Italians begin.

So we need clear yardsticks and data on who pays what and when, and the Community must make a serious effort to get this whole project going.

Let me make two final comments.

Madam Vice-President of the Commission. Take your time with the revision of the trans-European networks!

First, you should take another look at all the projects in the light of today' s debate.

We do not want more show projects, 14 or 15 show projects, with no guaranteed financing.

In this revision, we should identify measures as priorities only if we are certain they can be financed over a period of 10-15 years.

For the citizens will lose confidence in us if we declare certain projects to be priorities and then do not execute them.

We must remind the Member States that they have committed themselves to guaranteeing the financing, committed themselves to executing the plan.

Then we really must take them at their word and say: we will only list specific projects if they really are ready to be executed and financed.

Take your time and reopen these difficult discussions with the Member States so that you, as the Commission, do not propose projects in which we make fools of ourselves in front of the citizens, but projects that are feasible!

Mr President, I shall try to speak more slowly this time because last time I gave the interpreters a hard time by speaking at a Mediterranean tempo.

I come from a country which, because of its geographical location, has major transport problems when it comes to sending goods or persons to and from European cities and markets and when it comes to giving and taking.

One can therefore quite easily understand the great interest this country and its representatives have in trans-European networks, which I wish to talk about today.

However, not only as Greeks, but primarily as Europeans, we cannot but treat these networks as an important tool in our endeavour to strengthen social and economic cohesion, employment and sustainable development in our struggle to achieve European integration. And, of course, I disagree with what Mrs Schroedter has just said.

We should indeed accord trans-European networks the real importance which they deserve.

We should ensure that the financial resources spent on TENs are increased.

What is more, allow me to say that we owe this increase since, in the last decade, the need to cut spending in view of the obligation to meet the criteria and objectives of Economic and Monetary Union also badly affected TEN funding.

We should speed up the implementation of these projects by improving procedures and facilitating their funding through flexible public and private sector partnerships.

We should see to it that we overcome any hurdles that are holding up 7 of the 14 Essen projects and leaving us exposed.

And, of course, we should attach importance during the revision of the TEN guidelines to access to island regions and to regions which have difficulty obtaining access to the sea.

The Commission has presented us in its 1998 annual report with a rough picture of the state of progress in the construction of these networks, a picture which the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism - which, in the report under discussion, is asking for greater efficiency in the whole network construction operation - would like to be more detailed and informative.

The main role in the whole of this extremely important operation for the future of Europe belongs to the Commission and we call on it, in collaboration with the Member States, to give absolute priority, in the full meaning and with all the implications of the word, to developing these main arteries in the body of Europe so that it can function in the way we all want it to and meet the expectations of European citizens.

In closing, I would like to thank and congratulate the chairman of the committee and rapporteur, my fellow countryman Konstantinos Hatzidakis, for the work which he has put into his report which, of course, should be adopted.

Mr President, Madam Vice-President of the Commission, ladies and gentlemen, it is common knowledge that, at regional level in the European Union, there is a close connection between low per capita income, high unemployment and distance from mainland Europe or geographical remoteness, which is currently a serious problem, but which has existed since the industrial revolution of the 19th century, due to underdeveloped communications.

This is a vicious circle, which can only be broken by a political and economic joint action which addresses all the issues that are causing this underdevelopment.

The trans-European networks policy is not, however, being implemented in such a way as to resolve this crucial issue, despite the fact that it was introduced with the specific aim of establishing direct links between remote countries and the Union' s central regions.

The basic aim of the specific projects and budgets of the trans-European networks, as well as those financed by the Structural and Cohesion Funds, which resulted from a policy that was greatly desired by the Member States, yet poorly accepted and supported by the Commission, was to establish direct links between those regions that have a higher per capita income. In doing so, they rode roughshod over the regulations currently in force, with the damaging consequences with which we are all familiar.

The debate on the report by Mr Hatzidakis, whom I congratulate, provides us with a good opportunity to get to grips with the political dimension of the current situation and to try to find a solution to it, in line with the decisive reform of the trans-European networks policy which is due to be implemented in the 2000-2006 period.

It is therefore the intention of our political group, as the amendments that have been presented have highlighted, to ensure that the networks are compatible with sustainable development and that the reform corresponds to the objective of uniting the whole Community by prioritising the remote regions, which have hitherto been neglected. Finally, it is our intention to upgrade the railways and to bring about the decentralisation of the networks, particularly with regard to airports and ports.

The concentration of road, airport and port networks is causing serious congestion and environmental problems which we must prevent.

I hope that we will be able to bring about the changes that the European Union needs in order to achieve the regional balance and social cohesion that we are advocating.

We must be aware that, at this precise moment, Regional Development Plans are being approved for the period 2000-2006 which will contribute to isolating even further the Objective 1 regions, which desperately need a modern connection to the whole of Europe, including high speed rail links.

Amongst these regions are my own country, Galicia, and the entire north-western Iberian Peninsula, covering both Spain and Portugal, an Atlantic region which is crucial to the whole of Europe.

Mr President, this annual report clearly shows that Europe is not providing itself with the means to implement its trans-European transport networks policy.

But apart from the simple budgetary and financial considerations, in more general terms, it is the Commission' s general guidelines in this area that are worthy of criticism.

We do agree, of course, with the principle that it is necessary to create trans-European networks for the people of Europe, for the movement of people and goods, for economic and social cohesion and for rail alternatives to the all-powerful motorway.

We cannot, however, accept the method that has been imposed or the solutions that have been proposed.

Are all the fourteen projects that have been accepted relevant or essential to the needs of local populations?

Have they been devised in association or in consultation, or is the rationale of the trans-European networks, as the report implies, only based on the free market?

It is, moreover, not by chance that out of the fourteen projects, the seven whose timetable and financing are still in doubt are precisely those which do not only answer to the demands of profit.

The most negative aspect, however, seems to be the financing.

It is based on the principle that public funds cannot be increased, which is a moot point.

It therefore proposes to have recourse to private funds, in the form of partnerships, and this, moreover, is an essential element of the project.

This approach to rail transport raises the issue of public service.

Clearly, if private operators are involved in the financing, they will aim for maximum profit.

We must make use of private companies because they profit from the infrastructures, but in the form of tax deductions and not by them having an interest in the capital of railway companies.

The idea of a European public rail service must be developed and we reject privatisation and access to the capital of rail companies, including for new projects.

Once again, Europe is responding to a genuine need on the part of the people, the need for a high-quality European rail transport network, which is outstanding for both passengers and staff, with a race for profit.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, first let me thank our rapporteur very warmly for his report.

The European Commission' s annual report on trans-European networks once again sets out the progress made with many transport projects and emphasises the important part the TENs play in protecting the environment.

I take the view that the 14 projects decided at Essen play a very significant role in the extension of the European transport networks and, like many speakers before me, I want to stress the enormous importance of the Brenner base-level tunnel.

Alpine transit must be looked at and understood as an overall problem.

Certainly Austria, France and the neighbouring states are affected most.

To show you or make you more aware of the seriousness of the situation, let me tell you that about 30% of transit traffic round Switzerland goes via the Brenner, which means that Austria bears the main burden.

It should also be noted that in Austria, 80% of goods are carried by road and only 20% by rail, while in Switzerland the proportion is exactly the reverse.

When some people ask why Austria is getting so agitated, since surely there is a similar volume of traffic elsewhere too, for instance in the Ruhr region, I have to reply yes, that is true, but the topographical features of Tyrol, of the Inntal, simply differ from those in other areas, such as the plains.

Moreover, the Inntal in Austria is one of the most densely populated regions.

Alpine transit is an integral problem which needs to be addressed in integral terms.

We cannot look separately at Brenner, toll roads and Alpine transit.

As for carrying out the construction timetables, I can say that we already have definite construction schedules in the Lower Inntal.

Now we also need a clear political resolve, and not just on the part of the Member States.

I would consider the transport costs directive an appropriate legal basis.

I think that would give us sound financing.

I call for public-private partnerships, for I think working together is the best way to succeed.

We have a massive problem with north-south transit.

I am against further studies of the Brenner Pass, for we already have enough of them as it is.

What we need is to complete the Brenner base-level tunnel rapidly, for the sake of the population concerned, the environment and a sustainable, forward-looking transport policy.

Mr President, Commissioner, let me add a few comments to what has been said today about the Brenner base-level tunnel, most of which I more or less support.

The Brenner is a particularly good example of the problems besetting trans-European transport today.

Transport by rail, at least to the south of the Brenner, is not operating and the international link is not operating either.

That is why we have such major problems today and if we also need a base-level tunnel because of these mistakes and problems I would suggest that we approach the matter with great sensitivity, and that we proceed with care, for this is a project for centuries to come.

If we do decide to undertake it, we need to choose the environmentally cleanest, economically soundest option, as well as the most functional option.

That is why I have tabled a minor amendment to paragraph 7.

Perhaps we do not need another study, but we should weigh things up properly and select the best project.

I have put one of these projects before the Transport Committee.

There are few better or equally good ones.

We must choose the best because our transport policy, and therefore the EU, will also be measured by this small project.

Mr President, we support the development of a trans-European transport network which will favour rail transport over road transport, on the condition, however, that the development of the great trans-European lines does not prejudice suburban transport or so-called district lines.

Rail transport, the main lines as well as the district ones, should be a public service, which aims to meet the needs of the population, not to generate private profit.

The participation of private capital will necessarily result in a quest for profit, to the detriment both of users and of those who work in the sector.

Far too many recent disasters, particularly the one at Paddington station in Great Britain, illustrate the incompatibility between the quest for profit and safety.

As stipulated in the explanatory statement of the report, public investment is continually decreasing and in less than twenty years, has fallen from 1.5% of the European Union' s GNP to 0.9%.

This has resulted in falling standards in rail transport as a whole as well as staff reductions, which has contributed to keeping unemployment levels high.

If the Member States of the European Union do not adopt a new policy, or, in other words, if they do not prioritise investment in public services rather than endless subsidies to the bosses, any decision on a genuine public transport service operating on a European scale under the best safety conditions will remain nothing but empty rhetoric.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, the Commission' s report states that 1998 saw the consolidation of the trans-European networks and outlines the progress made with various projects in the area of transport, energy and tele- and data communications.

It must, however, be pointed out that the European Union' s budgetary resources fall considerably short of the requirements and the challenge generated by the establishment of a trans-European transport network.

Unless there is an increase in the financial contribution made by national, regional and local public bodies and by the private sector, we will not see any significant progress in this area in the foreseeable future.

I should nevertheless like to stress the fact that recourse to private finance should never be an obstacle to the development of communications in regions which currently have a per capita income well below the Community average.

With regard to the future review of the guidelines for trans-European transport networks, I feel I must once again draw the Commission' s attention to the need to attach greater importance to improving access to Europe' s remote and isolated regions, and to focus particularly on establishing sustainable transport networks.

The impact of such investments on the economy of these regions and on employment is a crucial factor in the socio-economic development of these regions.

The Commission' s work programme for the year 2000 lays down that the review of the guidelines for trans-European transport networks must concentrate on reducing bottlenecks in order to rationalise traffic in Europe and to make it flow more freely.

As I understand it, this amounts to saying that the review currently being prepared will mainly concern the central regions of the European Union, which are the main victims of these congestion problems.

I can only hope that this hypothesis does not mean that the remote and, to an even greater extent, the extremely remote regions might only be incidentally affected by this review.

This fear, which has been mentioned several times by many of my colleagues, led me to table an amendment to this effect, which was adopted by the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism and which features in Mr Hatzidakis' s excellent report.

I would be most grateful to you, Commissioner, if, today, you could allay my concerns.

Mr President, growth and employment in Europe depend to a large degree upon exploiting European infrastructure effectively.

We should therefore have already set in motion the TEN projects that have still to get off the ground.

It is no secret that I am very much in favour of a permanent link between Denmark and Germany, and I am glad that the new Danish Minister for Transport is also a supporter of the project.

However, I am a little put out that German politicians are rather less enthusiastic.

There has previously been some doubt as to whether a permanent link across the Fehmarn Belt is the way forward, but any such doubt has now been shown to be groundless.

All the inquiry reports from the Danish and German Ministries of Transport show that there are neither environmental nor financial problems with building a bridge.

With a faster and easier link between Denmark and Germany, we can build bridges to the new democracies in the East.

We are not only building a bridge in physical terms, for practical purposes.

We are building a bridge between countries to help industry and for human, political, social and cultural reasons.

Building a permanent link between Germany and Denmark will create many new and much-needed jobs in the area.

There are almost always people who automatically say 'no' to anything new.

Anything which brings about change is a little frightening, whether it be EMU, the euro, environmentalism or a bridge.

One should not, however, be afraid of something good.

A link across the Fehmarn Belt is an exciting, rather than a frightening project.

Finally, I should like to add my voice to the call to increase the budget appropriations for the trans-European transport networks, as they are quite inadequate.

Improved growth and employment require sums of a quite different order.

Mr President, when, at the Essen Summit, the necessary extensive investments in infrastructure were decided upon, it was mainly a question of motorways and high-speed trains crossing national frontiers in a Europe where investments have traditionally been made principally in the individual countries.

That is precisely why this decision was so extraordinarily important.

A properly functioning internal market will never, of course, be possible without extensive investment in this area.

Today' s report nonetheless raises a number of questions about how we are actually to follow up our various decisions.

A few of these TEN projects have been carried out within a reasonable timeframe.

Personally, I am very glad that one of these projects in particular has been carried out, namely the permanent link across the Sound between Sweden and Denmark which is to be opened on time in just a few months.

I am more doubtful, however, where a number of the other projects are concerned.

As quite a number of people here have said, many of these projects are being developed awfully slowly.

The rapporteur who, by the way, has done a quite excellent job, has expressed his concern about this.

It is, indeed, very worrying when these ventures are not taken seriously.

Let me give an example of this.

It concerns the Nordic triangle, designed to link the Scandinavian capitals by high-speed train and motorway.

This is something which the countries concerned have undertaken to carry out, but it is a terribly slow process.

Money is forever being transferred to other projects which are obviously considered more important than this major European project.

This happens because there is every opportunity to transfer money in this way, there being no proper deadlines for when the projects concerned are to be carried out.

Neither the road nor the railway ventures are, therefore, going to be finished within a reasonable period of time.

I should therefore like, here today, to ask the Commission' s representative a number of questions.

When does the Commission think that the Nordic triangle and the other TEN projects will be complete?

What is the Commission actually doing to make sure that they are in fact completed?

Is the Commission prepared to commit itself to establishing specific deadlines for completing the outstanding projects and, subsequently, also to ensure that these deadlines are met?

Mr President, I would firstly like to express my sincere gratitude for the work accomplished by Mr Hatzidakis, chairman of the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism, on the review of the trans-European networks which, in the coming months, I will have to present to this House.

I believe that his work will contribute decisively to the documents which the Commission will produce.

I would also like to express my thanks for the contribution made by Mrs Sbarbati, draftsperson of the opinion of the Committee on Budgets, as well as for the interventions of the other speakers who have participated in this debate.

I believe that, as well as analysing the situation, the most important thing is to look to the future.

Accordingly, I will take this opportunity to make some observations on behalf of the Commission.

Firstly, I fully agree with Mr Hatzidakis on the importance given to Community policy on trans-European networks and I also share Parliament' s concern, expressed not only by Mr Hatzidakis, but also by the draftsperson of the opinion of the Committee on Budgets and by other MEPs, on the need for this policy to be provided with adequate financial resources.

In this respect, I would like to thank Parliament for its support for the provision of a total of EUR 4.6 billion for the period 2000-2006 for this chapter.

Nevertheless, I should remind Members that, every year, the Commission gives consideration to projects which amount to three times the amount allocated annually in this budget.

At the same time, there is an agreement by all parties not to increase the overall budgets and, in this respect, you have also heard my colleague, Mrs Schreyer, talk of our current budgetary difficulties resulting from new needs and matters of urgency, such as meeting the Union' s main political commitments following the war in Kosovo.

In this respect, I share the European Parliament' s concern with regard to the adequate funding of transport networks, but I believe that we can jointly assume some of these responsibilities.

I would like to remind you that we know that Community support for projects carried out during 1996, 1997 and 1998 has accounted for 30% of the total, which is a very significant figure.

It is true that these include projects in Objective 1 areas and cohesion countries, which has allowed the percentage of cofinancing to be greater.

However, I must tell you that we cannot provide you with overall information, because we are not only talking about Community finance but also about finance provided by individual countries and private sectors in some cases, as well as regions and local authorities.

Therefore, we can only provide the information which is available to us and make analyses based on that data.

We therefore reiterate something that Mr Jarzembowski said, which is that some of those responsible are from outside the Commission and, of course, the will of the different Member States of the Union to promote and implement these projects is of crucial importance.

You say that some projects are being delayed.

In this regard, I would like to say that the target date is 2010.

There is therefore still time to implement them within the time limit.

Furthermore, some of the projects present great technical difficulties.

I will concentrate for a moment on one of the most talked-about projects: the Brenner base-level tunnel.

That tunnel is a symbolic project as far as the European Union' s technological capacities and its ability to act are concerned.

We are talking about 54 kilometres of tunnel in one of our most mountainous areas, with a series of unknown factors and uncertainties which require that the project be guaranteed as far as possible before we make such a huge investment as the one required for the Brenner tunnel.

In order to carry out the Channel Tunnel project, it was necessary to carry out major studies before establishing the routes and detailing and beginning the project.

This is also true in the case of the Brenner.

It is perhaps better to begin something late, but to begin with all the guarantees in place, than to find half way through that the studies have not warned us of some difficulty or other, meaning that we have to go into reverse, which would cause even greater delays.

In fact, new studies are under way, through an agreement between a group of interested parties, to determine the definitive route of the Brenner tunnel.

It has not been abandoned, it is just that it is an enormously complex project, ladies and gentlemen, and we must understand that these studies will probably take a further five years to complete.

I want to make this very clear.

We are talking about very far-off dates, but this does not mean that there is no will.

On the contrary, there is an absolute will.

This must, however, be based on the certainty that the project can be carried out in a way which will not damage our credibility.

Furthermore, I would like to point out that the level of funding in terms of the total appropriations for the 14 principal TEN projects has been 60%.

That was the percentage which you, the Parliament, considered appropriate in your most recent resolutions.

It is midway between your initial proposal and the Council' s proposal.

In reply to some of the questions raised, I would like to tell you that, with regard to the changes to the financial rules for the trans-European networks approved last year, new financing possibilities were created by means of partnerships between the public and private sectors.

These partnerships will be promoted in various ways. Firstly, thanks to the introduction of a multiannual indicative programme which will allow for private sector support with greater security and where the developers will enjoy guaranteed Community funding for several years.

That programme will cover the period 2001-2006. Secondly, the budget line for trans-European networks will contribute risk capital financing, which could promote - and I hope this is the case - the creation of investment funds geared to the TENs and, to this end, we have already asked for expressions of interest.

We are about to review the guidelines on the trans-European transport networks.

I will be presenting this review report and an initial proposal shortly.

However, it must be said that the objectives of the trans-European networks are the development of the single market and social and economic cohesion. I would like to make this very clear.

Therefore, the remote regions, the extremely remote regions and the least developed regions must be at the heart of Community action. However, resolving bottlenecks does not harm the remote regions.

I would like to give one very clear example: the bottleneck on the railway in Bordeaux. Does this affect France?

Yes, of course it affects south-west France, but only to a degree. Its real impact is on the whole of the centre and west of the Iberian Peninsula, that is, most of Spain and Portugal.

So when we clear a bottleneck in Bordeaux, we are in fact benefiting the development of an area of the Iberian Peninsula.

What I mean to say is that acting in a central area does not always harm the interests of the remote areas, but, on the contrary, in many cases it is perfectly interrelated.

Mr President, lastly, I would like to refer to the question of the intelligent management of traffic.

This aspect will also be included as a key element in the review of the trans-European networks.

I would like to congratulate Mr Hatzidakis once again and express my gratitude for his work as well as that of the other speakers.

The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 a.m.

The next item is the report (A5-0075/2000) by Mr Sterckx, on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism, on the communication from the Commission to the Council, the European Parliament, the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions: The European Airline Industry: from Single Market to Worldwide Challenges [COM(1999) 182 - C5-0110/1999 - 1999/2113(COS)].

Mr President, Commissioner, the question you are really asking in your communication is: what does the future hold for the European aviation industry?

That is the key question approximately ten years on from the start of liberalisation within that sector.

Liberalisation, as you point out in your communication, set a growth process in motion; new companies have sprung up, new routes have opened, new air fares have in fact been put in place, and so this has attracted a new kind of public to the aviation industry.

The existing large and small national airline companies have become more profitable and have started to operate more efficiently without government funding.

All these aspects demonstrate that liberalisation has stirred the market.

We could say that passengers have generally benefited from liberalisation, but not all of them.

For example, it is evident that the benefits in business class are only minor compared to those in other passenger categories.

We now wonder how solid the basis for the European aviation industry is.

In your communication, you stated that fragmentation is still far more pronounced here than it is in the United States.

We have more or less the same number of airline companies, but their share of the global market is 38%, whereas ours is 27%, which is a huge difference.

You also stated in your communication that the profitability of our companies is considerably less than that of our American counterparts.

We also question the viability of the new companies which are appearing on the market, because how long will they last and how solid are they?

One cannot help but wonder how many of these will still be operating within the European market in ten years' time.

Also, how tenable and sustainable is the growth we have witnessed within this sector over the past decade?

We are faced with an overcrowded airspace, or should I say a badly managed airspace?

We have congested airports to contend with and this is why, Commissioner, it is of great importance that you at long last make a proposal on the management of slot allocations for airports.

I think this is a matter of life and death, especially for small companies starting out in the aviation industry.

We have also asked ourselves about social development and the rights of passengers.

This is why I wanted to ask you what the outcome was of the agreement recently reached on Gibraltar on this matter.

Is that in any way related to aviation?

These are questions which we are still left with.

Important steps still need to be taken after liberalisation.

Firstly, air traffic control should, of course, be Europeanised.

This topic is also covered in Mr Atkins' report and I will be tabling an oral amendment on this matter tomorrow, to replace 'privatisation' by 'liberalisation' .

This was agreed upon in conjunction with the large political groups.

It is clear that another aspect, namely safety, should also be Europeanised.

A European Aviation Safety Authority should therefore be set up as a matter of urgency.

It is obvious that the Member States need to take a step back as far as these two aspects are concerned.

I will now move on to the key point in your communication, namely the fact that there is no external policy for European aviation, in other words that the rights with regard to third countries have been negotiated bilaterally.

This, of course, determines the entire structure of the aviation industry in Europe.

Normally speaking, after a liberalisation process, companies tend to operate in tune with the market which has been liberalised.

This is actually quite rare in the world of aviation.

An attempt to that effect was made by KLM and Alitalia, but this has now been abandoned, due in actual fact to a number of problems related to nationality, if I can put it that way.

A merger between Swissair and SABENA is still on the cards, but we rely there on an agreement with Switzerland which we will be discussing this week and on a forthcoming referendum in Switzerland.

What is happening is that, although European companies join forces with their American counterparts, they play second fiddle to the Americans.

This is why I, as rapporteur, have a few questions with regard to your proposal to establish this common transatlantic air space.

I am in favour of this in principle, but I do wonder whether we are not rushing into things or whether this is not too big a step, considering there is no solid base in place for the European aviation industry.

A number of very complex problems need to be solved first before we can take the second step.

As rapporteur, I am personally quite suspicious of America' s nationalism when it comes to transport, including aviation.

Negotiations must clearly be held with a great deal of openness and reciprocity, as it is put, and the European companies must have exactly the same rights as the Americans, otherwise negotiations are bound to break down.

Only then, as things currently stand in European aviation, will we be capable of competing with the Americans within an open market.

An important question is: what do we do if we cannot pull it off with the Americans?

What do we do then on our own?

How viable is the European industry if it is confined to the European boundaries and to those bilateral agreements?

What is more - and I have skated over this aspect in my report, but Mrs Lucas has drafted a report on the environment which deals with this at length - we need to acknowledge that there are limits.

The environment too has its limits and this is an important, in fact, vital question which we may need to ask ourselves, not so much following on from my report but following on from Mrs Lucas' report.

Secondly, intermodality is highlighted in my report too.

I think that the Commission too should be clear about this and should issue proposals to promote intermodality.

Trains and planes could work together very well in a number of areas.

At all events, Mr President, I would like to conclude by saying that liberalisation has been hugely important.

I am well aware of this, although we are not even halfway there.

In order to improve the current situation, we need to receive from the Commission proposals, concrete action plans and legal texts which we can debate within the very short term.

It is also clear that the Member States have a very important responsibility and that a great deal depends on them and on how much they are prepared to put into creating real European aviation and a real European aviation industry.

I think, therefore, that Parliament too, in tandem with the Commission and the Council, cannot work fast enough on this score because the world will not wait for us.

As such, we need to get a move on, otherwise we will be buried under an avalanche.

Mr President, as draftsman for the Industry Committee I just want to pick up on a couple of areas which I think need to be mentioned today.

Aviation is without doubt one of the most exciting and stimulating industries.

The opportunities for business and job creation during the last decade have played a major part in the economies of countries in Europe and worldwide.

For example, aviation in the UK contributes GBP 10.2 billion a year to the UK GDP and generates and supports 380 000 indirect and induced UK jobs.

It transports GBP 35 billion' s worth of UK exports, maintaining unrivalled access to the global market, and this is multiplied ten-fold across the European Community.

When I began my career in the aviation industry 30 years ago, very few people could afford to fly.

But today, with the liberalisation of the market, flying for most people has become a way of life.

The report covers a number of areas and outlines fairly accurately the way the aviation industry has developed over the last ten years.

But in a number of areas there is little recognition by the Commission of the benefits the aviation industry, including aerospace, have brought and I am disappointed by the negative attitude towards the industry in this paper.

One of the key factors in the success of the last 20 years has been the privatisation of the national state-owned industries which began in the 1980s.

I also welcome the Commission statement that subsidies have now ceased.

When we look at the choice of routings and so on for the consumer, air fares have come down considerably over the last few years.

Fares from the UK are amongst some of the lowest, showing what effect having three major carriers operating out of one country can have on competition and pricing.

This has produced the real benefits and other countries need to take a look at this.

The report outlines at some length the expansion in capacity which has taken place in the European aviation industry, particularly across the north Atlantic, but that is obviously quite a complicated issue.

I fully accept that there are challenges which need to be addressed such as problems with congestion, in particular air traffic control.

However, I believe that the Commission has a responsibility to put forward more balanced views which do not undermine the value and success of an industry which has made an enormous contribution, not only to the countries of the European Union but worldwide.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the Group of the European People' s Party (Christian Democrats) and European Democrats supported Mr Sterckx' s report in the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism as it will support it in plenary.

The key message, as Mr Sterckx has reiterated, is that basically liberalisation has succeeded in principle.

As a result we now have substantially more competition. This stronger competition has also created some movement in price levels, not in all market areas, certainly, but in many of them.

Furthermore, what many people feared has not come to pass, namely job losses and deteriorating working conditions, and instead we continue to see rising employment.

In the space of about eight years, employment figures have risen by nearly 50 000 and there really has been no evidence of a lasting decline in working conditions unless we look at this in the context of what has happened nationally, which is that national airlines are in a sense being transformed into modern service industries, which is, of course, accompanied by changes in working conditions and their modernisation.

Nonetheless I am glad that the report does address the fact that we, of course, expect common rules - even if for a different reason, namely because of safety aspects -with regard, for instance, to working hours and flight times, because, at the end of the day, it is training and actual working conditions that will partly determine how safe we can make European aviation over the long term.

Mr Sterckx also made it clear, however, that liberalisation concerns only a very small area of European air transport, which can largely be regarded as successful, but there are many other areas that currently continue to give us problems, whether these are old, unresolved problems or new ones.

We are a long way from having a uniform, common European air transport market, in principle.

I think in future we will have to deal with four important points.

Mr Sterckx has already addressed some of them, and I would like to raise them again.

In my view, the Member States' airlines must, of course, be in a position to have equal access to the international market, like other airlines in the world.

At the same time, we must ensure that the airline companies really do achieve economic stability, which means we have to try to ensure, through appropriate competition on the ground, that the immense costs of, for instance, landing and ground handling charges are reduced to the kind of level that is usual in other countries of the world.

Secondly, let me emphasise that we do want to see more air transport.

It enhances individual mobility. But, on the other hand, we must not disregard environmental conditions.

My position is fairly clear on this point. Bans are not the right method; instead we need incentives, we need to give support for the airlines to move towards reducing emissions by using modern fleets that use less kerosene and also produce less pollution.

Thirdly, in my view we need to improve consumer protection because obviously the growing number of passengers brings increasing problems with it and, in this regard, the passenger deserves more protection than the airline.

My fourth and final point, and the one I consider most important, is that we must ensure that we also have a single European airspace and we must establish a uniform system of air traffic control in order to reduce delays and congestion.

Mr President, I would like to congratulate Mr Sterckx on his report.

It is the first in a series of reports on aviation which we will be dealing with in the course of this year.

We support the development of a European aviation space encompassing all aspects of aviation, ranging from delays to environmental harm.

In addition, we think that, at world level, the Union must be able to show a united front on this matter.

We also have our doubts regarding the restrictions and automatic responses generated by national sentiment which, to this day, play such a significant role in European aviation.

I would like to illustrate this with air traffic control, for example.

These national responses and preferences also hamper cooperation, as we recently witnessed in the unfortunate breakdown in cooperation between KLM and Alitalia.

We will not protest in cases where liberalisation can help achieve a more effective policy, but it is a pragmatic approach and not a dogmatic one.

Indeed, where the interests of public services or the environment so require, we will not hesitate to advocate an active stance on the part of the authorities.

We would also draw attention to the human side of developments within aviation.

This is dominated by three issues: firstly safety.

We back the setting up of a European Aviation Safety Authority which unites as many countries as possible.

Our amendment on widening the scope in this way has been adopted by the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism.

Common standards and inspection agreements boost safety levels.

This should not be restricted to the EU.

We can and must help improve safety agreements throughout Europe.

One is led to believe that lower costs as a result of liberalisation only have benefits.

This may be the case for some passengers, but upon examination of recent annual reports of major aviation companies, this conclusion does not immediately follow.

Personnel too experience the adverse, social effects of cost reductions.

We do not want to let this situation get out of hand, especially when safety issues can be in the balance if, for example, pilots have to fly long hours.

Finally, air fares may seem low, but often the overall interests of the passengers are hardly taken into consideration.

It is no fun having to wait for hours because of a delay, on top of which you are likely to miss your connecting flight.

It is even less fun if you become the victim of overbooking.

Mr Sterckx rather feebly states in his present report that information on these situations must be made available to passengers.

A fat lot of good that will do them.

Passengers have rights and, more than anything, they have the right to be informed at the time when a problem arises.

As I understand it, airports will be installing notice boards this summer on which they will display passenger rights in the event of delays, for example.

This is a step in the right direction.

It would be better still if the amendment on passengers' right to information tabled by the Group of the Party of European Socialists were to be adopted in addition.

We are always harping on about consumer interests, well, here is one.

Mr President, I only have a few minutes so I want to focus on just one particular point in the Commission communication.

Let us recall that the title of this communication is 'From single market to worldwide challenges' .

Yet one of the remarkable things about this communication is that it does not appear to recognise that one of those worldwide challenges must be how the airline industry will respond to increasing environmental concerns and likely environmental legislation.

Of all the many words in this communication, just one short paragraph is devoted to this issue.

As rapporteur for a very good Commission communication on aviation and environment I know that the issue of environment and competitiveness is a very live one with strong feelings on both sides of the debate.

For example, that communication starts by saying that the growth of the air transport industry is, and I quote, "unsustainable and must be reversed because of its impact on climate and on the quality of life and health of European citizens" and it goes on to say very clearly that 'business as usual' is not an option.

It is quite obvious that aviation' s response to environmental concerns will have effects on competitiveness, some positive and some negative.

Let us not underestimate either the impact of aviation on the environment.

A report launched in the UK just yesterday by a number of environmental NGOs including Friends of the Earth forcefully made the case that one flight to and from the US could cause more pollution than the average UK motorist causes in a year.

It makes the case that the world' s 16 000 commercial jet aircraft produce more than 600 million tonnes of CO2 every year - nearly as much as all the countries of Africa put together.

It makes the case that the number of people flying will almost double in the next fifteen years.

I would ask therefore that we see a bit more environmental mainstreaming.

Rather than confining the environmental aspects of aviation to a report solely devoted to that subject, we should be seeing environment threaded through all approaches to this policy area, particularly one which purports to be addressing issues of competitiveness.

Mr Sterckx has included environment in this own report.

I very much welcome that but I would also like to see environment automatically mainstreamed through all Commission reports and communications.

Mr President, in the first half of the previous century, many opinion formers claimed that the air offered enough space for unlimited growth in international transport.

There was ground congestion and new infrastructure was very expensive, but anything was still possible in the air.

Meanwhile, the countries at the heart of the European Union have been faced with unexpected problems.

Thanks to free competition, record low prices and cheap, tax-free fuel, the airspace has become overcrowded there.

Gigantic airports emerged near Paris, London, Frankfurt and Amsterdam with a great deal of transit movement for travellers from outside Europe.

These airports continue to grow and they place a huge burden on their surroundings.

Not only do those living near the airports complain, passengers too are dissatisfied.

They are increasingly faced with delays.

The air has more or less reached capacity levels in that respect.

Thanks to new navigation techniques and low-noise aircraft, it may be possible to increase the number of flights for a little while longer, but this will inevitably have an adverse effect on the environment, safety and the reliability of the service.

We have reached the limits of growth.

Further growth of freight and passenger transport will need to be accommodated by alternative means: by rail or on water.

Meanwhile, however, competition between air traffic - which is favoured by government policy - and trains and ships has become fierce.

This is why the proportion of international train traffic and freight transport by river and canal has dropped so dramatically.

There are considerably fewer international through train connections within the European Union compared to 20 years ago.

In the remote areas of the European Union, however, it seems as if time has stood still there.

People still complain there that remote regions and islands are not sufficiently serviced.

New, small airports are expected to perform miracles as they could attract rich business people and masses of tourists.

What is more, the areas surrounding the Mediterranean tourist beaches are also increasingly afflicted by accidents, noise and air pollution, and nature reserves are being sacrificed.

During the discussion on Mr Sterckx' s report, it has already transpired in the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism, as well as from amendments tabled on this topic, that opinion is strongly divided on this matter within Parliament.

Certain Members favour an increase in the number of aircraft, the lifting of all legal restrictions in this connection and continued reductions in air fares.

I hear this opinion mainly from those Members who endlessly complain within the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism that their flight was once again delayed and who are very much guided by these personal experiences in their vision of transport policy.

According to other Members, air traffic has grown far too much over the past decades.

In their view, the conservation and protection of the natural environment are far more important than fast or cheap transport, and air traffic has already supplanted far too much rail traffic.

It is high time that the safety and health of passengers, personnel and population on the ground were made the top priority.

My Group is very much in favour of the second opinion, relating to the environment, safety and the interests of personnel.

Air traffic cannot continue to grow endlessly and we cannot afford to subordinate all kinds of other matters to this.

We consider that Mr Sterckx' s report falls short of being able to solve the actual problems but it is a first step in the right direction.

I am pleased that the rapporteur seemed prepared to adopt a number of amendments concerning safety and the environment at an early stage.

Mr President, the Sterckx report is excellent and develops a point of great relevance in great depth.

It may not be obvious, but air transport is not an end in itself: air transport moves capital, it moves industries - be it the tourist industry or some other industry - and it brings people into contact, not merely in the pursuit of leisure, but in order to clinch business deals.

The contribution made by air transport to the European and global economies is truly great, and it should therefore be both promoted and regulated.

Regulated in that, all too often, there is insufficient planning, airports are located in inconvenient places and airlines are prevented from expanding by the presence of military corridors or restrictions.

Clearly, we must not forget that the air industry is among the most global industries, for, nowadays, an aircraft can easily fly all over the world, especially if it is a high endurance aircraft.

Therefore, while nowadays, it is an easy matter to relocate an industrial plant, it is even easier to relocate an airline, in that the means of production itself is, by definition, mobile.

Then there is a problem of competition, particularly competition from the United States in the form of those huge carriers which are governed by standardised legislation which, I regret, is lacking in the European Union, both in the sphere of air traffic control - with the result that operational standardisation is lacking as well as legislative standardisation - and as regards the recognition of professional qualifications.

For example, even today, an Italian pilot with professional qualifications obtained in Italy cannot do the same job in Belgium.

Another issue to be resolved is the age limit.

Some countries of the European Union allow pilots to continue flying up until the age of 65, but in other countries they have to stop working at 60.

I therefore call upon the Commission to adopt common legislation governing the whole of the Union as soon as possible.

Mr President, aviation is undergoing turbulent times.

The report drafted by Mr Sterckx elaborates on the effects of strong growth within the sector.

The enormous competition within the industry has led to a price war in certain sectors.

The number of passengers and, alongside this, the number of flights, is growing at an alarming rate.

The rapporteur is looking for the solution to congestion in a common airspace and European air traffic control.

Competition also leads to lower costs.

The pressure on personnel in the sector is increasing both socially and financially.

It is vital to guarantee their rights.

I endorse the rapporteur' s observations that proposals are required which deal with the social dimension.

Passengers also suffer as a result of the commercial war.

Although air fares have come down in certain areas, there are situations in which their rights - including those in the event of overbooking - are under real threat.

This too needs to be regulated.

The impact of all these developments on the environment is of vital importance.

Achievements as regards innovations in terms of emission values, noise and harmful substances cannot offset the environmental damage caused by the dramatic growth in aviation.

And this is not likely to change in the foreseeable future

It is therefore necessary to consider the position which we want to, and must, accord aviation.

In some cases, only air transport is possible but in the case of holidays, for example, the increasing demand for transport can only be met through other means.

This report should also accommodate the downside of a worldwide aviation market.

Solutions which spring to mind in this respect include a common traffic control system, stimulation of technological innovation for engines and promotion of alternative methods of transport for passengers and goods, i.e. trains for passengers and coastal navigation for goods.

In my opinion, imposing VAT on flight services and excise on kerosene, which are, in fact, levied on other means of transportation - at intra-European level if necessary - will contribute to a more balanced view of the costs generated by the different means of transportation.

In short, the aviation industry is heading for stormy weather.

It is up to us to guide it through this in the interests of society.

In our opinion, the rapporteur is steering things in the right direction.

Mr President, Madam Vice-President, ladies and gentlemen, I just want to shed more light on one aspect of the Sterckx report, the question of airspace control, air traffic control.

I believe that paragraph 8 of the Sterckx report adopts the right approach, for we must look to the medium and short term.

I shall begin with the medium term.

In the medium term we must transfer regulative competencies for air traffic control to the European Union, something that is entirely feasible.

There is no point in people coming along and saying, well, Eurocontrol has far more members and is far better.

Eurocontrol does not work and that has been proven.

One reason is that it operates according to the unanimity principle and the principle of the lowest common denominator.

I think the European Economic Area sets a good example.

If the Community of 15 has the authority to set regulations, and if 12 countries want to join the EU in the next few years, then we will have reached the figure of 27.

If we follow the example of the European Economic Area with Norway and Iceland, then there will no problem with including Switzerland in the same system.

We therefore need EU competencies in this area, so that we can decide by a majority on the basis of Community law, rather than having to abide by unanimity and international treaties.

We also need private service companies to carry out the actual operations.

I admit that Mr Sterckx would like to see the term "privatisation" replaced with "liberalisation" .

I think we will be happy to endorse that.

But we need competition, and, of course, he agrees with us on that.

We must move away from a situation of monopolies and here I would like you to consider - although this is by no means a revolutionary idea - that if we have a single market on the ground, we could also have a single market in the skies, and that we should certainly allow different cooperating or competing service companies to control certain European aviation routes beyond the national borders, that we should move beyond the small-state mentality and offer services to airlines. We must go further in this regard.

In any case, we will be discussing this again in connection with the Atkins report.

I now turn to the short-term aspects.

We are all grateful to the Vice-President for setting up a high-level working party with a view to achieving results in the short term too.

I can only call on the 15 governments to instruct their civilian and military advisers to actually deliver solutions to the Vice-President by the end of the month, so that we will have something concrete to consider in June, and so that the Vice-President can respond to practical requests and take practical action, such as occasionally using military areas for civil aviation.

We must therefore proceed with practical solutions, for we cannot have the same situation this summer as last summer: congested airspace, stacked aircraft, the pointless, constant combustion of kerosene in the air, i.e. environmental pollution of the first order!

Let us hope that if the Member States really provide the Vice-President with what she wants, she can then present us with a good proposal that also includes short-term measures which can enter into force this summer.

Mr President, first of all I would like to thank Mr Sterckx for his report which addresses an important aspect of the civil aviation industry.

There is no doubt that civil aviation has grown considerably over the last ten years and it is predicted to continue growing in the foreseeable future.

There are those who would argue that this is due solely to the liberalisation process within that sector.

Whilst I and my Group recognise that this has had a considerable effect on aviation' s growth, other factors have also contributed.

In the initial stages of liberalisation, a lot of people lost their jobs, those who remained had to work longer hours and others suffered a deterioration in their working conditions.

Also, on some routes, fares increased while others were so cheap that airlines went bust or built up huge losses.

Another result of liberalisation has been the practice of co-sharing, of airline alliances, and in some instances even takeovers.

We are beginning to see now an increase in aircraft registered outside the EU similar to the maritime sector' s flag of convenience.

At my own airport in Manchester there are Icelandic-registered aircraft and I have been to Iceland more times than they have.

The reason why I mention these points is just to lend some balance to the argument.

It is very easy to say that liberalisation in aviation has been a glowing success, without ever recognising that there is also a negative side.

My Group accepts that gradual liberalisation is a way forward but only if safety, working conditions and passenger rights are safe-guarded and strengthened.

We accept that an increasing number of EU citizens are demanding better services.

My Group welcomes the latest decision by the Commission to launch a campaign to inform passengers of their rights - something which the airlines in particular have failed to do over many years.

We believe we need something more to ensure that passengers are better protected from delays and cancellations.

We have all heard the excuses offered by the airlines, ranging from "aircraft going technical" , which is aviation-speak for 'I' m afraid there are not enough people booked on so we are going to consolidate' .

"Air traffic delays" is the next one, but of course that is an easy excuse because there is never anyone from air traffic control there to say that is not the issue.

Then of course there is the 'get them on board' scenario, irrespective of whether the plane is going to leave or not.

Without doubt aviation has made considerable progress, but I also believe that aviation has a responsibility to its passengers, to its workforce, and also to the environment.

Finally, my Group looks forward to receiving from the Commission its new proposals regarding slot-allocation, even though they have been a long time in coming.

I hope this document will embody the view of the fair market access for all, in particular in clarifying the present legislative position regarding the trading of slots.

Mr President, the report we are discussing today deals with the results of the liberalisation of the air transport sector in the European Union, which was concluded in 1993.

We have supported this liberalisation process so that bilateral barriers may be lifted, ownership restrictions changed, technical standards harmonised, and suitable safety standards established and so that the conditions of liberalisation may promote greater transparency with regard to how air transport development policy is framed and allow, above all, the inclusion of environmental considerations in production within the aeronautical industry, in tariff policy and in the management of air traffic.

A key point raised by the rapporteur is the current situation in which, while the aviation industry is liberalised and operates in an open European market, the authorities which control the air space, the airports and the regulating bodies, as well as the companies providing services to the air transport sector, still operate from an excessively local point of view.

The rapporteur also mentions, as an unresolved issue, the continued state presence, in certain cases, in the ownership of national airlines.

Turning in particular to air traffic control, the development of a common system of air safety is a fine challenge for the future.

We must not forget that European airspace is a mosaic made up of 15 sovereign Member States, which, for a variety of reasons, mainly military, find it difficult to relinquish part of their sovereignty in this area.

To this end, we must concern ourselves with resolving the issue of the policy of privatising the operational bodies responsible for air traffic control.

With regard to charges, we share the Commission' s opinion that the costs over which the airlines have no control - ground assistance charges, airport taxes and atmospheric costs - must be transparent and non-discriminatory.

Turning to the Sterckx report, our contribution has concentrated on the environmental aspects related to it.

Our main criticism centres on the fact that the Commission, in its overall analysis, is trying to treat environmental, safety and health aspects in the aeronautical sector as a separate debate, by means of a separate communication, when, in reality, the impact of these factors on the future of the industry is crucial.

I would finally like to mention some basic points.

Airlines' pricing policy must include the external environmental costs of air transport. The regulation of slot allocation must be reviewed according to specific environmental criteria, taking account of noise and emissions into the atmosphere, and specific actions should be taken in order to strengthen intermodality with other trans-European networks, especially with railways, in light of the conclusions of the report on aviation and the global environment, which considers that more than 10% of European short-haul air traffic could change from air to rail.

Mr President, according to the Commission proposal adopted by our rapporteur, Mr Sterckx, the main stated aim is to liberalise air transport further and make it subject to the rules of the free market.

In this way, or so the Commission and our rapporteur tell us, we will see reduced expenditure on the part of airlines, better passengers services and more innovation.

It is therefore proposed that airports, with all the strategic importance which they have for a country' s safety, should be surrendered to the multinationals, despite the negative implications this would have, and that the aspirations of private-sector airport owners to reap maximum profits should be promoted.

It is also proposed that the sovereign right of each country to control air traffic in its air space should be surrendered to the European Union, on the pretext of establishing a uniform system of air safety. At the same time, the proposal calls for the privatisation of the operational bodies responsible for air traffic control which, it says, will be responsible for all the EU' s air space and will compete with each other.

This proposal, aside from abrogating the sovereign right of each country over its own air space, will give rise to confusion and will have particularly negative and dangerous repercussions on air safety as, objectively speaking, the competition which is being vaunted here as the trump card will be competition for maximum profit and not for maximum air safety.

The proposal argues that all this will reduce flight delays and hence the expenditure of the airlines.

Nonetheless, as experience with similar cases shows, it is doubtful whether a rise in profits will mean cheaper tickets or improved services. On the contrary, the situation will deteriorate.

It is also proposed to end state aid to airlines. This, however, will prove disastrous for air connections to and from disadvantaged areas.

This ignores the indisputable fact, as the experience of official organisations and trade unions for workers in the civil aviation industry around the world has shown, that constant reductions in the running costs of aircraft and ground services, together with wall-to-wall privatisation and the private sector' s goal of maximum profit, are the reason for the continuous rise in the number of air accidents.

These are the reasons why we shall be voting against the report.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, we have seen that the aim of Mr Sterckx' s report was to guarantee security, safety, consumer protection, fair competition and environmental protection.

We agree with these objectives, but we cannot support the project to create a regulatory authority for air transport safety.

We would like to have further information, particularly regarding the formation of this authority and we would like to know who would be responsible for monitoring it and by what means they would do so.

Furthermore, paragraph 8 calls for, and I quote, "the operational bodies responsible for ATC to be privatised" .

We do not think that this is a wise suggestion.

We are totally opposed to any kind of further privatisation, which could exacerbate the already deteriorating working conditions, in this area which is so closely linked to passenger safety.

This privatisation will result in major job losses and will certainly have a damaging impact on safety.

European skies are comparatively safe, and we want to see that safety preserved.

To conclude, in order to guarantee the primacy of safety regulations over all other considerations, air traffic control must remain a public and national service.

Mr President, I would first of all like to extend my sincere congratulations to Mr Sterckx on his excellent report.

It has come, I believe, at a time when the aviation industry is very much in the limelight, what with the takeover agreement between Swiss Air and Sabena, the breakdown of the marriage between KLM and Alitalia, as well as the vicissitudes surrounding Malpensa.

One could therefore say that there is a lot of commotion in the industry and this makes the report all the more topical.

Despite the many advantages described by Mr Sterckx, the liberalisation of aviation has not given us heaven on earth - or not yet anyway.

Just as Europe and EMU will need to be restored ecologically and socially, we will have to assimilate liberalisation with measures designed to better organise the airspace, increase safety and improve consumer and environmental protection.

It became apparent during the Strasbourg debate on night flights only two weeks ago that European legislation on aviation leaves a great deal to be desired.

Liberalisation without a common aviation policy and without a unified airspace will inevitably lead to problems.

It is estimated that air traffic will double in the next fifteen years.

At present, one in three flights is delayed and 450 000 flight hours are lost annually, and unless far-reaching measures are taken, the situation will only get worse.

What is actually preventing us from taking a number of additional measures, except for a powerful lobby of airline companies and a misconceived concept of sovereignty in some countries which refuse to let go of the management of their own national airspace?

We have a unified market, free movement of people and a single currency.

Why can we not move towards a single European airspace more rapidly?

Moreover, I fully endorse the idea of a common transatlantic air space, provided that this is not subject to unilateral European concessions.

This is most certainly a lesson we need to learn from the vicissitudes of the hushkits affair.

As far as the allocation of slots is concerned, I believe that more consideration should be given to environmental criteria, such as noise and exhaust fumes.

In addition, the government should invest more in measures which improve the quality of life of those living near airports.

This is often the case and is most needed at smaller, regional airports.

In summary, and by way of conclusion, I would like to advocate a pax avianautica. The ingredients of the pax avianautica which we need to pursue are a unified airspace, a common aviation policy, viable airports in a comfortable environment, increased safety and strong, European airline companies.

My home town of Ostend, with its noisy and unsafe, regional airport, will not fully understand the meaning of the European Union until we have achieved this.

Mr President, first of all I would like to thank our colleague, Dirk Sterckx, who has put an enormous amount of work into a report which is extremely important as it is a policy document that will lead to a great deal of further discussion.

Personally, I fully agree with the committee' s report, in that there is a need to open up the European skies, and with the need to unify them, since, although roads have been unified, the railways, the sea and the skies are not yet in that position.

It is extremely important that we move in this direction, but this should not be limited to the creation of a new market.

Personally, for several reasons, I feel that the tone of the report is excessively smug with regard to the liberalisation that has already taken place.

Firstly, the competition with which we are familiar has created two air spaces: that of the major routes on which we see congestion, delays, queues and broadly inadequate consumer protection laws, although prices have, of course, fallen. And then there is the air space of the smaller routes, which is expensive and which has largely been overlooked by the market.

I live in Bordeaux, but it is more expensive for me to fly from there to Lisbon than to fly to New York via Paris, and if I wish to fly to any other French city, I have to change aeroplanes at an airport in Paris.

I feel that these effects of liberalisation should not be ignored.

Secondly, I think that it is important to point out, as certain honourable Members have during this debate, that safety is not something that should be haggled over, and that European harmonisation of air traffic control must include this aspect of safety and it must not be handed over wholesale to businessmen.

I am one of those people who think that a European system of specifications should be introduced, some kind of agency, of course, but which would not necessarily involve privatisation and competition between the various air traffic control centres that exist at the moment.

Lastly, my third reason is that the Union' s regional policy, which accounts for the Union' s second largest budget, is meaningless without an effective planning policy.

Airports are highly decisive factors in influencing the location of businesses, senior officials, management, and therefore jobs to an area.

I fail to see why subsidies should be banned both for routes and for infrastructures, when certain remote regions do not have access to airports.

I feel that this aspect of regional planning should be taken into account.

Mr President, I would firstly like to thank the rapporteur, Mr Sterckx, as well as all the honourable Members who have spoken, for their active cooperation in the debate which has resulted in the report that we are discussing today.

To a large extent, the report confirms the analysis which was expressed in the Commission' s communication on the European air transport sector in the light of the global challenges, since, thanks to the liberalisation of this sector, we have been able to establish a much more competitive market than the one that existed previously. The importance of this is clearly illustrated by the increase in the number of airlines or the increase, much less spectacular perhaps, but significant nevertheless, in the number of routes where there are more than two competitors.

This gives an idea of how competition has increased over these years.

The opening up of the markets means that the sector has evolved in very diverse ways.

Airlines have developed innovative strategies in order to adapt to the growth of the market and the challenges of competition, but despite their restructuring efforts they still suffer a large degree of fragmentation and financial fragility in comparison with their principal international competitors, and I am referring specifically to the US airlines.

Ladies and gentlemen, some of you have spoken of a common transatlantic air space, and I would like to tell you that this is a very important issue.

The current situation is the result of the bilateral signing by various Member States of the European Union and the USA of the so-called "open skies agreements" which, in fact, are resulting in an internal fragmentation of the European market and making it impossible for European companies to restructure in such a way as to give them sufficient capacity to compete at an international level.

As you know, the Commission is totally against these bilateral open skies agreements.

It has appealed against them at the Court of Justice and I hope that the judgement of the Court will allow us to put an end to this situation and do what we have to do: enter into a bilateral agreement with the United States as the European Union as a whole, as a single internal market, and not divided up into different countries.

The opposite situation may undoubtedly suit the United States, but in no way does it suit European airlines and European interests.

One of the objectives of the negotiation of a common transatlantic air space is precisely to resolve, by common agreement with the United States, the current situation caused by the unilateral actions of the different countries which have signed up to these agreements.

I must point out, ladies and gentlemen, that the reality of the internal civil aviation market in Europe has been affected in a very negative way by this.

Just now some of you were talking about the KLM-Alitalia affair, which obviously involves other issues, but where, if the two companies had already merged, we would not have the problems that we are facing at present.

It is true that one trait of European liberalisation, when compared to US liberalisation, is that the granting of state aid has been authorised to support the restructuring of certain airlines.

It is true that the Commission authorised the injection of public capital - only once, as a one-off and subject to strict conditions - with the aim of helping companies to effectively carry out the transition from a regulated market to an open market.

We can now congratulate ourselves on the fact that the majority of European companies have completed the transition process and that transition can be considered to have been finalised.

I must say to those people who said that employment in the sector would be reduced, that this has not been the case and that neither has the quality of work deteriorated in any way whatsoever. On the contrary, more jobs and wealth are being created.

Companies have been able to confront the situation and liberalisation has significantly benefited consumers, although it is true that it has not benefited all consumers in the same way; for example, it has provided less benefit in relation to short-haul business trips where undoubtedly the lowest fares are not usually adequate and cannot be used.

I would like to end by referring to some of the questions that have been raised.

The issue of Gibraltar and the agreements reached recently by the two countries involved do not affect transport.

In this regard, therefore, the situation remains as it was before that bilateral agreement between these two countries of the Union.

I would also like to say that intermodality, which is already being considered, is a key element in the balanced development of mobility and air transport.

On the other hand, the question of slot allocation must be the subject of a Commission proposal since we cannot accept the current situation, in which many slots are lost, not all of them are properly used and, furthermore, let us be honest, there is a black market in them.

We will make a proposal to the effect that slot allocation should be an administrative right granted under licence.

We will try to ensure that there is greater flexibility in this allocation without causing any companies to go bankrupt.

With regard to Iceland, I would like to point out that it is an integral part of the European Economic Area and is therefore fully affected by the legislation.

I have left two issues until the end, not because they are less important, but because I wanted to focus on them for a moment.

The environment is a key issue in the development of aviation and, of course, efficiency in the consumption of fuel per passenger is improving every day, although it is true that the growth in air transport is exceeding the improvements achieved in efficiency.

We must therefore try to ensure that aircraft are modernised.

The question of noise is also a serious problem.

Lastly, I would like to make it clear that our primary concern, despite the fact that I have left it to the end, is safety.

That is the main and primary objective and all initiatives relating to air transport, the single airspace, the management of air traffic, the regulation of air transport, must take it fully into account. All our actions must take account, first and foremost, of the basic objective of safety.

The Commission does not hold any position in principle with regard to whether or not operational air traffic services should be privatised.

We believe that, before we reach that point, some associated services could be privatised, such as, for example, meteorological areas, which would allow for greater flexibility.

The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 a.m.

The next item is the oral question (B5-0218/2000) by Mr Pomés Ruiz, on behalf of the Group of the European People' s Party (Christian Democrats) and European Democrats (PPE-DE), on the appointment of senior Commission officials.

I would remind you that the vote on this matter will take place on 17 May 2000.

Mr President, the policy on Commission appointments is, without doubt, a key element within the framework of the reform to which President Prodi is committed.

It is a key element because this House shares the determination of Mr Kinnock, the Vice-President responsible for reform, to make appointments based not on national quotas, but on merit.

At the moment, therefore, while Parliament has still not taken a position on administrative reform - which we are observing with great attention and which we all hope will, this time, truly be a great success - I wish to say that it is appropriate at this stage to watch how the Commission is putting these good intentions, these projects to reform the appointments policy, into practice.

Furthermore, I believe that transparency is a good thing, not only in terms of the control which this House has to carry out, but it is also good in itself.

We should bear in mind that the appointments policy provides motivation in some cases and not in others. It promotes some officials at the expense of others and this policy may serve as an example, in terms of solving the principal problem faced by the Community structure - I am delighted that President Prodi and Mr Kinnock agree with this analysis - which is the lack of motivation amongst officials.

It is therefore very important that we try to see that good intentions are accompanied by good practices.

We all agree on the need to make progress on national quotas, and that appointments should be made on the basis of merit, but this cannot justify certain regional imbalances.

At the moment, according to the data available to us, which I am grateful for because the transparency process is a very good thing, most A1 or A2 senior officials are of the same nationality as the Commissioner, way above the German senior officials, for example.

To give another example, it cannot be put down to merit that there are 22 A1 or A2 Spaniards and 16 Belgian ones.

It is important that in a procedure which needs to be transparent, merit is easily explicable and comprehensible.

Merit cannot explain overall imbalances or imbalances in certain Directorates-General, in some of which there is a clear predominance of officials of a certain nationality.

It is also important that there is success in the search for equality between the sexes.

Nobody would say - I certainly would not - that the fact that there are so few A1 or A2 women is due to an assessment of merit.

On the contrary, we are surrounded by women who are much more valuable than us, my wife to name but one.

I must tell my friends that behind every great woman there is a great man, because everybody knows that my wife is worth much more than I am.

I am grateful to the Socialist spokesperson, who knows my wife, for agreeing with me.

It is important that we fulfil the commitment to double the number of female appointments.

We will closely monitor this appointments policy, which must be open and decisive.

We are happy to accept the new appointments within the Commission, in particular that of the Secretary-General.

Many believed that new policies require new faces and, in that context, perhaps the changeover of the Secretary-General should be supported.

At least that is what I think.

I would like to conclude by saying that when you come in July to explain the changes you are going to make to the procedures for appointments based on merit, I am sure you will have the agreement and support of all the Groups in this House.

Mr President, could I begin by thanking the honourable Member for his question.

I substantially agree with the points that he very effectively made.

In fact I would only diverge on one point.

He may be right that behind every great woman is a great man - there is a debate about that.

What I am certain is true is that behind every great man is a very, very surprised mother-in-law.

The honourable Member is, I know, very clear about the fact that responsibility for employment policies and patterns in the Commission, as a separate institution, lies with the Commission itself.

However, in order to provide useful information to this House and to the wider public, I am glad to respond to the two questions which the honourable Member has put down.

In order to give full and detailed answers to his first question, whilst saving some of the time of the House, I have sent a paper to the honourable Member listing the number of appointments of senior officials made in the Commission since taking office and also giving the names, nationalities and previous functions of all concerned.

To provide comprehensive detail, that paper also sets out the total number of senior officials from each nationality in the Commission and of the total numbers of all A grade staff of each nationality in the Commission.

A copy of that paper has also been provided to the secretariat-general of this Parliament for information and, naturally, it will be generally available to honourable Members.

In this oral answer, therefore, I will summarise the situation relating to senior appointments as at last Thursday, 27 April.

Since the present Commission took office, six appointments have been made involving promotions to grade A1.

They related to three officials of German nationality, two of Italian nationality and one of Irish nationality.

There have been fourteen other transfers at Director-General or Deputy Director-General level, which did not involve promotion in grade, although in four cases relating to Spanish, French, German and British officials, the changes meant advances in responsibility to full Director-General posts.

In the same period 19 appointments involving promotion to grade A2 have been made.

These related to officials of the following nationalities: 5 British, 4 Italian, 3 Belgian, 2 German, 1 Dutch, 1 French, 1 Spanish, 1 Irish and 1 Austrian.

Eleven transfers at Director level which did not involve promotion in grade have also been made.

In addition, two external appointments have been made in this period, one of a German national at Director-General level, and one of an Austrian national at Director level.

In summary therefore, a total of 25 promotions to senior appointments have been made since this Commission took office.

Six of the officials are Italian nationals, five are German, five are British, three Belgian, two Irish, one Dutch, one French, one Austrian and one Spanish.

These figures are accurate as of 27 April 2000.

As the House will know, in an international and multinational institution like the Commission, it is essential, as the honourable Member said, that the allocation of jobs broadly reflects the diversity of the Union that we serve and uses abilities effectively.

Those principles of balance and quality are clearly set down in the Staff Regulations and the Commission is committed to applying them fully at all levels.

As in any large organisation there is continual change amongst the staff of the Commission as people move, retire, become recruited, or promoted.

As a result, a still-photograph of the staff profile at any fixed time does not, and cannot, give a complete picture.

To be properly judged, balance must consequently be assessed and be maintained over the medium term and the Commission is also actively committed to ensuring that.

In response to the honourable Member' s second question relating to the rules and criteria applied to senior appointments, I draw the attention of the House to the decisions on the subject which the Commission adopted and published last September and last December.

Those decisions constitute specific legal rules for the institution rather than a generalised code of conduct.

Copies of those rules have been sent to the honourable Member and they are available on the Internet.

Against this background the following information may be useful to the House: the guiding principle of the system which the Commission uses is that appointments to all senior posts will be determined on evidence of the merit of candidates, including managerial capacity and other relevant abilities.

In order to take necessary account of the geographical balance to which I referred earlier and to do so in compliance with the essential principle of meritocratic appointment, specific provision is being made.

The Commission has rejected the concept of quotas because of its counter-productive rigidity, and also because it would breach Staff Regulations.

It has, however, adopted a decision to ensure that all Member State nationalities should be represented by at least 1 qualified person in the most senior post, Director-General or equivalent, and consistent with that, the Commission has given fresh emphasis to assess effectively proven merit as a prerequisite of highest positions.

The effects will be to maintain high standards of quality amongst the officials who lead the staff in the Commission in its vital policy, treaty application and management tasks and to do so whilst ensuring the broad geographical balance which is central to the character of an institution serving the whole of the Union.

The system for making promotion to the highest posts facilitates these purposes of sustaining merit and balance and I will summarise its operation for the information of the House.

Candidates for A1 and A2 jobs are interviewed by a panel of senior officials which has been assisted in the lifetime of this Commission by an advisory external expert with relevant experience in executive selection.

That panel makes an objective assessment of the professional and managerial qualities and capabilities that are relevant to the post and recommends a shortlist.

The shortlisted candidates are then interviewed by the portfolio Commissioner who is most directly concerned with the post and, in the case of A1 officials, by the Commissioner for personnel, who at the moment is myself.

The Commissioner responsible for personnel then formally proposes to the College the candidate who has been agreed upon with the portfolio Commissioner and with the President of the Commission.

In the case of appointments of Directors, the agreement of the relevant Director-General must also be obtained.

At all times the panel, the Commissioners and the College are conscious of the commitment to quality and balance and therefore apply that commitment consistently in the interests of the Commission and of the Union.

I can confirm that all appointments made by this Commission have been in accordance with these rules which are themselves based on Article 29 of the Staff Regulations and that will continue to be the course followed.

I apologise for the length of time I have taken up but, naturally, I wanted to give the House the most comprehensive information.

Mr President. I very much welcome the opportunity presented by the question tabled by my colleague, Mr Pomés Ruiz, to be able to start the debate on what will be many issues in connection with Commissioner Kinnock' s reforms.

I would like to thank him very much for the very comprehensive and open response that he has given to that question.

Today we have rightly focussed on what are the absolutely key appointments at the top of any organisation.

After all, your reform, Commissioner Kinnock, is going to have to be led from the top and we very much welcome the confirmation you have given about the way in which the top appointments have been handled.

What I would like to do in developing on Mr Pomés Ruiz' question is to table one or two other points to you in connection with some of the more detailed aspects of the White Paper and the change in organisation that you have proposed.

Clearly the very ambitious reform contained in your paper is going to be a formidable task for the managers you appoint.

To achieve your objectives of moving the Commission towards a world-leading international public service, it is clear that the appointments and capabilities of your team are going to be critical.

You say in your White Paper that there is a real need to raise management skills and create a common management culture across the Commission.

I would like to know first of all how far you feel that management culture is now being developed by your new top team and how far that is starting to be communicated through the Commission' s organisation.

The important and welcome news that we have had today about the appointment of a new Secretary-General, Mr David O' Sullivan, raises the question whether he has been involved already and will that have an impact on the development that you have already set in train.

The second point I wanted to raise has to do with what you identify in your White Paper - and I agree with this entirely - about the real challenges for any service organisation which is decentralising and delegating responsibilities to reporting managers, empowering them to take decisions and to have that all-important control of budget.

I would like your assurance that the new team that comes in has those skills and also, and this is particularly important, that it also has a commitment to developing team-work in the Commission.

This is going to become more and more important as we get more information-technology driven solutions, more horizontal team-working of the type that I know is moving into areas like the information society.

Can we have your assurance that your senior team is going to be open-minded and looking at these new solutions?

Finally, your White Paper quite rightly notes that action is going to have to be taken when managers are not performing to the expected standard.

It would not be surprising, given the changes, that there are some people who feel uncomfortable with this.

Can you confirm that probationary periods, as set out in your White Paper, have been included in the contracts for the new appointments, how long those periods are and that systematic assessments of performance are included in those appointments?

Mr President, I too would like to thank the Commissioner for his reply.

It is clear from the current debate that the European Parliament has asked the Commission to rotate senior posts and has already lent its support to this idea.

We have also asked to "de-flag" senior posts.

We want to see people appointed on merit and quality, and we as the Group of the Party of European Socialists very much welcome the action taken by the Commission so far, in response to Parliament' s requests.

We have also ascertained - and I must say that a number of the questions raised a moment ago are really starting to confuse the issue again - that the Commission is responsible for its appointments and that we as Parliament do not want to take the Commission' s place, especially not as far as appointments are concerned, because we would then be throwing everything back into disarray, and I felt that some of the questions were already heading in that direction again.

I would actually like to return to the very root cause of this discussion.

If it were to obtain these statistics, I believe that we already had them at our disposal.

If something else were going on, then we must have heard about it through the grapevine because over the past few weeks, rumour had it that some aspects were useless, that certain appointments or certain people had not been transferred and that some of them did not come up to scratch.

It has all gone quiet now.

All we have now is a number of very innocent, factual issues.

If this is about the internal reforms as a whole, then we could say: OK, here is a White Paper and here we have procedures we agreed on.

This very exciting and very extensive change is something both the Commission and Parliament want, but the ball is now back in the Commission' s court.

The Commission has to come up with proposals on these points.

Are we not up to speed, or is there something up with the Commission?

As recently as, let me think, seven months ago, we supported and appointed the Commission with an overwhelming majority, and now all of a sudden these questions are being asked.

Should this be seen as an attack on the Commission?

Is the Commission all of a sudden incapable or is this a sudden, inverse kind of declaration of support on the part of the Group of the European People' s Party (Christian Democrats) and European Democrats and that is why this Group is asking the Commission these questions?

Those seemed to be the undertones for a fleeting moment.

Our friends from the European People' s Party have thrown us into a bit of confusion because we are fully agreed on the key points.

The statistical data we received in this respect does not lead us to believe that anything should be amiss.

Neither have I heard that anything is wrong with the performance, quite the opposite, in fact.

That does not, of course, detract from the fact that, if you say you want to abandon national quotas, each one of us as we are here today would like to see some geographical balance in it all.

In fact, the Commission too has admitted to this, without rushing to attach national identity to the individual figures, individual posts, because we would then be back to square one, as we would be pushing aside the merits of the case and forcing the national flags back into use, which would take each one of us some time to digest.

I am speaking up today as a Dutch national.

Despite this, I do not think we should operate at national level but should cover a wider level.

Surely this position could not be any clearer?

I would like to add one more point which has not been discussed here but which I would like to bring up.

The question came up: should someone who has held a senior post be transferred to a job in the public sector elsewhere without any further ado?

This is a question which was asked originally, which has now disappeared, of course, and which has meanwhile been milked in the press.

What should we make of it?

In our opinion, we really need new standards.

This is what we asked the Commission for.

The Commission was willing to produce these new standards.

What you cannot do is judge the individuals who are not yet bound by these standards.

If you ask me, you would be shooting the Commission in the foot and, in my opinion, you would be shooting yourself in the foot more so than the Commission and this is not helpful.

In short, we are giving our wholehearted support to reform and we hope from the bottom of our hearts that the deadline is met.

Since Commissioner Kinnock is present today, I would appreciate it if he could confirm whether he is on target with his staff and people.

It is our task to give each other very critical guidance, and to ensure that reform is brought about.

We cannot see how these factual questions, which do not show up any defects, could contribute to this debate, unless there were ulterior motives towards the Commission from the start.

As I understand it, the salto mortale of the Group of the European People' s Party (Christian Democrats) and European Democrats could be interpreted as a declaration of support.

Mr President, Commissioner, it would naturally be rather difficult if Parliament were to take over the European Commission' s personnel policy.

In my opinion, we would then be far removed from the efficiency required by the Commission.

Because when you made your proposals back in January, and we studied them carefully, it was clear that the Commission' s appointment policy - and that is how we put it then - is a matter for the Commission and we should not interfere with it, unless there is obvious cause for this.

We continue to endorse the guidelines you gave at the time for this personnel and appointment policy.

First and foremost, appointments must be based on the candidate' s merits.

This is how it was described in your document and I think that this clause should be retained.

It is clear that we continue to support this.

A candidate' s aptitude for managing an office is one of the key aspects, and I heard you emphasise this in your reply a moment ago.

You made it clear once again what procedures are followed when appointing top officials.

You have also already stated in your action plan that a geographical balance should be kept, which was, in fact, what the question was about.

This too seems logical to me, yet it would not be beneficial if we were to rely on this provision too much and be too strict about it. After all, if you were to do this, in other words, if you were to weigh it up extremely carefully, then I think personnel policy would become impossible in the long-run and you would be very far-removed from the efficiency required in this type of matter.

On behalf of my Group, I would say that this question was somewhat superfluous.

One can enter into a large-scale discussion on the decisions taken today with regard to the nationalities of the people who have been moved, appointed or who have left.

The question which should be raised is whether or not this benefits the functioning of the Commission and have the procedures laid down by the Commission been followed?

This is the question we need to ask ourselves.

Whether the person involved is Dutch or of any other nationality is of little relevance in the great scheme of things.

What I do like, Commissioner, is that you, in your information, provide evidence of a transparent policy.

I also welcome the fact that, based on your information, it appears that there are no major imbalances.

I feel this should be acknowledged.

We have been given important information, in my opinion, and I would therefore like to say by way of conclusion: let us not stand in the way of the Commission' s reform process but support it instead.

We should not complicate matters - especially with regard to personnel policy, which is one of the most difficult topics - by asking questions which are not really relevant.

Mr President, in September the Commission adopted some excellent principles which were to be applied with regard to its staffing policy, and particularly in the appointment of senior officials, but let us now examine today' s appointments in the light of those fine principles.

I must enquire as to whether the panel actually interviewed the applicants, from whom the leader of the Institute for Future Studies was selected.

I somewhat doubt whether any lengthy interview process was involved in filling the post in which Mr Levi did so very well.

I would also like to mention that all the institutions should in fact adopt these rules concerning the appointment of senior officials, and we are finally able to say that the European Parliament has also adopted good principles regarding the appointment of senior officials, which must therefore take place very openly.

Let me make an observation regarding representation on a geographical basis. It is quite right that we should aim to move away from national quotas, but that should not mean we should have a hidden criterion that actually favours the notion of representatives of large Member States and major language groups in senior positions.

Finally, let me say a word about equality. Commissioner Kinnock faithfully made a list of the Commission' s senior appointments and promotions, but, Commissioner, you did not say how many women were nominated for, or promoted to, these posts.

I would ask you to take a look at your list with your "gender policy spectacles" on and tell us the answer, because the Commission really has to set equality targets a lot higher than it has ever done before.

Vice-President Kinnock, there is a strange atmosphere in this Chamber.

The PPE Group' s question for an oral answer was to be one of the major debates of a part-session - and a passionate plea was made for the debate to be held in April - but, today, the PPE Group is I know not where, for it is certainly conspicuous by its absence from this Chamber.

It may be that the decisions you adopted this morning have in some way assuaged the Group' s thirst for knowledge, but this Chamber appears to be unusually empty for a debate on such a major issue.

I supported the submission of the question.

I have been wondering since September, Vice-President, how it could be that such objective, such perfect, such universally acceptable criteria of competence, merit and so forth were met solely, surprise surprise, by officials living in or originally from certain island countries, while these same qualities did not appear to be present in officials from other, more misshapen countries - boot-shaped countries, for example.

Let us forget the figures for a moment and focus on the functions.

The A1 grade covers a wide range of concepts: an official could hold an A1 post and have important duties, such as Director-General for Development, for the Press and the Media or other Directorate-Generals, or he could be an aide.

How can it be - and this is a question which I continue to ask - that these criteria of merit, surprise surprise, have only worked in favour of certain nationalities?

This is what is to be inferred from a careful examination which is not merely concerned with numbers.

I continue to ponder this question, Vice-President, as I ponder the question of the appointment of senior Commission officials - officials or chefs de cabinet - who then unexpectedly book a flight and, via some European airport, London rather than Malpensa, desert the Commission for the private sector.

I feel that this is also a question which, although it does not form part of our question for an oral answer, would merit a debate at another time in its own right.

Personally, I feel very strongly that there is a need for this.

Lastly, I feel that the Commission is making the mistake of giving Commission staff themselves too much say in the selection of new staff. It should retain its right to make such decisions and not delegate this task to its administrative staff.

Mr President, first of all Mr Dell' Alba is certainly right with the first part of his question.

The tone of the question when it was put seems very different from the tone that we are hearing now in the Chamber.

First of all, we have to say that the White Paper reforms are progressing.

They are progressing slowly but Rome was not built in a day and we must remember that.

We all know that there is a timetable - one that we have all agreed to and must be kept.

What I would like to address, before I look at the substance, is the question behind this question, - that is what we really have to look at here.

It strikes me - and I will not be quite as subtle as Mr van den Berg - that the tone of this question seems to be the same tone as the Stauner report, the original Stauner report that was comprehensively rejected within the Budget Control Committee - the same tone that was set in the explanatory statement which was rejected by Parliament as a whole.

We are all desperate to see reform but it will take time.

The new Commission has been in office for only seven months.

It was approved by the European Parliament by a huge majority.

The question we really have to ask here is not to the Commission but to the PPE Group as to the motivation behind the question.

It strikes me as being clearly politically motivated, trying to undermine the work done on reform, trying to shoot this new bird down before it has taken flight.

This is because there is an element within the PPE Group, and I do not include Mr Pomés Ruiz in this, interested in wrecking the tactics of the Commission, wrecking Commission reform and wrecking the EU.

And the PPE Group is being hijacked by that element within the group.

I believe that this Commission is very open to taking on board some - I hope all - of Parliament' s concerns and criticisms, because we have criticisms too.

But there is a time and place for that and this will be when we look at Mr Pomés Ruiz' response to the White Paper.

The PSE Group want to engage in a constructive debate because we are interested in the outcome of reform, not in scoring short-term political points that do nothing but damage the European Union.

Turning very quickly to the substance of the questions: in the Commission hearings the European Parliament asked for rotation of A1 and A2 posts and to end national flags on senior jobs.

The Commission has taken positive steps since they came into power, ensuring that appointments are made on the basis of merit.

Of course, in a multinational institution, we must be sensitive to national considerations but these must be seen within the medium and long term.

As the Commissioner said, you cannot take a snapshot halfway through.

We should be interested in checking systems and not checking individuals.

The role of the European Parliament is to keep the Commission on its toes.

We want to see appointments on merit but that does not mean interfering and questioning every single senior appointment.

I would like to make a quick point on improving the equal opportunities aspect of the Commission' s reform proposals.

Mrs Hautala' s question was very well put and we also would like an answer to that.

We do not currently think that the proposals go far enough in terms of gender mainstreaming and equal opportunities.

On parts 3 and 4 of this oral question I understand that the Conference of Presidents agreed on April 6 that these two questions should be removed.

That being the case, I would like to ask you, Mr President, to look into why the services had still not removed those parts today.

The fact is that Commission reform is going ahead.

Mr Prodi has made some announcements today as the head of the organisation.

Again, most of it looks at mobility but I would like to ask the Commissioner why the role of the new post, Director of the Economic and Political Council, was not advertised.

That is a post that we would like to have seen advertised.

Finally, I would like to ask the PPE Group to refrain from such politically motivated and unconstructive questions as we have here.

I am confident that Mr Pomés Ruiz will not take that attitude when he responds to the White Paper, but please do not let your group be hijacked by a minority.

Thank you very much, Mrs Morgan.

I regret that I do not have any information on the question which you have addressed to the Presidency but, in any event, I will submit it so that you receive an adequate response.

Mr President, I also want to thank the Commissioner for his answer and, in common with other women, request the figures showing how posts are distributed between men and women.

Since the Commission delved into the details on 27 April, perhaps we can be told how many men and women there are in category A posts, not in category A posts generally, but broken down by grade, i.e. A1, A2, A3 and so on, for what is interesting is to see the figures broken down in that way.

More often than not, it turns out that there are no women at all in top posts.

And, in this connection, we could perhaps be informed about the composition of the panel - which should be an objective panel - in terms of gender.

Perhaps in terms of country of origin, too, but in any case in terms of gender.

Who, in the end, is to evaluate the shortlist that has been mentioned?

More often than not, it is exclusively men who carry out the final evaluation.

Mr President, could I thank the honourable Members in all parts of the House for the constructive contributions they have made in the course of this debate.

Perhaps I could risk some superficiality, because of the time, by trying to answer the specific questions raised.

First of all Mr Harbour' s questions, which typically were perceptive and constructive, related to how far we thought that the commitment to the development of managerial skills and culture was being achieved.

I will just stipulate one or two points that are evidence of progress.

I would not claim they were perfect and this list is not exhaustive.

So far as training is concerned, which, as Mr Harbour knows, is fundamental to the kind of changes that we want to achieve, the comprehensive programme of training for all managers in the Commission which should continue over two years commences this month.

Secondly we are already embarked on the process of collecting mission statements from every Directorate-General.

There is also the establishment of task assessments which we will do through a series of pilot schemes that will affect around one quarter of the Directorate-Generals in the first instance and then the compilation of job descriptions which will be undertaken over the period up to the end of July this year.

The process of evaluation of staff, and that of course includes managers at all levels, is being refined and will be introduced.

As Mr Harbour says, the role and activity of the Secretary-General in all of these activities and indeed in many others is crucial.

I believe that Mr O' Sullivan has a very strong commitment to the direction set out by the White Paper and will be a notable successor to his extremely talented and committed predecessor, Mr Trojan, who will take up a new post from the end of this month.

So far as empowering managers is concerned, the best instance we can give is that from May 1 we inaugurated the new internal audit service, the central financial service and we will shortly be having the first meeting of the Audit Progress Committee.

These are the first crucial steps in the decentralisation of financial control, which is of course critical to the empowerment of management at all levels in a money-handling institution.

Mr Harbour will be familiar with my view that as a consequence of making that central and measurable change, subject continually to examination, we will get a reverberating change of culture in the wider managerial style and operation of the House.

Finally, he is right to stipulate that team leadership, team working and team building are all critical to the effective operation of modern managerial skills.

We are nurturing that by the combination of structural change and supplementary training, evaluation and the appointment system.

Obviously too, the consideration of probationary periods in contracts of appointment for managers will be a strong supplement to the direction which we want to take.

But to do that comprehensively will require amendments to the Staff Regulations and I am looking forward to the cooperation of Parliament and the Council in gaining the changes in Community legislation which are necessary to facilitate that further development.

Mr van den Berg was correct, and indeed kind and generous, in re-asserting the fact that the Commission must be responsible for its appointments and its personnel policies.

I presume that he will follow through his enquiry as to why this question was asked.

I can only say that I welcome the opportunity to provide comprehensive information.

I am reminded that, in the hearings, correctly and forcefully, several Members of this House raised the question and indeed made assertive demands for de-flagging of senior posts, for the complete abandonment of formal or informal quotas and for the rotation of officials holding A1 and A2 posts.

Those are principles that I not only agreed with at the time, together with my colleagues in the Commission, but have actively been seeking to put into effect ever since.

If I can come to the point relating to new standards and outside posts, a point also raised absolutely correctly by Mr Dell' Alba, who has a question down on these matters and I am looking forward to answering it, I should draw the attention of the House to the fact that in the course of giving my attention to a specific case, which related to the departure of my own Chef de Cabinet, Mr Andrew Cahn, it became very obvious to me that the current arrangements relating to authorising the movement of permanent and temporary officials to outside employment do not have adequate clarity or consistency.

In practice, the course of action and rigorous scrutiny which I requested to be applied in the case of Mr Cahn meant that his case was dealt with very thoroughly and entirely properly.

I do not believe, however, that the Commission, or indeed other institutions, should have to rely on individual motivation by officials or by Commissioners and on rather ad hoc means of applying principles, which are, to say the least, rather generalised.

I therefore asked the Director-General of Administration and Personnel to produce a draft for rules that would take into account best practice in the administrations of Member States and of other international public bodies and to give precision to procedures.

Having such rules would obviously be the best means of ensuring transparency, consistency and practical guidance which would be in the interests of all parties, especially when, as Members have reminded us in the course of the debate, Member States and institutions are increasingly keen to encourage more exchange between national and EU administrations and between the public and private sectors.

Naturally, when I have a proposal to make for new and improved arrangements, I will put them to my colleagues in the Commission and subsequently report them to this House and the other institutions for consideration.

Can I take the opportunity of Mr Sterckx' s contribution to underline the point that I made earlier, a point which he wisely acknowledges, that no one, in consideration of the broad geographical balance to which the Commission is committed, should try to take a still-photograph of the profile of the staff at the Commission and represent that as in any way a permanent state of affairs.

A moving picture is the only one that tells the full story and the Commission is totally committed to ensuring that priority is given to merit and full and proper account is taken of geographical balance, which is essential in a multinational serving institution like the Commission.

On Mrs Hautala' s point, I would simply say that none of the appointments that have been announced today was the subject of a panel and there is a very straightforward legal reason for that.

Mr David O' Sullivan, for instance, will take up his post by rotation as provided for under the Staff Regulations and equally as provided for under the Staff Regulations, Mr Ricardo Levi is a temporary official and moves with his post to his new position.

So in legal, procedural and employment policy terms, the use of the panel system for promotion and appointment purposes was not required by the existing law in the case of appointments of that kind.

I think that also responds to the point raised by Mrs Morgan on that subject.

The question was also raised of women' s appointments.

Of the 25 very senior appointments that have been made by this Commission since last September, 4 have been of women officials.

Mrs Hautala and others will know of my ambitions in this respect.

I would only say that since that is nearly 20% of the total number of appointments, we are on target for this year' s commitment to ensure that we achieve at least a 20% advance in the number of women who are appointed.

In the course of the rest of the year I can say with certainty that velocity will at least be maintained.

Obviously, I would like to see it exceeded because there are a large number of highly capable women, as Mrs Dybkjær pointed out to us, in the Commission, and we want to see that quality properly recognised.

So far as Mr Dell' Alba' s geographical excursion into islands and boot-shaped countries is concerned, as I say I am looking forward to answering his further question and doing so in great detail.

It is significant that the island country, the larger island country, secured in the course of these months under this Commission no additional appointments at A1 level by promotion.

The boot-shaped country obtained two such appointments - the boot-shaped country obtained 4 A2 promotions in this period and the big island obtained 5, of which, to the best of my knowledge, none came from Wales.

I hope that is of some reassurance to Mr Dell' Alba.

Mrs Morgan, inevitably asks from the wilds of Wales 'Why were there not any Welsh people?'

It is because, Mrs Morgan, whilst I am totally committed to geographical balance, this would mean in Wales having one North Walian and one South Walian or I would generate even more dissatisfaction in the country I love most.

But Mrs Morgan did raise intriguing questions about the questions which have been put down; doubtlessly they will be pursued.

I would like to say to Mrs Dybkjær that in the comprehensive pursuit of our policy for equal opportunities, there will be evidence as the coming months and years pass, of us giving attention from the point of the invitation to applications, right through to initial appointment and promotions, to show that we are making serious efforts to secure substantial advances in the number of women of all ages and all grades who are employed in the Commission.

I can only ask honourable Members to wait until the physical evidence is available.

But if commitment and the strong and active dedication of members of the current College is anything to go by we will achieve success in all respects.

The vote will take place on Wednesday 17 May 2000.

The next item is the debate on the recommendation for second reading (A5-0106/2000) by the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market, on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to adopting a European Parliament and Council Directive on certain legal aspects of Information Society services, in particular electronic commerce in the internal market ("Directive on electronic commerce") [14263/1/1999 - C5-0099/2000 - 1998/0325(COD)] (Rapporteur: Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi)

Mr President, the recommendation which it is my honour to present, on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market, proposes that the plenary adopts the common position without amendments.

I have to say that this attitude has also been adopted by the various political groups.

Mr President, I would like to stress that, by approving the Council' s common position on electronic commerce tomorrow, this House will be showing a very great degree of political responsibility of great institutional significance.

Furthermore, by approving this directive, Parliament will be taking a decisive step in favour of the competitiveness of European businesses in the 'on line' economy and will be setting a milestone so that both consumers and companies will be able to operate in the internal market with the same guarantees and the same ease with which they operate in their domestic markets.

The directive ensures that companies and citizens are able to provide and receive information society services throughout the European Union, which will thereby become a genuinely border-free area.

European companies will be able to offer goods, services and information within the Union in accordance with the regulations of the Member State in which they are established and, therefore, in normalised circumstances, without being bound by 14 different sets of legislation.

In order to arrive at these results, the directive harmonises certain areas, in particular - to name the main ones - the place where the operators are established, their obligations in terms of transparency, the requirements for transparency in commercial communications, the conditions required for the conclusion and validity of electronic contracts, the responsibility of Internet intermediaries, the settlement of disputes, as well as the competences of national authorities.

In other areas, the directive is supported by the existing instruments intended to facilitate harmonisation and the mutual recognition of national legislations.

Mr President, the directive includes - and this is important - all information society services, both business to business and business to user services, such as those which allow electronic operations to take place - interactive telesales of goods and services, on-line 'shops' , for example; services which are offered free, such as those financed through advertising or sponsorship, the on-line press, on-line databases, on-line financial services, on-line professional services - lawyers, doctors or other professionals - leisure services such as video on demand, direct marketing and all services accessed via the Internet.

The directive is also - as I have already said - a great example of interinstitutional cooperation.

This directive is a magnificent example of teamwork by Parliament, the Commission and the Council.

Therefore, Parliament' s position on first reading, in particular its decisive support for the principle of the country of origin, was crucial to the Council in order to avoid the balance of the text being jeopardised.

In general, the common position follows the guidelines set by Parliament and, apart from some marginal cases, no significant amendments are added to the annex which provides for the exceptions relating to the principle I have mentioned. Balance is also maintained with regard to the provisions concerning consumer protection and the responsibility of intermediaries.

I would like to express my thanks, as rapporteur, for the cooperation of all my colleagues in the Committee on Legal Affairs, and in particular the leaders of the various political groups - especially the support of Mrs Berger and Mr Harbour from my Group - and the other institutions.

The common position, therefore, maintains the balance between the various general objectives and the various interests, and we have not therefore tabled any amendments.

It is clearly not a perfect text, but we consider it to be a reasonable and acceptable one, and it is crucial that it is adopted as soon as possible.

I will not repeat - although it is true - that Internet time is much shorter than time as we have known it up to now.

We must also understand that this directive is a priority in terms of guaranteeing the development of electronic commerce.

We must take account of the globalisation of the economy and competition from US companies and the legal framework of the internal market which strives, as on the Internet, for a space with no internal boundaries.

All of these elements are Community assets as far as the competitiveness of European companies is concerned.

Lastly, the development of new technologies and market-related innovations make it essential that we establish a legal framework for the development of commerce, while, as this directive ensures, areas are set aside which are suitable for self-regulation and for the development of specific codes of conduct.

This directive, furthermore, will provide a significant stimulus to small- and medium-sized businesses so that they will embrace, without delay, this commerce without frontiers. They are currently not doing so because of the legal uncertainty involved in dealing with many different sets of legislation within Europe.

Lastly, several Member States are already legislating in this area and, without this directive, we could see a genuine fragmentation of the internal market.

This directive, furthermore, Mr President, is a milestone which will affect all Community initiatives which have an impact on electronic commerce.

The legal framework established by this directive will facilitate the adoption of other Community directives, such as the one on copyright, the distance marketing of financial services or the controversial Brussels Convention on jurisdiction, and will clearly help to remove the risk of incompatibility between these initiatives and the principles of the internal market.

Parliament intends to monitor closely the transposition and application of the directive in national legislations, and I have therefore included two recommendations, two reminders to the Commission, which I hope will be approved tomorrow, not within the framework of the directive, but within the framework of the legislative resolution; one on the procedures for the detection and withdrawal of illicit material, and another on the drafting of codes of conduct.

Lastly, Mr President - and with this I will end - it is symbolic that Parliament is approving this directive on the eve of the celebration of the 50th anniversary of the declaration by Robert Schuman, in which he stated that Europe would not be created in an instant but through achieving specific objectives which would create genuine solidarity between citizens and businesses.

Fifty years ago, 'specific objectives' referred to the European Coal and Steel Community; today, as this directive points out, they refer to the information society.

For this reason, Mr President, I believe that tomorrow this Parliament will be worthy of congratulation, and this congratulation can also be extended to the other Community institutions.

Mr President, Commissioner, first let me thank the rapporteur, on behalf also of my political group, for this report and for the strategy she proposes, namely to accept this common position as it stands.

We found this strategy convincing and we too can recommend that the plenary of the House adopt the Council' s common position on the e-commerce directive unamended.

We do so primarily because we believe that this key component of the European legal framework for the information society needs to be implemented swiftly.

Let me emphasise that another reason why we are able to adopt it unamended is because the Council - exceptionally, I am tempted to say - has incorporated many of the European Parliament' s amendments at first reading.

That does not mean, however, that we do not still see much room for improvement, as other speakers have pointed out as well, and some of our wishes have not been fulfilled.

But if we are prepared to set these wishes aside for now, for the sake of the speedy adoption and implementation of this directive, we also expect the Member States, when they implement it, with appropriate monitoring by the Commission, to resolve all the questions that are still not one hundred percent settled without this being at the expense of aspects that are important to us, in particular consumer protection.

Here I am thinking above all of the interpretation of Article 1(3), which is still worded in a very ambivalent way.

I hope that article will not be used to undermine national provisions on health protection, such as the ban on the mail order sales of certain medicines.

I think we are also entitled to expect that the proposed codes of conduct, which will give those involved in e-commerce a very wide margin for self-regulation, will be drawn up as soon as possible and that they will be very comprehensive, with the participation of consumer protection organisations, in such a manner as to be really binding and easy to implement.

I think we can also describe the rules that we adopted on provider liability as generous.

I can only hope that they stand the test of time and that we will not have to revise them again in three years' time in light of practical experience.

The adoption of the e-commerce directive does represent a very, very important step, yet a few other key building blocks for the e-Europe are still missing. As the rapporteur pointed out, the Council is dragging its feet on the common position on the distance marketing of financial services, on copyright in the information society.

We also need to make more rapid progress in setting up out-of-court settlement procedures and the small claims procedure.

Finally, I hope that the directive we are to adopt will also serve as a good stepping-stone towards finding equally good global solutions.

Mr President, the passage of this directive at second reading has perhaps been historic.

I congratulate heartily our rapporteur on her original strategy and I hope what will be her achievement of obtaining continuing consensus.

I do not believe it has been easy for any of us as politicians to curb our natural instinct either to improve on or alter someone else' s text.

Yet it was a carefully considered decision.

We know the proposal is not absolutely perfect but the general feedback, both at a recent hearing in committee and from those who have lobbied Members has been: 'let' s have what might be an imperfect directive with a review rather than none at all' .

Speed with certainty in this fast-moving new world is essential.

Now we have an initial road-map; a reference point for European businesses trading on the Web; a road-map that has clearly established the country of origin principle while still protecting consumer interest.

This should really open up the internal market to the many and increasing opportunities which e-commerce promises to businesses of all sizes, but particularly SMEs.

We must continually be aware that the Web is not limited to Europe.

A large part of consumer transactions from Europe on the Web is directed at American sites and in future may well be directed at Asian sites.

European business has to keep up and the key to this will be confidence.

We have to aspire to the establishment of the highest quality of e-businesses in Europe.

Companies setting up or changing to this way of doing business have to look carefully at the way they operate, at the information and the service they provide to customers if they are to survive.

We should also take care to provide coherent legislation.

There are many opportunities but what of the threats?

Only this weekend we have seen in London the down-side of the communications and information revolution that the Web has created by putting elements in society in touch with one another, who have then wrought violence on the streets of London.

This may be extreme but there will be unscrupulous people who will set up scams on the Web.

One bad news story may blow confidence in e-trade for years.

E-commerce is in its early stages.

We need, as legislators, to be watchful, not necessarily interventionist, but wary of implications as the medium grows.

Our rapporteur has given us an extremely good basis.

The ELDR Group will stick to her original 'no-amendment' line.

Mr President, there is a practice in this House of thanking and complimenting rapporteurs and sometimes I have to confess that I feel it can be overdone.

But on this occasion I wish to say that it would not be overdone if I, on behalf of myself and my Group, particularly thank and congratulate the rapporteur on her work.

Perhaps I might also, as a new Member of the House, and therefore of the committee, thank her for the marvellous job she does as the chairman of our committee - for the courtesy and kindness, but firmness with which she carries out its business.

I have some sympathy with Commissioner Bolkestein here today.

Parliamentary debates are not always marked by tremendous cut-and-thrust but today I fear it is a procession because we are all standing up and saying that we agree with each other.

Is this, we ask ourselves, the death of ideology?

I suppose we could excuse ourselves with the thought that we are debating more with the medium here than the message.

We are dealing with the creation of a new medium and therefore one which creates an urgent and acute need for regulation and for common regulation on a grand scale.

It is therefore, and I think we are all correct about this, vital that we get on with it and that we do not risk unnecessary delay in bringing this into effect.

Nevertheless, I was very grateful to my colleague, Mrs Ahern, also from the committee, for raising some points of continuing concern tonight and I would like to thank again the rapporteur for the device whereby she has introduced in an addendum to the resolution the points about the intermediate service providers and codes of conduct.

That is important and I hope that the Commission will be taking that on board.

Coming as I do from one of the very remote parts of Europe, it is exciting to speculate on the possibility that these new media will help to correct the apparently unstoppable drift to the centre and the decay of the outlying parts of all our countries and societies.

In these circumstances we should welcome the chance to bring in an effective regulation on e-commerce.

We must also remember that there is another kind of exclusion other than geographical.

There is the lack of skill in these technologies.

We are also challenged - albeit outside the scope of this directive - to make sure that we do not have an exclusion of people by ignorance or the lack of access to the instruments of this medium of communication.

So let us be sure that we carry the directive but do not forget the other problems.

Mr President, can I join in the very warm welcome to my colleague, Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi' s approach, and commend her on the drive and persistence with which she has advocated this directive and the approach that we have taken.

It is an indication also of the approach this committee will take on all the subsequent legislation.

I would like to perhaps put a distinctive slant on this legislation.

I am one of the few engineers in Parliament, certainly in the Legal Affairs Committee which is dominated by lawyers, and can put a rather different point of view sometimes.

It seems to me that this piece of legislation can be likened in the technological world to the operating system of the whole legal framework that we are putting in place in the European Union for electronic commerce.

It is this operating system within which a lot of other key legislation will be fitted, such as the copyright and information society and distance selling of financial services.

All of those things were fitted into the overall framework of this directive.

So essentially this is the core principle.

I hesitate to call it the Windows because that produces rather unfortunate competitive issues these days but those of you who are software experts will know what I mean when I use the word "Linux" .

For those of you that are not so technologically enabled, Linux is a competitor to Windows that is owned and updated by the users.

That essentially is what we have here.

We have a system that is going to be operated by the users and the point I want to make this evening in now thinking ahead, because we are confident we are going to get this directive through, is to say to the Commission that we need to have a very comprehensive and a very fast feedback from the users about the problems and issues that they are encountering in using this directive.

Clearly the Internet world is going to be highly suitable for the Commission to set that up.

We want to know about issues where Member Governments have blocked transactions.

We want to know where the directive is being tested in the courts.

We want to know where consumers have had problems and feel that their rights are not protected.

We want to know for some of the special cases which we have not been able to cover this time, like gambling - the effect on national lotteries - pharmaceuticals and books, the real problems that they are having.

All of those I suggest need to be covered by the feedback.

The final point I want to make is about speed.

Mrs Palacio referred in her introduction to Internet years and the speed of approach.

We were challenged by the Commission and by the Council to get this directive through as quickly as possible.

I say to both of them, and in particular to representatives of the Council here, we have risen to that challenge and we now expect Member Governments to behave with the same speed to get this legislation transposed.

We encourage the Commission and the Council to get the remaining bits of that legislation to us as quickly as possible because that is what Europe needs.

Mr President, can I too add my congratulations to the rapporteur.

There can be no doubt that the job of the Parliament tomorrow is without further ado to vote through the report unanimously.

Commission, Parliament and Council have had ample time to discuss and debate at both first and second reading and, as the rapporteur said, most of Parliament' s views now feature in the Council common position.

It is therefore a balanced proposal.

Let us remind ourselves that the Lisbon special EU Summit in March set us new targets and deadlines to make better use of the Internet, strengthening Europe' s competitiveness in the knowledge economy.

This therefore means we need to create a clear and simple, predictable and consistent legal framework for electronic commerce.

It is now an economic and political imperative.

The directive will go a significant way towards creating the framework which is necessary to provide the confidence that both business and consumers desire to maximise the potential of e-business.

From the wealth of letters and comments that I have received as a member of the Legal Affairs Committee, I know it is not possible to please all interested parties.

Concerns still exist but I believe that Council, Commission and Parliament have struck the right balance between the need to protect public policy and consumers and at the same time promote and support the growth of e-business.

I therefore strongly recommend that Parliament endorses and adopts Mrs Palacio' s report, which represents a common position.

We do this in the full knowledge that the e-economy is evolving at a rapid pace.

We are witnessing in the 21st century the equivalent of the Industrial Revolution.

That means, as policymakers and institutions, we are still navigating our way through uncharted terrain.

We need therefore to continue, as Mr Harbour said, to have a full consultation and debate on both the outstanding and arising issues for business and consumers.

In particular, this is the case given the global nature of e-commerce.

We have in this directive an article which allows us to do that.

Article 21 of the common position provides for a review and we should use the time until then to deepen and further our knowledge on this critical sector of the European economy.

We need to continue to consult with interested parties in this debate and we need to ensure that the result is a national legislation and that we produce clear, appropriate and speedy legislation.

Mr President, Commissioner, e-commerce offers the European Union a unique chance to stimulate economic growth, strengthen the industry' s competitiveness and create new jobs.

The legal framework of the internal market plays a crucial role in this.

The present proposal removes a whole raft of obstacles and uncertainties which businesses are still having to negotiate in the field of e-commerce.

These uncertainties have been there for far too long because the Council needed nearly a year to determine its positions.

Similarly, the copyright directive has been with the Council since February 1999, i.e. for over a year now.

In the light of the speed of developments, neither industry nor consumers benefit from such delays.

The country of origin principle is one of the internal market' s cornerstones.

It is therefore obvious that this should be extended to cross-border e-commerce.

One cause for concern in this respect, however, is that this principle will only apply to trade between businesses for the time being.

Revisions of private international law for the benefit of on-line trade with consumers are in the pipeline.

It is crucial in this respect that disputes are settled out of court as much as possible. After all, court proceedings are drawn-out and costly.

I would therefore call on the Commission to support initiatives to this effect.

It is unfortunate that the present directive is not being dealt with in conjunction with, and at the same time as, the copyright directive, because there are inconsistencies in terms of liability of service providers.

How does the Commissioner intend to create unambiguous and legally secure positions for service providers?

I would like a reply to this question.

Mr President, I would like to thank the rapporteur for her work.

I was not one of those who agreed with the consensus in committee about the tabling of no amendments.

That does not mean I did not appreciate her very solid work and I would also like to thank her very warmly for taking to heart the concerns that I expressed in committee, particularly on the liability of intermediary service providers, codes of conduct and the participation of consumers.

Without consumer confidence, e-commerce is going nowhere.

This is fundamental, horizontal legislation that is going to be dealing with the whole Internet and its commercial viability.

Unless we have consumer confidence and can deal with illegal content speedily without resorting to lengthy court cases, we will not have the kind of ground rules which citizens and consumers need and require.

There has already been reference here tonight to the need for revision.

Even before we adopt the directive we are talking about revision and I think that is very wise.

Some of the concerns that have been expressed here tonight, particularly about dealing with illegal content and consumer acceptance, need to be being already pursued by the Commission before we adopt this fully as a European directive.

I would like finally to thank again the rapporteur for taking on board the serious concerns that we expressed in committee.

Mr President, with the adoption, without amendments, of the common position of the Council, the European Parliament is rising to the challenges of the current changes, to the demands of the new economy, at last setting rules in place governing the use of the Internet for trade and the provision of services.

I will not go into the technical and legal details, which were covered by the rapporteur, Mrs Palacio with her usual competence, and I would like to thank her for the extremely skilful way in which she handled the legislative procedure for this directive.

A further point: the new economy is something which the European economic and social model will have to address, and it must exploit all the opportunities for development and new jobs it provides.

We are witnessing a new industrial revolution. Consequently, the structure of the European economy is in need of legal infrastructures and, tomorrow, we are going to meet that need.

The absence of legal infrastructures is holding back development.

The internal market has become a reality and the fundamental freedoms enshrined by the Treaty of Rome as objectives have indeed been achieved, but whilst in the past the creation of the internal market was an end in itself leading to economic development, now new challenges have arisen for a market which is being forced to compete with the rest of the world by the globalisation of the economy.

The European economic and social model, which is based on the social market economy, is quite capable of dealing with world-wide competition, provided that it succeeds in evolving, eliminating all the unnecessary rigid constraints which are responsible for its continuing weakness in some areas.

It is no longer good enough just to create any old market: the internal market must be competitive, regulated in such a way as to allow firms to produce and trade quality goods and services at costs which are compatible with those of competitors.

This constituted the historic change brought about by electronic commerce - a revolution whose scope and implications are still not fully understood.

We only need to think back to the issues we have worked on in the past: risk capital, highly skilled services, innovation tools and the protection of intellectual and industrial property.

All these areas will have to evolve, and, in many cases, change completely.

A malicious thought has come to me: what will become of the petty national protectionist behaviour which we have witnessed in recent years?

Now, at this time of revolution, a large number of issues dear to the European People' s Party must be reassessed.

The social market economy also means solidarity and paying due attention to the more vulnerable strata of society which, in the industrial revolution sparked off by the Internet, also now include those who do not know how to use a computer.

This potential for growth is our challenge for the future!

Mr President, I want to begin by cordially thanking the rapporteur and the Commission for the superb way in which they have handled this difficult but extremely important issue.

The new technology is in the process of transforming our lives and, together with the new currency, can create a completely new Europe.

However, we are not alone in the world; e-commerce means competition, not only for companies but also for politicians.

Faulty regulations and obstacles both old and new can mean our failing to make the most of our historic opportunity for new freedom and success.

The development of information technology provides new opportunities to communicate and to disseminate information simply and cheaply.

The increased flow of information through Bulletin Board Systems, electronic mail and the Internet ought not to be subject to greater restrictions than traditional information channels and communication facilities.

A guiding principle for the new technology ought to be that everyone should have considerable freedom to make use of it and exploit the advantages it has to offer and that everyone should also be responsible for what they do.

The basis of a democracy must be that freedom of expression should be protected, not restricted.

Communication using computers should be viewed in the same way as any medium of communication.

It is stated in one of the items, item 48, that the directive does not affect Member States' ability to prevent a certain amount of illegal activity by imposing demands upon service providers who store information from their clients.

I proposed that that sentence should be removed because it does not have anything to do with the criteria for being able to impose the restrictions concerned.

It is not appropriate for the Member States to decide this issue or to demand that service providers be held liable for the actual details of the information provided.

That would be as absurd as making a café owner liable for monitoring what is said across the café tables.

Is there anyone who wants to see a utilitarian nanny State?

I therefore also support Amendment No 1, which I think is extremely important and deals precisely with this issue.

E-commerce crime, or cyber crime as it is called, should, in my view, be combated by means of better working methods on the part of the police and not by means of legislation which is in danger of compromising basic democratic values.

It is time to implement the decisions about quality labelling and, in cooperation with the service providers, to devise practical codes of conduct without thereby raising the cost levels for consumers or introducing costly bureaucracy.

Freedom with responsibility ought to be the motto for continued work on developing this area.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I too want to begin by congratulating the rapporteur on her report and her strategy.

I welcome her recommendation that we should not suggest any amendments to the common position.

All current surveys show the great economic potential of electronic business.

The previous speakers have already described that in graphic terms, so I need not go into the subject or this aspect of it again.

Europe continues to trail behind the USA in e-business.

Yet we have a real chance to catch up.

Europe is presently seeing a wave of Internet companies being set up.

We must give political support to this trend.

We must also encourage stronger competition on the local telephone markets to make Internet connection cheaper.

In this context, let me also give special thanks to the Commission, to Mr Bolkestein and his colleague, Mr Liikanen, who has also done an excellent job here with the TC package he forwarded to us in Parliament a few months ago.

I think that means we have a very good policy in that area as well.

At European level, the creation of the European single market and the introduction of the euro are certainly decisive factors in the promotion of electronic business.

Furthermore, e-business will be encouraged tomorrow when we adopt a legal framework for electronic commerce in the European Union.

That will send out a clear signal.

It will show that Europe is open and is able to promote the Internet as a new form of communication and commerce.

I believe it is also a good signal in terms of attracting foreign investment.

On the content of the directive, I just want to emphasise one key point which some of the previous speakers have also addressed.

It is the question of the regulations that a web trader has to comply with for cross-border transactions.

Here the regulation provides that what is known as the principle of the country of origin should apply.

That means that a service provider is subject only to the control and the legal system of the Member State in which he is established.

The aim is to prevent him from having to comply with the different legal provisions of all the countries in which his clients may reside.

That saves him a considerable financial outlay in these transactions.

However, it also creates a new situation, to which industry and national legislators will have to adjust.

Divergent rules in the Member States, on advertising, for instance, will mean that Internet providers in the European Union are treated differently.

That is why we need changes to the law and more far-reaching harmonisation in some respects.

In Germany, for example, we may well have to abolish the law on discounts and the regulations on free gifts.

I am glad the directive also contains a review clause.

I would ask the Commission to take that very seriously.

We in Parliament will, of course, follow developments in e-business closely and give appropriate support to any Commission proposals for a revision of the directive in a few years' time.

Mr President, I would like to preface my few remarks by echoing comments made by other speakers in thanking Mrs Palacio for the work that she has done on this report.

It is not merely that she is not proposing any amendments - although that is an example that some rapporteurs might follow with advantage, rather it is because she has recognised the overriding importance of taking this legislation forward and putting it on the statute book.

As has been mentioned this evening, e-commerce and online business are developing very rapidly and it is very important that we put in place a legislative framework in Europe within which it can develop and flourish.

Indeed, as Mrs Wallis said, you must remember it is not only within Europe.

It is actually a global industry and it is around the world that we want to see a proper framework established.

It is always easy to be wise after the event and no doubt if we do proceed apace we may not achieve a 100% satisfactory outcome.

It is one of the interesting characteristics of the Community system of legislation that it is relatively easy to bring forward amending legislation.

This can be done quickly if necessary, as Mr Lehne pointed out.

So there is no reason to delay.

Speed on this occasion is of the essence.

It is important that we are not distracted from setting a framework within which e-commerce can develop for the benefit of both business and the consumer.

Professor MacCormick said that there seems to be a very great deal of agreement about the need to go forward without amending this proposal.

One of my colleagues in another parliament, of which I have the privilege to be a Member, always says 'the one way of identifying things when you are wrong is when everybody is in agreement about it' .

On this occasion I do not believe we are wrong to approach this matter in that way and I hope this Parliament will agree with me with a big majority.

Mr President, I would also like to express my gratitude and congratulations for the work carried out both by the rapporteur, Mrs Palacio, and by those who have worked on it in the Council and the Commission.

Of course, it is essential that we have a legal framework in place as soon as possible.

However, I would like to make certain observations which may be useful in this second phase which is so necessary.

We should not forget that the Internet is international.

We are talking about a directive for the internal market, but, as its original name, the 'World Wide Web' , suggests, it is international and we should bear this in mind as a fundamental reference, above all because the Internet is going to determine Europe' s economic position in the future, as well as its political position and its ability to influence the global, social and cultural environment.

I therefore believe it is fundamental that we bear in mind that the bulk of this success stems from the creation of new companies, the creation of small- and medium-sized enterprises.

Therefore, in the review which is carried out, it is essential that we remember not only the consumers - who in any event must make their own decisions and must use mechanisms for encrypting and protecting their data in accordance with laws and with technology - but also the SMEs, because otherwise there will soon be little electronic commerce in Europe.

It therefore seems essential to make a genuine effort to homogenise the rules of the internal market and, at the same time, work energetically to unify the principles applied on a global level with regard to electronic commerce.

There is no point in having sound regulations for our internal market if we lose sight of the bigger picture.

In order to achieve this, it is also important to bear in mind that the regulations of the country of origin are fundamental, since, without them, small- and medium-sized businesses would find it difficult to operate and would encounter obstacles to achieving their objectives, because they do not have access to the same resources as large companies.

Mr President, Commissioner, Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi, ladies and gentlemen, I say 'yes' to the directive and 'yes' to the rapporteur' s strategy, for it is thanks to that consistent approach that I too have withdrawn my amendment.

The electronic market is a prime market in terms of growth, employment and future prospects, and not just in Europe.

We must therefore exploit all its opportunities and it is important that this regulation on electronic commerce has removed the barriers created by divergent legislative provisions and the ensuing legal uncertainty.

The rapporteur analyses the common position in the spirit of constructive criticism.

Let me pick up on two points of detail that are very close to my heart and where I would have liked to see the common position worded more clearly.

First, there is the question of the sale of medicines and, secondly, the protection of books as a cultural asset in connection with the existing fixed book price agreements.

On the first point, let me say briefly that in my country, Austria, we have banned the sale of medicines by mail order.

So there is some concern that firms established in Member States where this is allowed could encourage Austrian patients to order and buy medicines through the Internet.

In view of the health risks alone, I once again ask for extra clarification in the common position, so as to ensure that advertising activities and agreements with a view to the mail order of medicines are excluded from the area coordinated by the directive.

My second point concerns cultural assets.

Article 1(6) is the only article in the directive that refers, and then only in very general terms, to the cultural area, to the protection and promotion of cultural diversity.

I think that is not good enough.

So I would ask for it to be made clear that the directive does not apply to the fixed book price schemes introduced via legislation or arrangement in some Member States.

Furthermore, operators established in Member States other than the countries concerned should not be allowed to undermine these schemes when selling to an end consumer.

As far as I am concerned, the question of e-commerce in medicines and the protection of cultural diversity will be an important issue in the review scheduled in three years' time, which I welcome.

I ask the Commission to devote special attention to these two points.

Mr President, Commissioner, representatives of the Council, I had to hurry when I noticed my electronic gadgetry up there in my office on the twelfth floor was telling me the list of speakers was being worked through at a rate of knots.

It seemed it was the representatives of our political group that were going at such a rate, and I did not notice.

I am a little out of breath.

Hopefully, however, it will not have an effect on the matter in hand.

It was easy to agree with the explanations given in section 6 by the rapporteur, Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi, as to why Parliament wishes to adopt the Directive under discussion in accordance with the common position.

As so many have already said, the matter is urgent, and I agree.

Stressing the importance of the review clause is only prudent in such urgent legislative plans as these.

I am satisfied that, as in the directive on electronic money for which I was rapporteur, a review clause is to be included.

The directive in hand is immensely important as regards the competitiveness of the EU.

It is pointless to deny that a veritable race is going on between the various continents in the area of electronic commerce.

There is competition with regard to speed and innovation.

From the point of view of unemployment within Europe, which remains high, we should remember that it is the early bird that catches the worm.

New jobs will be created where the new technology is first introduced.

We cannot watch from the wings while Europe consistently lags behind the United States and other global challengers.

On the other hand, Parliament will not solve the challenges of e-commerce by intervening itself in a big way or through regulation.

Wisdom is not always a characteristic of politicians, be they in the Commission, the Council, or in this Chamber.

Too much regulation will freeze commerce over the Internet and prevent it from adapting to new circumstances and technical developments.

This must also be borne in mind, especially in relation to the second reading of the copyright directive soon to take place here.

To derive maximum benefit from e-commerce we have to ensure there is real competition in the telecommunications networks.

Like Mrs Niebler, I would also like to thank Mr Liikanen, and express my gratitude for the work the Commission has done with such determination in this area.

Only through competition will we be able to reduce costs, and thus increase the length of time people use the Internet, as well as increase the volume of electronic commerce.

If we just sit here talking about details, we will not manage to lay down even elementary up-to-date standards for electronic commerce.

How do we imagine we will be prepared for the next stage, m-commerce, or wireless commerce, if we cannot meet the demands of e-commerce?

That is why I support the previous speakers regarding the adoption of the common position with no amendments.

Mr President, could I first of all convey my thanks and compliments to the rapporteur, Mrs Palacio, for the way in which she has handled this matter.

She has taken into account the importance of, and urgent need for, this directive, and she has cleared the way for the prompt and final approval thereof.

On behalf of the Commission, I would like to express my great appreciation for the crucial role which Parliament, and the rapporteur in particular, have played in the negotiations on this directive.

Mrs Palacio has spoken about a milestone in the development of the European Union.

I think that she is right and it is indeed a lucky coincidence that this milestone should be reached a few days short of the fiftieth anniversary of Europe Day which will take place next Tuesday.

Parliament' s approach to this directive and the effect Parliament has had on bringing about the common position could well serve as a model for future cooperation between the institutions.

I will return to this in a moment, but on behalf of my staff, I would very quickly like to thank those Members of this House who have carried out the Commission' s work.

I would like to thank those Members of this House who, in turn, have thanked the Commission for the work it has done.

Once again, this is something which my staff will greatly appreciate and I am grateful to the Members for their comments.

I probably do not need to stress the urgency with which clear and flexible legislation is needed for e-commerce within the European Union.

This is legislation which will offer legal certainty to industry and the consumer.

Rapid approval of this directive is vital in order to attain this goal.

In fact, heads of government stressed this recently at the Lisbon Summit, as was pointed out by Mrs McCarthy, among others.

The directive must ensure that the principles of the internal market also apply to the information society services and that small- and medium-sized businesses, in particular, can consider the entire European market as their home market.

Many in this House, especially the rapporteur, Mrs Palacio, have emphasised this aspect for the benefit of small- and medium-sized businesses.

The Commission is therefore of the opinion that the directive will stimulate European integration and will, consequently, lead to greater economic growth, more investments in innovation and more jobs in Europe.

It will also have a favourable effect on the European industry' s competitive position within the global market and this aspect too has been stressed by a number of Members in this House.

Furthermore, the directive strikes a very precise balance between all private and public interests involved.

This has also been acknowledged by various MEPs.

Mrs Wallis spoke of the right balance that has been struck and this was echoed by Mrs McCarthy.

Some Members are left feeling not completely satisfied.

When the right balance is struck, this invariably means that one or other party cannot achieve its ambitions.

Mr Lehne mentioned that he was not 100% satisfied and Mrs Wallis too has said that it is better to have what might be an imperfect directive with a review rather than none at all.

As I said, I understand that not everybody can be happy when the right balance is struck. The French language captures this sentiment rather beautifully with the expression: on ne peut pas contenter tout le monde et sa belle-mère [You can' t please all of the people all of the time].

Parliament has not tabled any amendments and has thus paved the way for a swift approval.

This is a wise and much appreciated decision taken by all major political groups.

I too would like to express my appreciation for this.

Parliament has been extremely sensible, if I may say so.

The decision is justified, not only on account of the pressing nature of the directive, but also because the common position offers a sound and - I repeat - well-balanced compromise.

This compromise is in line with the internal market' s direct approach, which received huge support at first reading and which was supplemented by Parliament.

Parliament tabled a number of amendments at first reading which proved to make a positive contribution to the common position and which elucidated and reinforced the Commission' s original proposal.

Those amendments have been incorporated in the Commission' s amended proposal and subsequently in the common position.

It should also be stressed that Parliament' s rapid approval of this directive without any further amendments was made possible thanks to the excellent cooperation between the rapporteur, the Finnish Presidency and the European Commission.

This has also been highlighted by the rapporteur and the Commission is grateful for this.

In other words, the common position fully reflects the support which Parliament has given to the internal market approach at first reading.

I think that we should, and can, learn from this close cooperation between Parliament, the Presidency and the Commission in order to accelerate the decision-making process in policy areas which fall under the codecision procedure.

In my opinion, further consultation is necessary in order to find out how we can improve this approach in future.

As a necessary step following on from all these efforts, the Commission will now commit itself, at Parliament' s request, to a swift and accurate transposition of the directive, taking into consideration the balance which has been struck between all the different interests and which undertakes to ensure that the directive is implemented correctly.

This mainly applies to the country of origin principle which has been mentioned many times this evening, as well as the liability of intermediaries, which is also a very important aspect of this directive.

In this connection, the Commission will be happy to meet Parliament' s request to issue guidelines for codes of conduct and to stimulate the establishment of effective procedures for notification and removal.

I would like to say a few words regarding the specific questions which have been raised by Members of your House.

First of all, I would like to address a comment made by Mr Harbour regarding feedback.

In answer to Mr Harbour' s remarks, I would like to say that the Commission plans to monitor the implementation of a feedback structure by the various Member States very closely.

The Commission most definitely intends to encourage all interested parties to keep the Commission abreast of all the possible problems which could crop up.

The Commission will be setting up a website with this goal in mind, thus enabling interactive exchange with all parties, with the intention of taking these remarks on board when this directive is up for review in three years' time.

With regard to this review, Mr Lehne expressed the hope that it will take place under the mandate of this Commission.

This Commission will still be within its mandate, at least if Parliament so wishes, because, as you are aware, the Commission as a whole is, of course, reliant on assent from this Parliament.

I will now move on to a question raised by Mrs Plooij who spoke about the way in which the different directives have to be aligned with each other.

I would like to inform Mrs Plooij that the directive on copyright in the information society will be discussed during the forthcoming Internal Market Council, which will take place on 25 May.

The Portuguese Presidency will make every effort to reach a common position during that Internal Market Council.

One of the key topics which is still being discussed concerns the exemptions which can be made on copyright and, more specifically, exemptions for the benefit of technical copies, which are necessary to ensure that a free flow of data remains possible on the web.

Needless to say, this point is very closely linked to the provisions of the e-commerce directive which we are debating this evening, provisions which concern the liability of service providers.

I would like to assure Mrs Plooij that the Commission is absolutely determined to ensure that both directives are brought into line with each other with regard to this important matter, in order to create legal certainty, which is needed both by parties entitled and service providers in the information society.

Finally, I would like to address a comment from Mr Karas.

He has spoken about the trade in pharmaceutics.

I would like to point out that the introduction onto the market of pharmaceutics by means of advertising and sale, etc. is bound by strict national and Community rules.

Distance selling, particularly of pharmaceutics, is greatly restricted or even banned in certain Member States.

Those restrictions also apply to selling via the Internet.

Given the Internet' s global dimension, there is indeed a risk that Community legislation on advertising and sales of pharmaceutics via the Internet could be by-passed by companies based outside the European Union.

This is why the Commission is now working together with the Member States to find solutions to this problem and to examine whether and on which points Community legislation is necessary in this field.

This concludes the remarks which I would like to make on behalf of the Commission at the end of this debate.

I would once again like to convey my heartfelt thanks, first of all to the rapporteur, Mrs Palacio, and also to all the others who have taken part in this debate for their constructive attitude, as a result of which no further amendments were tabled at second reading.

It has also facilitated the swift adoption of this directive, at least I assume so, because the vote is tomorrow, so that we can swiftly move on to the next stage and implement e-commerce for the benefit of all EU economies.

I feel I must thank you, on behalf of the House, for your exhaustive response to the debate.

The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.00 a.m.

The next item is the debate on the report (A5-0105/2000) by Mrs Schierhuber, on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation, on the proposal for a Council decision on the conclusion on behalf of the European Community on the Food Aid Convention 1999 [COM(1999) 308 - C5-0148/1999 - 1999/0131(CNS)]

. (DE) Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, first of all I want to sincerely thank all those who helped me draft this report, and especially the committee members for adopting it unanimously.

Day after day, over the last few weeks, we have seen pictures of the dreadful famine in Ethiopia all over the media.

While we all sit at home, replete after a good supper, our TV screens show us depressing new evidence of the sufferings of a people plagued by drought and hunger.

This afternoon, in response to precisely that situation, the European Parliament adopted a resolution on the famine in Ethiopia.

The European Parliament, one of the most important political institutions in the European Union, has a duty to take a stance on the matter and it is important that we do not remain silent in the face of such disasters but offer political, moral and financial support, given also that the EU is one of the biggest donor countries.

The international Food Aid Convention we are discussing in plenary today could not take place against a more topical background, and its importance and necessity could not be demonstrated more clearly.

The objective of this international convention is to contribute towards world food security, but also to make it possible to respond to acute food crises with different food requirements.

By and large, I welcome the new convention for I believe it incorporates some very good ideas and covers a wider range of products.

But let me add a few general comments.

Firstly, we must at all events continue to provide food for emergencies such as drought and other climatic disasters.

Here we need to ensure it is delivered rapidly and minus the bureaucracy, because aid can only save lives if it reaches the suffering people rapidly and in time.

A binding strategy for closer coordination between the donor countries will help ensure that the aid really is effective.

Secondly, we should set a long-term objective in our food policy, which is to create food security in every part of the world, so that the supply of food aid can be confined to emergencies.

Food aid consignments should gradually be replaced by measures to improve food security in these countries.

Thirdly, it is extremely important in food policy to take account of the repercussions on local food production and markets.

These repercussions must be monitored and, as I said, local production must not be jeopardised, for I believe that would be counterproductive.

Fourthly, the Commission has been asked to evaluate food aid to ensure that it is fully consistent with other development cooperation sectors and their principles.

Naturally, the findings will have to be incorporated in our future activities, otherwise the evaluation would presumably be pointless.

My fifth point is that we must be extremely careful to ensure that the aid actually reaches the target groups who are genuinely in need.

In this connection, I am particularly keen to see women involved in the planning and execution of the programmes, for I think that would be a good step in the right direction.

Allow me to mention another point, namely the problem of food aid on the basis of credit.

I welcome the restrictions in the new convention, for our long-term aim must be to abolish the credit system completely.

Instead, we should increase still further the share of food aid in the form of grants.

In that context, let me also say that I fully and wholeheartedly support the amendment Mr Fiori tabled for the plenary.

To finish, a word about the forthcoming WTO talks.

Let me express my very serious reservations about linking the liberalisation of world trade to food aid provision, for that would be at the cost of the starving people, which can be in nobody' s interest.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, Mrs Schierhuber, you have already mentioned the resolution on Ethiopia.

Well, it is an outstanding example of how topical and necessary food aid is, even today.

As such, we can hardly deny this Food Aid Convention review our approval.

But we will not only lend our approval for the sake of international solidarity to relieve famine, but because this review encompasses a number of improvements compared to previous versions.

After all, the nature and way in which food aid is being granted within the framework of this Convention to this day, has been, and is being, heavily criticised, and rightly so.

Under the terms of the Convention, cereal surpluses from Europe and the United States can be converted into cash and removed from our market.

In this way, local food production is often thrown off balance and deeply discouraged. The Convention is used as a lubricant for commercial transactions and often clashes with social and cultural traditions.

For example, our rapporteur already mentioned the important role of women in the supply of food.

Big bucks are often made on the back of the poor by making huge charges for transport and operational services.

The European Union has codes of conduct which deviate from this and which it tries to apply to its own aid.

These rules are now also incorporated in this international food aid agreement.

The Convention has changed significantly for the better, in our view, due to the fact that not only cereals, but also other products, including local products, fish and vegetables, can qualify, transport and operational costs must be proportionate to the value and the least developed countries, in particular, will be able to apply for this aid.

In my view, the intention to promote local agricultural development is vital.

Despite this, there is still a blemish on the new Convention.

The European negotiators have succeeded in cutting mixed aid in the form of loans down to 20%. But the United States remain determined to use this type of aid, which permanently saddles the most needy countries with a debt burden, even if this is at a reduced interest rate and if it does not have to be paid off for another 30 years.

But what is 30 years in the life of a nation?

We fully endorse the agreements which should prevent a great deal of malpractice, by detaching aid from commercial transactions, for example, and by warning against disrupting the local markets.

This can happen very easily, both in buying products and selling food aid within the local market, because speculations and price rises are just round the corner.

The example of Ethiopia illustrates that not only the purchase but also that the transport, distribution and preservation must be monitored very carefully and, Mr President, given that we were in Ethiopia, the orders had been placed, there were plenty of foodstocks, yet none of it was there at the right place or time of the famine, I do wonder whether we should not fine-tune our instruments.

Mr President, I warmly welcome the extension and modification of the Food Aid Convention and thank the rapporteur for her work on this report.

The Commission proposal comes in for some criticism from the Budgets Committee in that there is no complete financial statement.

I have to say, with the fluid nature of food aid it must be extremely difficult to project accurate financial figures.

Now that the scope of aid has been widened, quite rightly in my opinion, from just cereals, this would be even more difficult.

I am particularly pleased to read in the new Convention that least-developed countries and low-income countries will be given priority when food aid is being allocated.

I am also pleased to see stronger provisions for promoting local agricultural development and local purchases as this also assists local economies and encourages local agriculture.

There are now many areas of sub-Saharan Africa where, unless there is a dramatic climate change for the better, it is unlikely that food will ever grow again.

I am thinking particularly of areas where the desert is literally burying the productive land.

We are now seeing in Ethiopia an even more desperate situation, where food aid is being provided but there is no water to cook with.

This is an issue that will have to be addressed in the future.

Water will become more valuable than oil in future in developing countries.

It is also good news that the new Convention covers transport costs and associated operational costs.

Even if again this comes in for criticism from the Budgets Committee, it is not much good delivering food aid to a country' s ports if you cannot then distribute it to the remote areas by truck or by air to the people starving and in need.

There is no doubt that past programmes have had a beneficial effect where they can be carried out and the fact that sub-Saharan Africa has a steady and worryingly increasing problem probably reflects the instability in many of these countries caused by war.

This has increased the number of refugees dramatically and worsened the problem of providing food aid.

The continuous need for an international, legally binding framework which defines and provides the commitments and instruments for the delivery of food aid to the developing countries is obvious.

The extension of the Convention and the new rules that have been introduced must therefore be warmly welcomed.

Mr President, I also wish to congratulate the rapporteur.

Clearly from the comments that we have heard already, the global institutional arrangements intended to underpin food security, as recent experiences testify very clearly, need serious attention.

There is actually a loss of confidence in all forms of food aid except for emergency food aid.

Internationally negotiated commitments to tackle issues of food security problems are not, in my view, properly understood.

There is still an institutional resistance to radical reform of food aid policies.

This is summed up by the kind of tinkering on the edges which characterises the re-negotiated Convention.

The institutional Treaty-based arrangements for food aid are, in my view, still somewhat outdated and created with a world in mind where food aid was assumed to be a major feature of development and of humanitarian assistance and relief.

The arguments have already been made here this evening for compensatory financing, for aid to agricultural development, for export credits and for local sourcing; all of these criteria, all of these priorities are very well understood.

Something people have not mentioned is that the European Union has actually gone further towards translating the understanding of these issues into action than any of the other donors, particularly for instance the United States.

We welcome the fact that in our food aid budget line we target food security issues and that budget provides financial assistance for food security.

Clearly the challenge is to meet the needs of the hungry in the most locally sensitive way.

We need to see foodstock plans based on knowledge and transparency.

We need to have the knowledge of where the foodstocks are, we need to assess where they are and we need to access those foodstuffs when we have identified them.

We also need to monitor all foodstocks that are held in the world, both public foodstocks and private foodstocks.

Finally, in the context of the WTO debates, we also need to see a guarantee of the legal right of all human beings to access to food.

This will mean, and many of us said this in Seattle in the debates, that we would require inter alia a food security clause in any future WTO agreements on agriculture.

This would represent very real progress in the attempts that we make to tackle food security.

Mr President, this Convention will only be successful if, in time, it becomes redundant.

Needless to say, structural food aid will continue to be necessary as long as we have so many seriously undernourished people.

The aim of this prevention exercise is to secure the developing countries' own foodstocks and to phase out dependence on donor aid.

In other words, the intention is not to help Europe get rid of its agricultural surpluses or to promote rich countries' exports by means of soft loans.

Excess production within European agriculture must be drastically reformed in order to re-adjust the market, the world' s poorest regions should not be used as a dumping ground for products of stubborn European mismanagement, and our efforts to stimulate exports should not be aimed at the poorest and most vulnerable countries in the world.

The Fiori amendment is preoccupied with Europe' s own interests and is therefore wide of the mark.

In fact, it promotes exactly the opposite of what is really needed, namely a strategy which leads to self-sufficiency.

This means that the focus should be on stimulating local production.

If this does not happen, our aid will have the opposite effect.

The local producers will then be pushed out of the way from the outset by free or cheap products and the affected countries will remain dependent on the 'oh so generous' donors.

Another implication of a correct strategy is that soft loans would not be linked to compulsory purchases in the donor country.

Moreover, the permitted 20% credit is not really of any benefit because it can lead to unfair competition.

Despite what has been agreed, food aid must remain restricted to financial aid and a range of real food. As such, vitamin tablets from Canada do not form part of this.

Mr President, does the Commission share my view that European food aid itself should be streamlined and should be stripped of time-consuming red tape?

Does the Commission think that this is feasible and could aid not be allocated via one development budget line?

Mr President, the food problem can, in principle, be solved, even in Africa, provided we have a cohesive development policy intended to reduce poverty there instead of increasing wealth over here.

Our aim should not be to fill the purses of a few but to fill the mouths of many.

Only when we manage to achieve this will aid no longer be necessary.

Mr President, I am, of course, in favour of food aid for starving people, despite the commercial operations that are hidden behind this aid and despite the conflicts of interest which divide rich countries on this issue.

First of all, I wish to condemn the derisory extent of this aid compared to what is actually needed.

The European Union prides itself on having given a commitment to supply 1.322 million tonnes of wheat equivalent, but, at the same time, the report states that there are 791 million people suffering from malnutrition in poor countries, 124 million of whom live in sub-Saharan Africa alone, where Europe is supposed to be particularly closely involved.

Work it out for yourself: European aid comes to around 7 kilos of wheat equivalent per person per year, which is less than twenty grammes per day, and the report is cynical enough to stress the fact that food aid must not discourage local production.

It is not food aid that has ruined agricultural production in many African countries, however. It is the iron grip of huge European and American industrial or agricultural concerns, which have imposed the cultivation of hevea, coffee, groundnut, cotton and even out-of-season fruit and vegetables for the European market, at the expense of their own food crops.

Even in terms of food production, habits have been foisted on the populations of these countries by forcing them to consume rice or wheat-based products, which they can only obtain on the world market, generating profit along the way for a handful of huge Western companies.

In places, the report smacks of "Lady Bountiful" and presents this aid as an act of charity on the part of Europe, but Europe, or rather its privileged class, is responsible for the ruin of Africa, and that includes the ruin of its self-sufficiency in food.

It is not charity, then, that Africa needs.

What it needs is the European and American multinationals to stop bleeding it dry. It needs Europe to provide the African people with simple machinery, such as water pumps and industrial products to compensate for what it plundered throughout colonial times and afterwards.

Africa will then be in a position to develop its agriculture to a level where it can produce the food to feed its people properly.

Of course, I am not naïve enough to think that one decent resolution passed in the European Parliament will be enough to guarantee this.

It would require an end to capital' s dictatorship of Europe as well as of Africa, and the only reason why I have voted in favour of this report is in order not to stand in the way of this aid.

Mr President, in our work on food aid we must not forget that, even today, there are hundreds of millions of undernourished people in the world.

The endeavours of our predecessors in the Community institutions succeeded in reducing the total number of undernourished people by over 20% in the space of 30 years.

In recent years, the trend has been reversed, which is extremely odd considering the efforts made by the Western world: in certain areas of our planet, the number of undernourished people is constantly on the up and the problem is heightened by natural disasters or, even worse, wars, which have continued to hit the headlines recently.

We must therefore congratulate ourselves on the fact that this issue is still on the agenda of the European Parliament and the countries of the European Union.

I was very pleased to note that, as is the case in the Convention we are discussing now, the Community legislator has consistently striven to guarantee food security and not subsistence.

The ultimate purpose behind our aid is to bring about food security: with the passage of time, the aid must be gradually replaced by tangible measures and sustainable instruments for consolidating that security, eliminating, at last, the need for any form of aid or intervention.

I am sure that our fellow citizens fully approve and support any initiative undertaken by the Community institutions on the matter of aid, or, even better, support for those communities which are less fortunate than we are.

However, I cannot miss this opportunity to touch on an aspect, a principle which, I feel, is of paramount importance, precisely to our fellow citizens.

In my opinion, the correct weighting should be given to European production.

The Convention does not give any form of priority to European products, not even agricultural produce, which are intended for humanitarian aid.

Europe has always been one of the highest-producing continents in the agricultural sector.

For example, the European Union is one of the world's largest producers of starchy products, which are essential for nutrition.

This productivity must not be undervalued or underestimated in respect of the produce available on world markets, even in the provision of aid to the most disadvantaged communities.

For this reason, I have tabled an amendment, not to the draft Convention, which, I am aware, cannot be amended, but to Mrs Schierhuber' s resolution.

This amendment has been judged inadmissible, but my aim in tabling it was to provoke a debate of substance in this Chamber on a topic which, I feel, is of vital concern to our farmers, particularly at this difficult time for them in the aftermath of the reform of the common agricultural policy.

In conclusion, I would stress that the purpose of my amendment, and the purpose, now, of this speech, is to promote the cause of Community products, in particular, agricultural produce, at the time of the conclusion of international agreements, and to urge the European executive bodies not to disregard the millions of people whose livelihood depends on European produce, and I refer not to consumers but to producers.

Thank you very much, Commissioner Fischler.

The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 a.m.

Aid to uprooted people in Asia and Latin America

The next item is the debate on the report (A5-0065/2000) by Mr Deva, on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation, on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation (EC) extending Regulation (EC) No 443/97 on operations to aid uprooted people in Asian and Latin American developing countries [COM(1999) 443 - C5-0146/1999 - 1999/0194 (COD)]

Mr President, I am indeed privileged today to present this report to Parliament.

It is one of the first reports from the Development Committee under the codecision procedure.

I am particularly grateful to all my colleagues who have turned up in force to hear me speak and present my first report to Parliament and the heaving public galleries.

All are waiting with bated breadth to hear my speech.

This is a very urgent matter.

It is my hope that we can pass this report without any substantial amendment other than procedural ones because the report is an extension for one year of an existing regulation which supports four million refugees in the most war-torn and ravaged part of the world.

If we delay or fail to pass this report in plenary as soon as possible, all further assistance, food supply, housing, shelter, water, sanitation and education, to the most vulnerable people in the world, will be severely affected as there will be no legal base in the European Union to support them and to fund them.

What we are doing today is to consider a Commission proposal to extend the regulation on aid to uprooted people in Asia and Latin America, which expired on 31 December 1999.

The extension we propose is for one year until 31 December 2000.

The extension of the regulation will enable a further EUR 40 million to be spent until the end of this year.

Between 1997 and 1999, Parliament sanctioned EUR 240 million.

This regulation came to an end on 31 December 1999.

By extending this regulation today for a further period of one year, we are also giving the Commission time to prepare a new regulation which I hope will be a multiannual one to replace the existing regulation.

This new regulation, to be brought in at a later date, should build on, and take into account, the existing regulation as well the annual report and the evaluation which the Commission has undertaken to present to Parliament and Council in the very near future, and no later than September.

The European Parliament' s original report on the current regulation, the Howitt report, was exemplary in how it was constructed by Parliament.

It had considerable success in improving the existing draft and thus played an important part in supporting and improving the text which was finally adopted.

Notably, the Parliament contributed to a strengthening of the regulation in its reference to environmental concerns, complementary support and cooperation and assisting local host populations, a strong approach for targeting support programmes towards women refugees, particularly those who have been the victims of rape, and a clear provision for the upholding of the "non-refoulement" principle, i.e. protection against forced return.

Mr Howitt engaged then in a very positive dialogue with the Irish presidency as well as with the Commission in order to improve on the existing draft.

In addition, and more importantly, more than fifty NGOs were consulted.

Therefore the Parliament played a major role in producing this regulation with its report.

Support to uprooted people, refugees, returnees and internally displaced people in Latin America and Asian developing countries has been a feature of the Community budget since 1984.

The UNHCR estimates that there are 4.8 million in Asia and some 88 000 in Latin America.

Of these, the current regulation and the one year extension that our report today is calling for, will continue to help 2.9 million Afghani refugees of whom about 40% are in Pakistan and Iran and the 60% balance in Afghanistan itself.

A total of EUR 24.3 million was given to Afghani refugees with a further EUR 960 000 to Thailand, EUR 6 million to Sri Lanka, EUR 11.8 million to Burma and EUR 1.8 million to Nepal.

In Afghanistan, about 2 million people were assisted by the mine-clearance programme which is crucial in returning that country back to normality.

Therefore, in a sense, an immediate approval of the proposal would postpone the need for a long-term solution.

In doing so it would nevertheless allow the institutions to engage in a more thorough dialogue in this area and hopefully allow us to find a more permanent solution by 2001.

This is also a very timely report in the context of asylum-seekers.

We are now presented with a solution by this Parliament, by our institutions in Europe, where we want to and can help people where the problem is.

We can stop people needing or wanting to come across if we can help them at the place where the problem has arisen.

The central thrust of my report is to help the people in war-torn areas, in ravaged parts of the world, to settle back to normality, to have proper foundations and sanitation, proper infrastructure, and to stop them needing to travel as asylum seekers and refugees.

Mr President, may I begin by stating how bizarre it is that we are debating the extension of a regulation tonight in May 2000 that already expired last December and which, under the Commission' s proposal, would again expire in seven months' time.

As the rapporteur for this Parliament on the original resolution four years ago, I cannot but comment that this represents a failure of political commitment in Europe to aiding five million refugees, some of the poorest of the poor, in Asia and in Latin America.

Nevertheless we are here now, and the Socialist Group supports the rapporteur' s recommendation for adoption of this regulation with the minimum of amendments, already agreed in principle with the Council, in order to allow a fast-track, one-reading approval of the extension, and in reality to allow refugee support projects this year to go ahead rather than be cancelled.

The need for this work remains as strong as it did four years ago.

It is no good us debating conflict resolution in the Parliament and then finding that the sole support to assist people when the guns are put down or when the period of immediate humanitarian assistance is at an end is then forgotten altogether.

This regulation has enabled us to intervene in countries where there is deep conflict with serious abuses of human rights.

For example in Afghanistan, which has today broken all world records for refugees with six million people having left the country since 1992, leaving the single largest and longest staying refugee population in the world.

Or like the protection of the terrorised indigenous peoples fleeing from Burma.

As one conflict ends another begins, as the half a million returnees expected in Timor by December this year go to demonstrate.

On this regulation, we know that the Council has some divided thinking.

I have to say, Mr Patten, I regret that the Commission does too.

Whilst it has supported projects in Asia to a great degree it has failed to address properly and with sufficient vigour the problems of refugees and internally displaced people in Latin America.

You know that I have spent much time visiting and studying the problems of violent, armed conflict in Colombia.

In that country alone there have been 800 000 internally displaced people since 1996; 123 000 new internally displaced people between January and June last year.

It is a disgrace that with this regulation the European Commission in the past has failed to address this problem.

The sort of forced displacement that we have seen in Colombia I have seen too in Chiapas in southern Mexico where the presence of international aid workers is essential for the protection of human rights.

Finally, I would like to congratulate Mr Deva on his report, thank him for his kind words in his speech and endorse what he says.

I know he will be listening carefully to the Commissioner when he sums up to see if he will put on record that promise to ensure that a future proposal for a multiannual regulation comes forward and that the annual reports will be provided.

With Mr Deva we ask those questions of you, Mr Patten, and if we do not get satisfactory answers the Socialists on this side of the House will be supporting Mr Deva in taking a very different stance on this report altogether.

Mr President, I should like to thank Mr Deva for a very good report, of which it might be said that it is as long as the Commission' s text is short.

It no doubt says something about the relationship between Parliament and the Commission at the moment that the text presented to us has been produced very urgently and is therefore very brief and very simple.And, as Mr Howitt also mentioned, is it, of course, not particularly satisfactory to receive it four or five months after the regulation has in fact expired, but this is actually the usual way, although I do not suspect Mr Patten of being up to no good.

It is the usual way things are debated in parliaments.

A report is submitted which says that we must now extend the regulation.

It is four months since it expired.

Parliament is thus, in actual fact, compelled to say: all right, then, we really have to accept the extension for, otherwise, there will be even more people dying of hunger and destitution.

It is not a fair way of doing things, and I shall therefore, like Mr Deva and others, also listen to what Mr Patten has to say.

That said, however, I would also say that we need to implement this proposal as quickly as possible, for we must try to help as best we can and just hope that we can find a more satisfactory way of doing things in future.

One simple little matter, which Mr Deva also emphasises, and which I too think we ought to discuss in the future, is the situation of women and children, which is, of course, extremely difficult and always will be in these situations.

We therefore need to concentrate very heavily on this area and find some methodical ways of doing so, partly by involving NGOs and others who can make a contribution.

Mr President, I would like to join in the heavy criticism which has been levelled by the parliamentary Committee on Budgetary Control and the Committee on Development and Cooperation and which has been outlined in the otherwise very constructive report of Mr Deva.

These committees complained about the fact that the annual reports have not been issued by the Commission, and what is worse, the independent evaluations have failed to materialise, although these are, of course, vital in order to establish that the validity period of the regulations definitely needs to be extended.

But how can we do this without the necessary reports at our disposal?

As has already been expressed in other criticism, this is probably once again a case of outstanding payments, unnecessarily complicated procedures for financial control and a fragmentation of efforts.

Also the fact that the amounts spent are disproportionate to the number of displaced persons raises questions.

Commissioner, of the EUR 240 million, 40% has been allocated to Latin America which has less than 1% of refugees in the world, while 60% has been granted to Asia which has 40% of the displaced persons.

Were it not for the fact that a sudden discontinuation of the programmes would cause undesired effects and result in innocent victims, we would follow the advice of the Committee on Budgetary Control, but instead we will now follow Mr Deva' s recommendation.

He has called for an extension of that programme by one year, although Mr Howitt has already pointed out that, in actual fact, we are already halfway through that year.

We hope that the report and in-depth evaluation will as yet be forthcoming.

Mr President, we are not talking about humanitarian aid but about viable projects aimed at self-sufficiency and the reintegration of refugees and displaced persons, ex-soldiers, etc.

Surely we should be able to come up with the goods and establish that there is indeed reduced dependency on aid.

Mr President, we are prepared to give the Commission some respite because we know that so many people are making huge efforts and because Parliament too is not exactly whiter than white as far as the Council is concerned, which you are under-staffing, but I think that, in any case, we will need to get the Commission to keep its promise to us, because otherwise this cooperation will be futile.

Mr President, it seems simple. All we need to do is to change the year 1999 to 2000 and the European Union can support campaigns for another year for the benefit of uprooted people in Latin America and Asia.

There is, however, more to it than that, as evidenced by the opinions of the Committee on Budgets and the Committee on Budgetary Control.

With regard to the implementation and evaluation of this programme, the Commission has not exactly come up smelling of roses.

Little consideration has so far been given to the operation of this programme.

Sound annual evaluation reports are lacking.

Moreover, we are still waiting for a long-term vision for this programme.

I would, therefore, make the approval of the extension of this programme dependent on the availability of reports. Parliament must use this as a way of forcing the Commission to account for the spending of the development funds.

None of this detracts from the fact that the recipient countries sometimes have dire situations to contend with.

The European Union must help where it can.

The role of the national Member States, however, is at least as important. Indeed, at European level, we are always running the risk of making pledges that we cannot keep due to budgetary restraints.

The most important prerequisite to a long-term solution for the problems outlined is sound coordination of Member State efforts.

Mr President, it is not only a political responsibility but a moral responsibility that the European Union has to help those in straits outside its boundaries as equally as they can.

This being the purpose of this report, I congratulate its rapporteur, Mr Deva.

To help those in need when it is in our hands to do so, at the end of the day, results in our really helping ourselves.

The Bible as always is right when it states that there is a giving which does not impoverish.

The other side of the coin is also true.

Countries that have serious internal hostilities and all the terrible reaping of that where the innocent go to the wall and countries encouraging displaced persons to return home ought to be helped.

The fact of the matter is that those displaced are mostly women and children.

This makes it even more imperative that action should be taken.

Food supplies, water and sanitation, housing and shelter, education are, of course, the top priorities.

I welcome the recognition of this.

I believe that the four amendments submitted by the Committee on Development and Cooperation must be accepted by the Commission and I hope that the Commissioner, Mr Patten, who did not very often give me happy replies on other things when he was in another office, perhaps today will give me some little encouragement that Christmas is really coming.

It is essential that annual reports are submitted by the Commission to this Parliament and to the Council, as is specified.

If such reports are not forthcoming then I could not find my vote to go with this renewal.

I believe that the Commission must answer to this and tell us what they are going to do.

The financial framework needs to be introduced in keeping with provisions already agreed to.

These provisions must be strictly adhered to and this change is absolutely necessary.

The new text on comitology is necessary and when the long-term future of this regulation is assessed, this Parliament must have before it independent valuation reports, so where improvements can be made they can press upon the Commission to make those improvements.

Where they think this expenditure of finance can be maximised to a better reaching of the objective and target of these regulations, then we should have the information before us so as to give us a good, healthy and proper debate.

Mr President, the Commission proposes that the existing regulation be extended.

According to the regulation, the Commission is obliged to prepare an annual evaluation for Parliament and the Council, something it has not done. However, the programme must not be halted under any circumstances; that would be quite wrong.

It is important that the programme should be extended, but not before we have seen the evaluations.

The Commission promised that we would have the evaluations in March, then in April and then in May. So where have they got to?

An independent evaluation is needed for otherwise we have no guarantees that the money has been spent properly.

The purpose of the evaluation is, of course, to improve the future programmes.

Everything concerning development aid, including the rehabilitation of refugees, ought to fall within the remit of the Directorate-General for Development.

It is this Directorate-General which has the expertise and it should therefore also have the responsibility.

The Court of Auditors has also criticised the lack of clarity in the way the different initiatives are related to one other.

It is indefensible and damaging to the programme that no effort is being made to introduce coherence.

I am glad that there is support, especially in the Committee on Budgetary Control, for my amendment to the effect that the programme should only be extended once the Commission has fulfilled its part of the agreement and submitted annual reports and evaluations.

Without this amendment, the Commission could get away with not having submitted a single evaluation report since the regulation came into force in 1997.

I have also noted that my dear friend, Mr Dell'Alba, has had his grumbles printed as an appendix to my opinion.

However, he is only speaking for himself.

At any rate, he had no backing in the Committee, since he was the only one to vote against the conclusions.

Mr President, let me first of all thank my honourable friend for his extremely thoughtful report and for the care and attention that he has devoted to the issue of uprooted people in Asia and Latin America.

It is common to all the speakers in the Chamber and to others outside that it is an excellent report but, speaking for myself, I would not have expected any less from my honourable friend.

Regulation 443/97 on aid to uprooted people is an important instrument clearly, an instrument to deliver aid that is not covered by humanitarian assistance and the honourable Member Ms Maes made this distinction extremely clearly.

It supports projects implemented by international organisations like the UN and the UNHCR and NGOs and these measures are designed to improve living conditions, not only for returnees but also for the communities into which they will integrate.

In that context particular importance is attached to clearing the land of mines, a point which my honourable friend referred to, rebuilding farming systems, supporting secure livelihoods and embracing key health and education challenges.

A number of honourable Members have made clear the good and practical work done as a result of this regulation.

I noted in particular what the honourable gentleman, Mr Howitt, said about geographical balance and one or two other honourable Members referred to that as well.

I also noted what the honourable gentleman Dr Paisley said about our moral duties to those who are uprooted.

Dr Paisley and I have not always seen eye to eye on every subject but I hope that this is a subject on which we can see eye to eye and even share quotations from both the Old and the New Testament.

The Commission started preparations for the renewal of this regulation in Spring 1999.

However, these discussions were delayed by the former Commission' s resignation last year.

It was decided as an interim step to propose an extension of the current regulation up to the end of the year 2000.

A Commission activity report covering the three years of implementation of the regulation from 1997 to 1999 was presented in its preliminary version to Mr Miranda, the President of the Committee on Development and Cooperation of Parliament, and, of course, to the rapporteur.

In parallel, preliminary findings of an on-going external evaluation on the implementation of the regulation were also transmitted.

The final evaluation report will be submitted to the Parliament by September of this year.

Now to the amendments: the Commission broadly agrees with the four amendments which have been tabled by the Parliament.

However, concerning the first amendment I would like to stress again that the draft of the activity report has already been made available to the Committee on Development and Cooperation and that official submission will take place next June at the latest.

The Commission agrees with amendments two and three since they reflect the existing framework of interinstitutional cooperation with regard to budgetary discipline and comitology.

Now let me come to the fourth amendment.

I recognise that the Parliament would like to see the independent evaluation report extremely soon.

A number of honourable Members have argued that you should see that by July.

We believe however, that given the late contracting of the 1999 programme, which means that some activities are only now getting under way, it would be better to finalise the report, which must be a thorough and comprehensive document, a month or two later, say by September.

That will give us a reasonable period to evaluate 1999' s activities.

However, as you know, the evaluation is already under way and I will make any interim reports available as soon as they are produced.

I want to make that commitment unequivocally.

I hope that Parliament would be willing to agree this approach.

There have been references to the new regulation.

I can confirm that the new regulation is under preparation.

It will need to take into consideration the findings of the evaluation exercise and, of course, before presenting it to the legislative authority, we in the Commission will have to ensure that we are able to mobilise the necessary human resources for its effective implementation.

Too often, in my experience of just seven months, we undertake to do things without having first made sure that we have got the resources to carry them through and it is important for us to be honest about what we want to do and how we can achieve it.

Before closing let me once again thank Parliament for its support in extending the validity of this important instrument.

I can assure honourable Members that I have taken account of the criticisms and of the aspirations that have been expressed during the course of this debate.

I am old enough and experienced enough in political life to recognise the difference between a standing ovation and a raspberry, or a bronx cheer as the Americans would call it, and I do not wish to sit through another debate about a subject as important as this and hear it dominated by well-meant criticisms.

So I hope that we can do better by the time we next discuss this important subject.

We are dealing with important technical details but, above all, we are dealing, as honourable Members have pointed out, with human tragedies that lie behind the need for all these measures and that is why we have to ensure that our own response is as rapid and as effective as possible.

The vote will be taken tomorrow at 11a.m.

The next item is the report (A5-0118/2000) drawn up by Mr Carraro, on behalf of the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy, on the proposal for a Council decision on the conclusion of the Agreements between the European Community and its Member States, of the one part, and the Swiss Confederation, of the other part (7260/2000 - COM(1999) 229 - C5­0204/2000): 1. on the free movement of persons (9748/1999 - C5­0197/2000­1999/0103(AVC)); 2. on air transport (9749/1999 - C5­0198/2000 - 1999/0104(AVC)); 3. on the carriage of goods and passengers by rail and road (9750/1999 - C5­0199/2000 - 1999/0105(AVC)); 4. on scientific and technological cooperation between the European Community and the European Atomic Energy Community, of the one part, and the Swiss Confederation, of the other part (9751/1999 - C5­0200/2000 - 1999/0106(AVC)); 5. on certain aspects relating to public procurement (9752/1999 - C5­0201/2000 - 1999/0107(AVC)); 6. on trade in agricultural products (9753/1999 - C5­0202/2000 - 1999/0108(AVC)); 7. on mutual recognition in relation to conformity assessment between the European Community and the Swiss Confederation (9755/1999 - C5­0203/2000 - 1999/0109(AVC))

Mr President, this draft recommendation marks the end of a political and institutional process which began 10 or so years ago under the auspices of the then President of the Commission, Jacques Delors, who, as far back as the early 1990s, predicted the entry of the Swiss Confederation into the then common economic area.

As you are aware, this project was blocked by the Swiss referendum in December 1992, when, albeit by a very narrow majority, the Swiss citizens decided to block the entry of the Swiss Confederation into the European Community.

That was the beginning of a period of uncertainty, of widely sectoral agreements, which is being brought to an end by this package of seven agreements, which are closely related to the economy but which are also wide-reaching and of general interest.

The seven agreements govern the free movement of persons, air transport, the carriage of goods and passengers by rail and road, scientific and technological cooperation, public procurement, agricultural products and, in relation to these, mutual recognition in the area of conformity assessment.

They are also characterised by a specific simultaneous enforcement clause to the effect that the agreements will enter into force only insofar as they are approved or rejected en masse.

For this reason, although the draft legislative resolutions are separate documents, they have to be tabled and approved en bloc because, and I stress this, they have to be enforced en bloc.

The agreements were signed as early as June 1999, ratified by the Swiss Parliament on 8 October 1999, and tomorrow they will have reached the stage of ratification by the European Parliament.

However, I would also like to point out to the House that the citizens of Switzerland will, once again, be called upon to pronounce judgement on this package of agreements, and, therefore, also on relations with the European Union, in the referendum on 21 May next.

Nevertheless, it is as well to remember that this declaration will certainly be different from the 1992 decision in form and substance.

In 1992, the people of Switzerland were called upon to pronounce judgement on Switzerland' s accession, whereas on 21 May they will be asked to approve or reject a package of strictly economic agreements which do not have the political implications of the 1992 agreements.

However, I feel it is highly significant that Parliament is voting on and approving the texts - if that is the decision of the House, as it was the largely unanimous decision of the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy and as it is the desire of all the parliamentary committees which have expressed their opinion - and giving its assent before the Swiss referendum on 21 May.

Not, of course, in order to undermine the sovereignty of the Swiss people' s vote in any way, but, on the contrary, to give a further sign of confidence and conviction that the development of a common European economic area and growing integration of the markets and economies of this Europe - of which Switzerland is, clearly, at the heart owing to its central geographical position - are a concern which we share and which we consider more important than disputes over procedures.

In my opinion, it is politically significant - and, for this, all thanks go to the Chairman of the Committee on Industry and the staff which have made it possible - that Parliament is going to vote before 21 May, for this will present the Swiss citizens with a sure, well-defined legal framework on which to pronounce judgement.

The opinion of the Committee on Industry is wholly favourable and I recommend that the House votes unanimously for the motions during tomorrow' s sitting.

Mr President, I want to begin by thanking the rapporteur for the committee responsible. He has produced a very coherent opinion.

I also want to thank the Commission for its good work in connection with the negotiations.

With regard to my committee' s area of responsibility, that of citizens' freedoms and rights, this agreement is welcome.

I also want to emphasise that it is important to view the agreement in its entirety.

In the course of my work on the opinion, I in fact became aware of quite a number of problems and difficulties for EU citizens who live and work in Switzerland. In certain cases, it has been a matter of discrimination pure and simple.

There is no doubt that the agreement we now have provides great opportunities to solve those problems which exist and to prevent new problems from arising.

