The reform of the CFP and the forthcoming launch of the Green Paper mark a critical time for the fishing industry.

On the one hand all of us here in this Chamber want to see the existence of the fishing industry, not least because we enjoy eating the product; but on the other hand we are faced with grave scientific evidence of depleting fish stocks, so much so that certain species may no longer exist in the future.

In Scotland, as mentioned this evening by many of my Scottish colleagues, the issue of cod is dominating the news agenda.

Some say that even before the launch of the Green Paper there could be little left of the Scottish fleet because of cuts in TACs, quotas and the proposed cod recovery proposals.

Others say that in order to have a fishing industry at all we need to conserve, they hark back to the 1996 article in Nature warning of the collapse of cod stocks.

I really do not know how you square the circle, but by the end of 2002 we must.

From talking to people in the industry, those involved in scientific research and those involved in conservation, it seems there is a willingness to be involved and a need for greater participation of all those concerned.

In Scotland, the Scottish Fishermen's Federation and the WWF have joined forces and suggested a better way of working.

The proposal for zonal management and greater regionalisation of the CFP is a serious one that has the support of fishing and conservation groups alike.

In other countries there are also suggestions.

This can only be good for debate.

In conclusion, this year and next will provide an opportunity to get the CFP right.

I look forward to debating this on future Tuesdays in Strasbourg.

Mr President, Commissioner Fischler, President Prodi was decorated by the King of Morocco and at the same time signed a cooperation agreement with that country, which excluded fishing.

The European fleet in the Canary-Saharan Banks has not taken to sea for a year now and thousands of workers are grounded.

The Commission is not facing up to its responsibilities and is willing to sign a limited and ill-judged agreement that can only lead to the destruction of our fleet in two or three years' time.

Resolutions adopted in this Parliament are scorned, as is Parliament itself, and the Member States, Spain in particular, turn a blind eye.

This is the deplorable image that shipowners, fishermen and the populations affected in Galicia, Andalusia, the Canaries and Portugal have today of the European Union.

I am sorry to have to say this, Commissioner Fischler, but things could not have been handled more badly.

Mr President, first of all, I should like to congratulate both MEPs, Mr Gallagher and Mr Poignant, on the way in which they have set the tone for the new Green Paper, for it feels like this debate forms part of the groundwork for this paper, and we could say that we are using these reports for our own ends in an appropriate manner in order to adopt a position on this.

If we consider the fisheries policy, then there is actually one aspect which needs to change on a number of levels, and with regard to that debate I should like to put forward a few initial points, which are also based on the situation in my region, so as to give you an indication of the expectations we have from the Green Paper.

To begin with, there is the issue of control, especially quota control, within the EU.

This will need to be regulated more effectively in future, for any policy hinges on control, and if we want to adopt a policy in a truly structured manner, sound control is vital.

This is also the key point, and in due course, we will need to consider sanctions in this field in the event that countries do not have adequate systems for quota control.

The second important point for the future policy is a restructuring programme which needs to be developed to replace the present multiannual orientation programme.

European subsidies should benefit actual capacity reduction first and foremost, as well as environmental and quality investments with the following action points: a sea-day scheme in all EU countries - in my own country this scheme has worked excellently, which was also evident from the fisheries conference held in Brussels a couple of months ago.

A second point is a premium scheme for the use of nets, which restricts additional catches. This is a truly technological improvement.

The third point is the so-called set aside scheme for regions which are hit hard by the dwindling fish stocks.

I am, for example, thinking of regions in Europe which heavily depend on cod stocks and the decline thereof.

Europe should definitely invest in this.

A fourth point, in my opinion, is the reorganisation of the fisheries policy which must be further developed.

A fifth point is the actual investment in food safety, because the dioxin issue will soon be hitting the fisheries industry, and we must be able to deal with this adequately.

A sixth point is that, in the light of the environmental problems in candidate countries upon EU enlargement, we will need to pay particular attention to the problems which occur there in the field of food safety.

Mr President, we are faced with the total inability of the Commission and the Council to negotiate on behalf of the citizens.

The latest Euro-barometer data shows scepticism is rising, perhaps as a true reflection of this inability to negotiate.

In the agreement with Morocco they have had no weight whatsoever.

Even the French Presidency told us at the time that it was unable to secure an agreement.

We are going to have a major social problem on our hands, and we have no real alternative.

Now some of our fishing towns are going to develop their economy partly around and thanks to the drug that Morocco grows and markets and we Europeans consume.

To Moroccan blackmail of negotiating with the resources of some fishing grounds that belong to the Sahrawi people, the Commission responds by seeing Community fishermen as real enemies, cutting their quotas and signalling to Morocco that that is the way to go, without proposing an alternative.

Can anybody be sure today that all the Community boats that have had anything to do with fishing in Morocco are tied up?

Well, then, Morocco-European Union relations must be seriously affected.

All the funds poured into this agreement should be used to finance alternatives in the areas affected.

Meanwhile, the Commission Presidency is trying to settle a very long-standing problem at the last minute.

We are concerned that the solution proposed is just a makeshift solution for the sake of the media and not a real solution to the problem.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, globalisation is a growing phenomenon which will entail innovations and will bring substantial change to all sectors of the economy.

I fully agree with Mr Varela when he describes globalisation as a phenomenon whose repercussions vary according to specific cases.

Although, for many, it is a challenge which generates wealth and opportunities, for others, those who have difficulty in adapting to change or are unable to do so, it is a source of problems and discontent.

Adaptation to a global economy has had varying effects on the fisheries sector.

In fact, in situations such as that of Sicily or Sardinia, some of the traditional coastal fleets, which have grown up and survived in a local context thus far, feel threatened by the impact of globalisation. The work of such fleets is frequently the lifeblood of local communities.

Therefore, when we talk of negotiations underway within the World Trade Organisation on the liberalisation of trade, we must take into account the different specific circumstances in order to avoid bringing about total liberalisation of customs duties which could lead to irreparable damage and the destruction of the entire sector.

We must, therefore, uphold a tariff policy based on reciprocal trade, taking into account the fact that, in many countries, imports from Europe are subject to non-tariff barriers which hamper the smooth functioning of the free market.

Moreover, we must prevent the fishing of certain migratory species which, in Europe, are subject to tying-up periods but which, in other countries, can be fished and then sold on the Community market.

It would also be appropriate to revise the system of existing trade preferences, for sometimes the level of development of third countries no longer justifies the granting of these preferences.

Finally, we must uphold the European Union policy which makes access to the Community market for products coming from third countries dependent upon access for the European fleet to the fishing waters of the countries with which we are negotiating.

Mr President, honourable Members, on behalf of the Commission, I should first like to thank all the rapporteurs, the Committee on Fisheries and the other committees involved for their comprehensive work in the run up to today's debate.

I should also like to extend special thanks to the Chairman of the Committee on Fisheries, Mr Varela, for coordinating all the work and for his interesting own-initiative report.

Mr Varela, you make it quite plain in your report that it is impossible to discuss the future of the common fisheries policy without taking account of the broader economy surrounding fisheries.

Like every other economic activity, fisheries are affected by globalisation.

I fully endorse much of what you say in your report and in the resolution attached to it.

You highlight the fact that European fishing is committed to the principle of multifunctionality, i.e. the principle of a sustainable fisheries economy which preserves fish stocks and protects the marine environment and makes an important contribution to the economic and social structures of coastal areas engaged in fishing.

I particularly welcome your support in the fight against illegal and irresponsible fishing.

We shall have an opportunity to discuss Community solutions to this burning issue.

But I can already see that you, too, are in favour of a more resolute approach here.

I think that we need further discussion on three points in the report.

First, the report shows a certain tendency towards more protection from international competition on the grounds that fisheries provide a great many jobs in certain coastal areas.

That is certainly true, but if we unilaterally insist that jobs must be safeguarded solely with the help of the fisheries policy, without taking overall local conditions in a coastal area into account, then we run the risk, under certain circumstances, of subsidising in the wrong direction.

That would be counterproductive, both for fish stocks and for jobs.

Fisheries needs to stand on their own two feet.

This may lead, in numerous cases, to a reduction in the status quo, but when regions are affected by such structural adjustments, then the Community must, of course, help.

The most efficient form of help we can provide is by giving young people a future and offering them alternative employment to fishing.

Secondly, I should like to comment on the WTO negotiations which you mention.

As you are aware, we do not yet know if a new WTO round will even start and, if so, to what extent.

But even if there is a comprehensive round, I very much doubt that the Community would be willing to accept reciprocity in fisheries on the questions at issue, such as investments or the right of establishment.

Until now, only natives or nationals of an EU Member State have been allowed to invest in the fisheries sector.

Thirdly and finally, I should like to remind you that it has been accepted since the beginning of the common fisheries policy that the Community has one seat and one vote.

This purely numerical disadvantage is more than offset by the advantage of having a greater say in the shaping of international fisheries policy.

To summarise, Mr Varela, your report makes an important contribution to the continuing debate on the future of the common fisheries policy.

The Commission will certainly take your thoughts into maximum consideration in its forthcoming Green Paper.

That brings me to the reports and motions for resolutions from Mr Gallagher and Mr Poignant.

Both reports start from the same premise.

The fisheries sector in the Community is under equal pressure from several quarters.

Fish stocks are declining, there is excess capacity in the fleet and it is becoming more and more difficult to access third country waters.

I am delighted that you basically subscribe to the analysis in the Commission report on the application of the system for fisheries in 1996-1998.

It is true that some progress was made - I need only mention the flexibility in year-to-year stock management or the new TACs in the North Sea for non-regulated species or the regulation on technical measures or the introduction of the VMS - but we still have to admit that we have failed to reverse the negative trend in numerous important stocks, such as cod or hake.

Both rapporteurs also highlight the following serious shortcomings, as identified in the Commission report: effort limitation has either not worked or has been unsatisfactory, the regulation on technical measures in the Mediterranean has been patchily implemented, the fourth MAGP is not nearly ambitious enough and control arrangements have not been made stricter, as we proposed in 1998.

Meetings with various representatives of the fisheries sector have also shown that we need either to improve or to overhaul numerous aspects of the fisheries policy if we are to achieve responsible, sustainable fisheries.

Differences of opinion notwithstanding, the majority of those affected are agreed that we need to do more.

In particular, we need stricter controls, we need better application of the rules, we need to reduce discards, we need to promote scientific research and we need to involve those affected, especially the fishermen themselves, at an earlier stage and more intensively when taking decisions on fisheries policy.

The Commission therefore agrees to the motions for resolutions on several points.

However, it has the impression, as regards the delicate question of the 6/12-mile zone, that the majority of those affected are in favour of maintaining the status quo.

The Commission will publish its Green Paper in a few weeks' time, together with the reports under Article 14 paragraph 2 of Regulation 3760.

We must use the ensuing debate to discuss how to rectify the shortcomings identified in the reports and suitable solutions for doing so in order to put the fisheries sector in the Community back on a viable basis.

On the evidence of the motions for resolutions, the main objectives of the reform process identified by all three rapporteurs are as follows: to reduce excess capacity and improve coherence with environmental policy measures in order to maintain and re-establish stocks; to ensure that the people directly affected are more closely involved in decision making and to resolve local or urgent problems more efficiently in order to ensure that the rules are adhered to and applied and fisheries management is improved overall - in other words, everything which qualifies as good governance.

Then, to create a fisheries sector which is both sustainable and economically viable and internationally competitive - while at the same time helping those who are forced to look elsewhere for work; to develop a modern foreign fisheries policy which is closely coordinated with other Community policies in order to achieve responsible and rational use of resources, and, most importantly, to redevelop the Mediterranean dimension.

This brings me to Mr Cunha's report on Guinea-Bissau.

This resolution will guarantee the activities of the Community fleet in question, while at the same time supporting the local sector.

I am delighted that the rapporteur supports our proposal.

The sum of EUR 6.5 million now released will be used specifically to restore the fisheries-related installations which suffered serious damage during the armed conflict in Guinea-Bissau.

This will help the Community fleet to make better use of the agreement.

In detail, we want to support the following activities: reconstruction of the infrastructure, controls on and monitoring of the fleet and new research programmes.

I should like to make a few comments here on the terms of payment: a tranche of 50% of the overall amount will be paid out first, as soon as the government has submitted an action programme.

The remainder, in other words the second half, will be paid out once Guinea-Bissau has filed a detailed report on the implementation of individual activities under the action programme and the use of the funds earmarked for them.

Finally, a brief word on the proposed amendments.

Proposed Amendments Nos 1, 2 and 3 extend the deadline for implementing the activities required to 2003.

I think this proposed amendment is both reasonable and justified and the Commission can therefore support it.

We fully share the concern expressed in proposed Amendment No 4 but, as we already inform the budgetary authority of all financial and budgetary transactions under the terms of our Interinstitutional Agreement, proposed Amendment No 4 is in fact superfluous.

As far as the contributions to the debate on the current state of negotiations with Morocco are concerned, I should like to thank Parliament for its obvious confidence in the Commission's work.

I have to tell you that the agreement ceased de facto to apply 14 months ago, and that the Moroccan side was, unfortunately, not prepared to enter into serious negotiation on a new agreement until the end of October last year, in other words, just three and a half months ago.

We did, however, make good use of the time up to Christmas, with one technical discussion a week in either Brussels or Rabat.

Negotiations were held practically every day in Rabat between 2 January and 9 January.

We really have done our utmost here.

For the rest, it is wrong to say that we have received no support from the Council.

Both the main countries affected and the presidency have supported us in our efforts and I think that, at the end of the day, the meeting between the King of Morocco and our Commission President was a useful one.

I hope that negotiations will again get properly under way, and that hopefully we shall soon be on the home straight.

The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon.

The next item is the joint debate on:

the report (A5-0360/2000) by Mr van den Bos, on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation, on the proposal for a Council decision concerning the conclusion of the Cooperation Agreement between the European Community and the People' s Republic of Bangladesh [7595/1/1999 - COM(1999) 155 - C5-0356/2000 - 1999/0086(ACC)];

the oral question (B5-0004/2001) by Mr Miranda, on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation, to the Commission, on Bangladesh.

Mr President, Bangladesh is rich and poor at the same time.

Rich in human resources, poor in capital means.

It is one of the world' s poorest and most densely populated countries.

It is regularly afflicted by natural disasters.

This is why it is important for Europe to give as much aid as possible.

The agreement with the European Union bears witness to good relations and provides an excellent backdrop to stepping up development cooperation and trade.

In addition, the agreement lays the foundation to the political dialogue which provides for human rights, good governance and democratic freedoms.

On my recent visit to Bangladesh with Mr Miranda, I noticed that they attach far greater importance to relations with Europe than we often realise.

The government as well as the opposition, but also academics, journalists, industry and non-governmental organisations look up to Europe and expect a great deal from us, more than America, for instance.

We should not disappoint them in this expectation, and make every effort to promote positive developments.

The following recent trends can be cited as favourable: economic growth by more than 4%, a fall in the population increase, falling illiteracy and greater participation of women in the political and social arenas.

This is in contrast to the fact that the country labours under the burden of an increase in domestic violence against women, but also in violence on the streets and in political confrontations.

Abused women accounted for more than 30% of the patients in a hospital we visited.

Child labour is still widespread, despite the recent progress made and initiatives presented by the government and industry.

Mass-scale political strikes regularly bring life in Bangladesh to a standstill.

Foreign investment is only possible if the government ensures more peaceful social conditions.

There is also instability politically speaking.

There is a deep historic distrust between the two major parties, despite the fact that you can hardly tell them apart in terms of content.

The opposition must resume its constructive role.

Without peaceful cooperation between the key parties, the country cannot come out of its political and economic impasse.

It is therefore essential for the forthcoming elections to be above board.

The European Union should not fail to send observers, including members of this Parliament.

In addition to flooding and erosion of the river banks, the population is also suffering on a large scale from the poisoning of drinking water.

In principle, the European Union can provide valuable aid to help alleviate all of these problems.

Reinforcement of the government apparatus should take centre stage in aid provision.

The state is functioning ineffectively in very many ways, especially in the finance and education sectors.

It is unfortunate that with regard to aid, the European Commission does not have the sound reputation among donors which it should really have.

Often, funds only become available after long delays, it at all.

The delegation is not sufficiently involved in defining the programme.

The shortage of personnel leads to a lack of supervision in projects.

In short, this is a good, practical example which illustrates the need for reforms in the management sector.

In order to provide efficient aid, it is vital for the European Commission, the EU Member States and other donors to dovetail their policies.

The many non-governmental organisations which are present fulfil a key role in the implementation of programmes.

The resources are pooled sector-by-sector, which benefits effectiveness and harms European visibility.

But the advantage outweighs the disadvantage.

Premier Hasina assured us that the Chittagong Hills peace agreement is being implemented to the letter.

From our visit to the site, we gleaned a different impression, if the truth be told.

Neither the Land Commission nor the Regional Council were functioning.

The military presence has not let up.

European aid can only be given to this region if substantial progress is made when the peace agreement is being implemented, which, unfortunately is not yet the case.

The development of Bangladesh hinges on the good governance of the country' s own leaders. Europe cannot offer anything but aid.

My conclusion is that the country should not be as poor as it is now.

Absolutely not. If only the country' s resources were better employed.

Mr President, in actual fact, suffice it to say that I concur with Mr van den Bos, and I would like to take the opportunity to emphasise how fitting Parliament' s recommendations are here.

Bangladesh has always been one of those poor countries which are regularly in the news, and the disasters which hit that country are always heart-rending.

When we now study the statistics, we notice that, all of a sudden, the country could be considered a success story, with economic growth of 5% of the GNP per capita, with growth in export of no less than 12.8% in the five years between 1993 and 1998, and even boasting a decrease in the population growth.

Mothers now have three children instead of seven.

In short, you could be forgiven for thinking that everything is moving in the right direction, but, of course, this is the difference between a country which is very, very, very poor and a country which is only very, very poor.

It remains a problem if you realise that 60 million people live under the poverty line, and you have economic growth which cannot keep up with the population growth.

Out of the 162 countries on the Human Development Index, Bangladesh does not come last, but 145th, which is very sad indeed.

So we welcome this toll-free access of the country' s goods into the European market.

We think that this will have a favourable impact, but we believe that we, ourselves, should make a greater effort to, for example, breathe new life into the jute organisation which died a death.

Finally, I, too, would appeal for more use to be made of the human rights clause which is encapsulated in the first article of the agreement, so as to realise those aspects which Mr van den Bos expressed so eloquently.

Mr President, Commissioner, today, at last, we have an opportunity to express our opinion on the new cooperation agreement concluded with Bangladesh.

Our fellow Member and rapporteur, Mr van den Bos, with whom I visited that country last year, has already stated that we have approved this.

But he also outlined some of the central thoughts of the Committee on Development and Cooperation as to what the Community' s future action in Bangladesh should be.

Without wishing to repeat what has already been stated, I would nevertheless like to highlight some issues, on which we would also like to hear the Commission' s thoughts.

This is the most heavily populated of the so-called 'less-developed countries' .

The fragility of its economic situation, marked by the predominance of the primary sector, which involves around 65% of the working population, and also the acuteness of social problems, are highlighted by the most varied indicators.

And as if this were not enough, there are also the terrible disasters that constantly afflict the country.

In addition to these factors, the political situation, as has already been mentioned, still shows a worrying degree of instability on all counts.

We were able to confirm this for ourselves during our visit to this still young country. We saw the widespread poverty and the problems facing health and education but also some possibilities that are opening up, such as initiatives arising from cooperation, which are taking place at every level, either under the auspices of the government or which are being implemented by NGOs, the interesting use of microcredit, even though it benefits limited numbers of people, and the role and the particularly difficult situation of women.

We also saw the disastrous effects of erosion and of successive floods, and also the dangers and consequences of the huge environmental and health disaster caused by the presence of arsenic in drinking water.

We were also able to see the shortcomings in the political arena, which were quite clear in the climate of great violence that marks relations between the government of Mrs Hasina Wajed of the Awani League and the opposition, particularly the Nationalist Party of Bangladesh, which does not participate on a regular basis in the work of the national parliament.

We also saw the problems and delays in resolving the conflict with the people in the southern part of the country, specifically the Chittagong Hill Tracts.

As you all know, the European Union is Bangladesh' s main trading partner.

Around 45% of that country' s exports come to the European Union. Bangladesh has also benefited from various development instruments, such as aid for technical and financial cooperation with Asian countries, food and humanitarian aid and exemption from customs duties on exports.

The European Union has also provided Bangladesh with a considerable amount of external aid that has been earmarked for it and on which, in fact, the country is heavily dependent.

We also know that the current agreement carries on from the 1976 agreement, and can be extended according to future needs.

The question we now face now with regard to the circumstances I have just described is to know what real objectives and priorities this new agreement hopes to achieve and in general, what effects we hope to have on sustainable development in the field of administration and on the participation of the public and public organisations in national life.

In the resolution that we adopted in the Committee on Development and Cooperation, we indicated the directions that we felt to be the most appropriate.

Mr van den Bos has already mentioned them in his speech.

We now hope that the Commission will express its agreement or disagreement with the guidelines that we proposed.

We also hope, however, that the Commission will state to what extent it will be willing to provide political support for Bangladesh in order to overcome the problems to which I referred earlier.

Given the requests that the government and the opposition have already made we would also like the Commission to tell us how it intends to support the forthcoming electoral process and whether it will be sending a mission to observe the elections that have already been scheduled for this year.

Mr President, let me first of all say that I feel it is a privilege to discuss these matters, as we are doing here on the basis of your report.

For me it represents a sort of idyllic political consensus.

We agree on your report and we welcome it very much and this is not just nice, it is also really valuable for Bangladesh and other partners.

It is very useful that we in Europe should profoundly agree on how to work with our partners.

If we were discussing aimlessly without any sort of direction, they would not have a good partner, so it is really important that we agree.

A year ago I deliberately chose Bangladesh as my first destination on a normal bilateral field trip.

We went there after the UNCTAD conference in Bangkok.

I wanted to go to a non-ACP LDC country to start in the right place.

I also wanted to start in a country as Commissioner doing field trips, a country that I knew well already in order to better be able to assess how the Commission works.

If I went to a country I did not know, there would be too many disturbing impressions, but this one I knew quite well and I am happy to say that I was positively surprised by what I saw in the field.

We were closer to the poor women, we were further out in the villages than I had expected and we worked more through Bangladeshi NGOs than I had expected.

This is a good basis and also one of the reasons why Parliament and Commission are in harmony about where we go now.

There are big problems to discuss with the Government of Bangladesh, notably its inefficiency: it performs as badly as the Commission, so the two of them have a lot to talk about, but we know that and we are clear about it saying "our delivery problems are clear and well-known, but please do not add to them by also being slow and unclear in your decision-taking process".

This is why the new agreement that we are now deciding on is so important, because it, in fact, brings cooperation one step further forward and clarifies priorities.

We will go from one country to another across the world and bring what we are doing up to normal standards concerning the basis of cooperation and priorities.

So this is all very good

As to the questions that have been put concerning the elections, on 27 January we are sending the assessment team from the Commission over there and we will be ready, willing and eager to include representatives of Parliament in an observation capacity.

If this is what we finally decide to do, we think it may be very useful.

Bangladesh has done quite a number of valuable things in recent years: regionally, agreeing more with her neighbours and approaching solutions to very old problems.

As to the Chittagong Hill tribes, we take the view that the issue there is moving too slowly.

I clarified this when I was there in February last year.

On the other hand, problems relating to land-ownership and other things are very difficult to solve in any country.

The attitude is important and I believe they are trying to do something meaningful.

What Mr van den Bos has mentioned concerning donor coordination and the many NGOs in Bangladesh is interesting and important.

Many innovations have taken place there.

Microcredit is a great achievement and it is not only one very famous organisation that has been successful.

But I would come back, when we talk about development in Bangladesh, to the role of women.

Their ability to change the life and the situation of families is extraordinary, but I would, in fact, point to the many young women and girls in the textile factories who in a strange way represent the chaotic way of modernisation.

The alternative - not having jobs - is quite problematical, but the kinds of jobs they have are also very problematical.

At the end of the day our liberalisation, the access for them to our market, is part of the hope of these women and of Bangladesh, so I think we are on the right track and I very much appreciate the support and the agreement that we have on what to do in Bangladesh.

Mr President, I am very pleased to be able to speak in this debate on European Union cooperation with Bangladesh, a country I know well, a country I was proud to visit with the European Parliament's delegation in the autumn of 1998.

There are, of course, a great number of people with Bengali roots settled in London and other parts of the European Union, people originally from Dhaka, Sylhet and other parts of Bangladesh.

I know from them and from my visit that Bangladesh is a country of proud, hard-working people and a country with great prospects, but one which does need assistance from the more wealthy and developed parts of the world like the European Union.

This report helps provide that support and should be commended, and accordingly I pay warm tribute to the rapporteur and my other colleague.

But the rapporteur said something which struck me, as did Mrs Maes.

The rapporteur said that state structures in Bangladesh work badly and Mrs Maes derided some of the advances that Bangladesh has made in recent years.

Yet in many ways I think that Bangladesh is amazing for the way that it does work.

It does work despite its turbulent and violent history, despite the political problems, despite its other difficulties and despite the poverty.

It does function and, as the Commissioner has just said, that is amazing considering all the difficulties.

I believe that this is fundamentally a credit to the people and indeed to the Government of Bangladesh.

Now on the positive side - and some of you from other countries may not be aware of this - Bangladesh has lately been admitted as a full test cricket playing nation.

Perhaps more significantly, reserves of natural gas have now been discovered in the Bay of Bengal.

The European Parliament has to help ensure that Bangladesh is not exploited by the big multinational companies, that it is able to use its reserves properly and to sell them at the most competitive price, which may not mean just to India or to Russia.

The cricket aspect may seem irrelevant but it does show a determination to succeed and Bangladesh will do well in this field of test cricket and this will be an inspiration to millions of people in that country.

The report makes it clear that if the European Union works in partnership with local people it can help on big issues.

It can help with family planning, the key to stability for Bangladesh.

A poor or developing country cannot sustain a birth rate above two children per woman.

The idea that a large family is automatically the route out of poverty must be eradicated and women, all women, must be able to choose whether or not to have children.

European companies must also make certain that they do not exploit the cheap labour and do not continually perpetuate the working environment in factories, where the women suffer and work very long hours for very little money.

Furthermore the European Union has the expertise to help with other problems in Bangladesh - the flooding that we have heard about, that destroys great swathes of the land on a regular basis is not inevitable.

Europe has the know-how to prevent the deforestation.

We have the knowledge and experience, for example in the Netherlands, to help improve low-lying land and land susceptible to flooding.

We, as a European Union, already help Bangladesh with grants, with least-developed country status, and with the preferential access to markets that this brings with it.

But we can, I believe, and we must do more.

The future of Bangladesh also depends on its youth.

To my mind too many of the young people in Bangladesh leave to be educated abroad in Europe and the United States, which I commend, which is good; but then many of them do not go back to Bangladesh to take back their education, their experience and their great strength.

We must encourage them to do so.

I will end as I began, by saying that Bangladesh is a country with a future.

Just as the last part of the twentieth century belonged to the countries of south-east Asia, the Tiger economies, I believe that the first part of this century can belong to the countries of south Asia.

With help from this Parliament, Bangladesh can share in that sense of belonging, in the wealth, the prosperity and ultimately the success that will bring.

Mr President, like others in this Chamber, I am one of the fortunate group of people who has visited Bangladesh, not several times like the Commissioner but in such a way as to be able to form some modest impression, and it is against that background that I wish to emphasise how important it is for cooperation between the EU and Bangladesh to be continued and developed further.

There are a number of conditions present in Bangladesh that are not present in a number of other developing countries, in as much as Bangladesh - and this, I think, is very important - has only one language and one religion and consists of only one ethnic group, which means that the ethnic conflicts we see, for example, in Africa do not exist there. Nor do religious wars.

However, it also means that it would be still worse if we were to let down just such a country, precisely because Bangladesh does not have a number of the problems we see in other countries, and we should be failing the country if we were not to commit a good deal in terms of aid, including development aid. Bangladesh can only hold its own if we are willing to help the country, and that means both the EU, as the Commissioner mentioned, and also the Member States, among which I can call attention to my own country, Denmark, which is one of the largest providers of aid in the area.

There are three points I should like to emphasise in addition to the general need for aid and development.

There is the need for good governance and support for democracy.

Others have touched upon these, so I shall not comment further upon them.

There is the need to continue helping to promote women' s independence, for example by continuing and developing further our support for microcredits.

Women suffer a good deal of oppression in Bangladesh and, as a number of speakers have already pointed this out I shall not go into any more detail on this subject either.

In this connection, I should like to say that women were precisely those who left me feeling most encouraged following my visit.

However, I should like to emphasise our need to make further progress now.

We cannot be satisfied with microcredits. We must move on to the next phase of development, whether it be concerned with textiles or something else.

I come, then, to my third point, which the Commissioner perhaps takes a rather different view of.

I believe that, in this context, we can perhaps make use of information and communications technology, precisely in order to support women too - since they are now a mainstay of society - and so as to give a boost to their cause and, all in all, to strengthen the country' s further development.

Mr President, we very much welcome the cooperation agreement which is an affirmation of the good relations between the European Union and Bangladesh and provides a framework for their further expansion.

Article 7 of the agreement deals with regional cooperation, and I would firstly like to touch on two points which relate to Bangladesh's regional situation and her relationship with neighbouring countries.

Although there is still some tension in border areas with India, there has been a great improvement in relations between the two countries.

Evidence of this has been the signature of the water sharing Treaty with India.

Following this there has been an interim agreement for sharing the waters of the Tista river and Indian assistance in preparing the project report on the proposed Ganges barrage which will be located on Bangladeshi territory.

The two countries have also recently begun talks on fighting floods which have deluged both countries with tragic consequences.

This cooperation is good news and to be encouraged and supported.

I have to say I do not see the same positive approach on the part of the Burmese authorities.

In fact, in the last few days, there have been troop deployments by the Burmese in support of Burmese attempts to construct a dam on the Naf river close to the Bangladesh border, sixty miles south east of Cox's Bazar.

In the past, such actions have resulted in military action.

A particularly regrettable aspect of this activity is that anti-personnel landmines have reportedly been laid along the border by the Burmese.

Bangladesh is the only south Asian country to have signed the Ottawa Convention banning these weapons.

Deplorably, Myanmar is not a signatory to the Convention and there are indications that she has planted mines inside Bangladeshi territory including on agricultural land.

Myanmar should accede to the mine ban Treaty immediately and Bangladesh should take steps to ratify the Treaty.

I hope the Commission and Council will pursue these points in their dealings with both countries.

On a separate matter, the report describes the impact of population growth in Bangladesh on food security and economic development.

The population of 127 million is likely to grow to over 200 million by 2030.

This represents a huge push factor for emigration including to the European Union.

Bangladesh must facilitate the re-admission of nationals who are illegally in the territory of an EU Member State.

This is recognised in the declaration attached to the cooperation agreement.

It is important that the Government of Bangladesh should take early steps to enter into negotiations with those Member States that so wish and to conclude mutually acceptable re-admission agreements.

I trust the Commission will also attach importance to this.

Mr President, I would first like to say a few words about the intervention of jute organisations and Bangladesh's role as a host of the old organisation.

A year ago there were quite dramatic problems and I tried to see if it were possible to rejuvenate the old organisation.

There was no agreement between our Member States to do what we in the Commission would have liked to do, which explains the phase that we have been going through with this organisation.

The good news, however, is that the need has been accepted for a special effort, based in Bangladesh I hope, to promote the use and new uses of jute as a raw material, so perhaps it is now possible to continue with the substance of what the old jute organisation could do.

There was a meeting in Dhaka at the beginning of October and all the different parties agreed to create what is called an international jute study group.

The draft proposal for the constitution of this body will be discussed and hopefully finalised at the meeting of the International Jute Organisation to be held in Dhaka at the end of this month.

Subsequently it will be submitted to UNCTAD in Geneva and, once adopted, sent for signing and ratification to the governments concerned and the UN treaties section.

So we now have very high hopes that a new body that can promote renewed international cooperation in the jute sector will come out of the long painful discussion about the old jute organisation.

This is very good because the International Jute Organisation is the only international organisation of this kind that is actually based in a least-developed country.

This is what I can report on this matter that was brought up in our discussion here.

To Mrs Djubkaer I would say: yes, it is a strong asset for Bangladesh that it is a nation and we definitely should encourage the use of that potential.

The Chittagong Hill Tracts problem is a challenge to that picture of Bangladesh but fortunately, compared to the past, the tensions are lower and they still seem set on the right course.

As to the role of IT in Bangladesh, yes of course we will try to be useful and do something but I do not honestly see it as an easy shortcut, so we will stick to the basic priorities of our agreement with Bangladesh.

But we will use IT in all possible applications.

As to what you say about focusing specifically on women in this respect, I would say that Bangladesh may be one of the places where it would be possible to experiment with this.

So we should be open to these possibilities.

I agree very much with what Mr van Orden said about the regional aspects.

It seems that Bangladesh is the nice guy around and we certainly should recognise this as a fact and we should relate to Bangladesh in that perspective.

It has neighbours who are not all very easy and the whole region is more problematic than we may often think.

There are some eleven million Bangladeshi living illegally in India.

That is a large number in a European context, so from the point of view of stability, democratisation, orderly elections and so on, it really is facing quite some challenges.

Let me once again thank you for this very positive debate.

I look forward to working with Parliament on our relations with Bangladesh.

Things are moving so rapidly there that compared to the past we may be able in just a few years to expect and to detect real changes as a result of our cooperation there, and it is a great inspiration.

Finally, we look forward very much to welcoming Bangladesh as one of the leading participants in our conference in May in Brussels on LDCs, to be held with UNCTAD.

This will be a big opportunity for Bangladesh and the other least-developed countries to present themselves not as patients on a sick bed in hospital, with the rest of the world looking at them like curious doctors, but as partners in the global society, representing cultures and potentials which are important in keeping alive the diversity of globalisation.

So we are also looking forward to that partnership.

The first EC-Bangladesh Joint Committee meeting under the new cooperation agreement is now planned for the first half of March 2001, so the train is on the move.

I have received a motion for a resolution tabled pursuant to Article 42(5).

The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon.

(The sitting was closed at 11.40 p.m.)

Use of depleted uranium in Bosnia and Kosovo (Balkan syndrome)

The next item is the Council and Commission declarations on the use of depleted uranium in Bosnia and Kosovo.

I shall give the floor to the President-in-Office of the Council, Mr Danielsson straightaway.

Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, Members of the Commission, the information concerning health risks posed by depleted uranium to the population and to staff in peace-making missions in the Balkans, as well as its possible environmental consequences, has caused great concern in Europe.

It is a concern which must be taken with the greatest seriousness.

The issue ought to be investigated by organisations and institutions with competence within this area.

In November of last year, representatives of the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) and of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) visited Kosovo.

UNEP has been working for some time on a report on the toxicological and radiological consequences of the use of depleted uranium in the Balkans.

We welcome this report, together with the report which the World Health Organisation (WHO) is at present in the process of compiling on the same subject.

The issue of possible health risks to those soldiers who take part in peace-making efforts in the Balkans is mainly a responsibility for NATO and participating States.

The EU countries which take part in these missions do so on the basis of national decisions.

In the interests of the greatest possible transparency on the issue, views are, however, being exchanged within relevant consultative bodies.

A discussion is to take place over lunch during the meeting with the General Affairs Council on 22 January.

This also reminds us of how important it is that the effects upon health and the environment of military crisis management initiatives should be discussed now that the EU is developing its crisis management capacity.

This is a natural part of a crisis management organisation' s activities, and work of this kind is being done both within NATO and the WEU, as well as within the UN.

The issue of the possible health risks and environmental consequences involved in the use of depleted uranium also draws attention to a very important issue: that of the general environmental problems in the Balkans.

The populations of Kosovo, Yugoslavia and other war-torn countries in the Balkans have been sorely tried, with tragic and long-term consequences.

It is in the interests of Europe as a whole to overcome these consequences in cooperation with the governments in the region, which are all democratic and peace-oriented.

Through the Commission' s aid programme, the EU is offering support to the countries of the region in their efforts to get to grips with their environmental problems.

Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, I am deeply grateful to you for giving me the opportunity to speak on a matter which I believe, as I am sure you will agree, rightly deserves to be dealt with as a matter of top priority by Parliament.

It is only right that we should be concerned for the health of our military personnel, of the citizens of the Balkans and of those working for Community institutions, non-governmental institutions, international organisations and Member State organisations operating in the area.

I therefore share the anxiety expressed regarding the health of all these people.

I should like to begin by expressing my solidarity with all those who are experiencing health problems, who are concerned about their families and who are suffering from illness.

The fact is that there are many such individuals and they are entitled to receive the best care available.

They have the right to be informed of the cause of their condition without delay, and we shall devote all our energy to doing so.

We are all under an obligation to do what is needed to ensure that the relevant information is available to those concerned.

I stand before you today as Secretary-General of the Council, but I am also here in my capacity as the High Representative for the Union' s Foreign and Security Policy.

In dealing with the matters which have given rise to concern in the House, I shall endeavour to do so from the Council' s point of view.

I should first like to reiterate my personal commitment and the commitment of all Members of Council to this region, namely the Balkans.

I am sure they will make every effort to help clarify the situation.

Our states are democracies, they have nothing to hide, and it is our intention to forward Parliament all the information available at any given time.

Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, the crucial issue we are confronted with is to establish clearly whether there is a link between the use of these weapons and the illnesses notified by the troops or by those who served in peace-keeping operations in the Balkans, or whether, on the contrary, the incidence of these illnesses is no different from that usually recorded amongst our troops.

This is the question we have to answer.

If we are to provide a clear answer to it, we must proceed in as rational a manner as possible.

We should investigate: if this really were a syndrome in the etymological sense of the word, then all those affected would show similar symptoms. In time, those symptoms would develop in a similar way, and the outcome would also be similar.

That is what is generally understood by the word syndrome.

So these are the indications we must seek and we should deal with them in a fully open and transparent manner.

All of us involved in establishing the truth must base our conclusions on facts and not on mere assumptions.

Furthermore, if we are to assess the facts, we must have access to all the information available.

We must make a particular point of fostering openness and transparency amongst ourselves.

Once we are aware of the facts, we should study them in such a way that all the results we make public generate calm and inspire confidence.

Our work is indeed inspired by this spirit.

Such openness and transparency must be common to all: they must permeate all the Member States of the European Union, relationships between the Member States of the Union and NATO, and those between NATO and other allies involved in peace-keeping operations in the Balkans.

Obviously they must also characterise relationships between governments in the region.

Accordingly, the European Union' s Political and Security Committee dealt with this matter on 9 January.

Member States shared their concerns and information on the measures each had taken, as the current presidency stated.

There was broad agreement that NATO, as the institution that had assumed responsibility for handling the Balkan crisis, should be charged with assembling information from all those involved regarding the use of depleted uranium, the location of military contingents, and all medical data.

As you are aware, ladies and gentlemen, at that meeting the Commission also explained the measures it intended to take. I am sure that the Commission will today be able to supply information on the measures it has taken, either through Commissioner Wallstrm or through her representative.

As regards NATO, I have to tell you that as soon as the matter became public, I personally contacted the Secretary-General.

We have remained in constant contact ever since. The Secretary-General, his assistants and the Council' s assistants have ensured that we have all kept each other as well-informed and up to date with developments as possible.

Allow me to recall briefly the measures taken by NATO at its meeting on 10 January: first, it convened a meeting of national military medical experts to allow them to make contact with each other and exchange the whole gamut of ideas, background information, objectives, etc. A working group was set up immediately to serve as a forum for exchanging information.

I think it is important to highlight that membership of this group was open to all countries who had played some part in peace-keeping operations in the Balkans, not just to NATO members.

It was also agreed to consult more closely with the countries in the region.

Hence the matter was raised with the Yugoslav Foreign Minister, Mr Goran Svilanovic, on 10 January. He was assured that all of us, especially NATO, would forward all available information.

In addition, it was agreed to make all information concerning this incident available to the United Nations Environment Programme.

Furthermore, as you are aware, NATO members reiterated their view that at that time there was no evidence to suggest that the use of the weapons in question constituted a significant risk for the armed forces of the countries involved, or for the civilian population of the Balkans.

NATO has also made it quite clear that it is by nature a military organisation, not a medical one.

It is therefore required to submit all the necessary information to the European Union. It fully intends to do so, to enable better qualified organisations, notably the World Health Organisation, the United Nations Environment Programme and the International Atomic Energy Agency to draw the appropriate conclusions.

As you know ladies and gentlemen, NATO' s Medical Committee held its first meeting on Monday 15 January, and the newly established group for the exchange of information met for the first time yesterday.

You are aware of the outcome of that initial discussion, it has been published and placed on the NATO web site, together with the scientific data exchanged at yesterday' s meeting.

I think it is worth emphasising once again that, at NATO' s suggestion, membership of the group dealing with the exchange of information will be open to all fifteen Member States of the European Union, and that maximum transparency is fully guaranteed.

As the presidency has correctly stated, the next step will be to review the body of scientific material as it becomes available. Together with Mr Persson, Prime Minister and President of Council, Union Foreign Ministers will also deal with the matter at the first meeting of the General Affairs Council on 22 January.

I am convinced that this is a sensible way of proceeding at the moment, to ensure that we assemble all the information required and arrive at conclusions soundly based on facts.

As you may imagine, I have remained in contact with the governments of all Member States, and I must say to you, quite sincerely, that if a report pointing to a possible link does emerge, I will personally see that it is forwarded to the House. I promise you that.

I should, however, state that to date, the Council has not received a single scientific report establishing a link between these illnesses and the use of depleted uranium weapons.

Let me stress once more, ladies and gentlemen, that if such a report does emerge you will be made aware of it immediately.

I should mention that since I was called to appear before the House, that is, in the last few days and hours, some countries have submitted scientific reports.

I refer for example to the reports submitted by the Committee of the Belgian Federal Nuclear Monitoring Agency. I believe this is a document well worth reading.

In connection with the monitoring of radioactivity levels, I ought to say that Portugal and Spain have already submitted what are to all intents and purposes their final measurements.

Ladies and gentlemen, this is what the European Union is doing, wants to go on doing and will continue to do, in that spirit of transparency and good cooperation the Presidency-in-Office mentioned earlier.

I do not however believe that it would be right, at a formal sitting like today' s, simply to pass on the sum total of information currently available without putting it in the actual context we find ourselves in.

As I stand before this House, which represents the people of Europe, I am bound to say that we need to remember our starting point and the fundamental cause underlying today' s debate.

We must not shy away from it.

The fundamental cause underlying this debate is that there was a problem involving failure to respect human rights in Bosnia, which this very House condemned time and again.

Madam President, I cannot forget how, when serving as Foreign Minister for my country in 1994, I used to study the findings and conclusions arrived at in this House very carefully. Through them, Foreign Ministers of Union countries were being urged to take action and not to allow such violent disregard for human rights in Bosnia Herzegovina to prevail.

I have an even clearer recollection of when I stood before you in this very House in 1995, as President of the Council of Ministers of the European Union, and you pleaded passionately with me, calling for action to prevent a disaster.

We did take action, spurred on of course by the good intentions of all democratic countries who wish to defend the rights being violated in others.

That is what we tried to do.

And I should like to remind you...

(Protests and applause) with all due respect and in a spirit of fellowship, that the House later adopted important resolutions on the situation in Kosovo.

We must not forget our starting point.

I believe we have to find time in this global debate not only for the causes which are the subject of current research, research we are determined to carry through to the end because we represent democratic societies, but also for the underlying cause of the whole problem. That is none other than the serious violation of human rights in the Balkans, part of Europe, our own continent.

We tried to put an end to it as best we could with the means available to the countries of the European Union and to NATO members.

As I conclude, I would like to take you back to the last emotive moment we shared together.

You will recall that on 5 October, in this very House, seated in this very seat, I was privileged to share a highly emotive moment with you all: the time when the Parliament in Belgrade began to fall to the democrats.

Let us not forget what we have achieved.

Let us not forget the positive developments leading up to the Zagreb summit. That was the first time that the fifteen governments of the European Union met with all the governments of the Balkan countries, and that every one of them had been democratically elected.

Finally, ladies and gentlemen, I want to say with some feeling that in recent years I have, as you can imagine, been intensely involved in trying to build a more democratic Europe, a Europe in which human rights are respected. I shall do everything in my power to ensure respect for the qualities I mentioned earlier: the scientific approach, the spirit of transparency, community spirit, since that is what we are.

I shall also do my best to ensure that the facts we have available at any given time are forwarded to the House.

As I have said in all sincerity, no link has so far emerged between the facts and the consequences.

That is what the scientific committees are saying.

I also want to state, however, that we cannot and must not be satisfied with this. Let me reiterate that the Council and I are fully committed to pursuing the investigation of this matter through to the end.

Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, I have absolutely no doubt that we shall all be true to those guiding principles I referred to: responsibility, transparency and honesty.

Before giving the floor to Mrs Wallstrm, to speak on behalf of the Commission, I have received a request for a procedural motion from Mr Alavanos.

In view of the fact that we cannot possible reorganise our debate on the basis of procedural motions, I would ask you to please tell me immediately, Mr Alavanos, in accordance with the terms of the Rules of Procedure, to which Rule your procedural motion refers.

(The President gave Mr Alavanos the floor after he had clarified that his point related to Rule 37)

Madam President, under Rule 37 of our Rules of Procedure, the Council and the Commission may ask to make a statement to the European Parliament; however it is up to the President of the European Parliament, it is specifically up to you to organise the debate.

In this sense, and because the debate is public and European public opinion is horrified by what it has heard, I think that we all have an obligation, if we are to avoid being accused of complicity, to ask the High Representative of the Common Foreign and Security Policy of the European Union who, until recently was the Secretary-General of  and who is under investigation by the International Tribunal in the Hague for crimes against humanity, according to a statement by the public prosecutor in the Republica and other newspapers, to explain why, as Secretary-General of , he gave the go-ahead for a mini nuclear war in the Balkans.

Especially as Mr Solana has thrown part of the blame on to the European Parliament.

You must give a reply here.

He has said that we, too, are partly responsible for the mini nuclear war because we called for action in the Balkans.

I would remind you that we agreed on the organisation of this debate at the Conference of Presidents last week.

I shall give the floor straight away to Mrs Wallstrm, to speak on behalf of the Commission.

Madam President, before I turn to the specific question of depleted uranium, let me first put the issue in context by saying a word about the environmental situation in the Balkans and what the European Commission has been doing to tackle it.

Nearly a decade of regional conflicts, combined with weak institutions, old-fashioned polluting industry and a legacy of years of unchecked pollution, have left the environment of the Balkan region in a state of serious neglect.

In June 1999, a report conducted for the Commission by the Regional Environment Centre in Budapest gave a preliminary assessment of the environmental effects of the conflict in the Balkan region.

In October 1999, the United Nations Balkans Task Force then provided its assessment of the environmental damage arising as a result of the Kosovo conflict.

In our efforts to tackle the health and environmental situation in the Balkans, the Commission has established a twin-track approach.

This combines action on the one hand to address immediate problems with longer term assistance.

Our longer-term assistance is designed to embed a process of sustainable environmental protection in the countries in the region, all of which are potential candidate members of the Union.

Let me set out briefly what we have been doing.

In the framework of the Stability Pact, the Commission has been the driving force in the development of the Regional Environmental Reconstruction Programme.

This provides a framework in which environmental actions can be pursued at regional level in the Balkans.

By bringing together the various bilateral donors and the countries in the region, we are providing a focus for the coordination of otherwise disparate and overlapping bilateral actions.

To help launch the Regional Environmental Reconstruction Programme the Commission is currently funding actions to the value of EUR 5m.

Other donors have committed a further EUR 2.5m, and others still have expressed their intention to commit around another EUR 5.8m, bringing a total of around EUR 13.3m.

Through these actions we have targeted institution building, participation in the activities of the European Environment Agency in the region and two environmental hotspots in Albania and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.

Our contribution reflects the balance between setting the basis for long-term environmental protection and urgent remedial action.

Let me now come to the specific issue of depleted uranium and the public concern about the possible health risks associated with the use of depleted uranium weapons in Kosovo and Bosnia for the local populations, as well as the international personnel serving, or who have served, in the region.

The Commission is naturally also concerned to ensure that the interests of its own staff and contractors placed in the region are properly assessed.

Let me stress again that this is an issue which has aroused considerable public anxiety and that anxiety must be addressed.

But it can only be addressed on the basis of facts and the provision of all the information on this issue.

That is why it is essential to proceed rationally and on the basis of scientific evidence.

Uranium itself, as you know, is a radioactive and toxic element that occurs in several minerals.

Depleted uranium is less radioactive than natural uranium.

It is readily available as a by-product of the nuclear fuel cycle and it is very hard and self-sharpening.

As such, it is used to make tips to shells to increase their penetrating capacity.

However, there is currently no unanimously held scientific opinion on the health and environmental effects of depleted uranium.

At the time that the UN Balkans Task Force provided its original assessment of the environmental damage arising as a result of the Kosovo conflict, it had not received any official document confirming whether or not depleted uranium had been used during the conflict.

When that confirmation was given, UNEP carried out a mission to collect, for example, soil, water and vegetation samples in autumn last year.

We expect that the results of their examinations will be known in March this year.

For our part, the Commission has acted swiftly in the face of recent concerns to ensure that any Commission action on depleted uranium is based on sound scientific knowledge.

We have used existing structures to convene a meeting of an independent group of experts under the Euratom Treaty to give an opinion on the possible health consequences in general of exposure to depleted uranium.

In their opinion the experts will be expected to draw upon all available scientific evidence.

We expect to have the scientific opinion of the independent experts within a month from now.

In the light of the opinion the Commission will review whether or not follow-up actions are indicated, for our own staff for example.

We will also decide whether it is appropriate to adapt existing assistance programmes within the longer term with the aim of ensuring the sustainable development of the region.

The Commission will, of course, invite Member States and international authorities to share information on their findings and approaches and to discuss any proposed follow-up actions resulting from the opinion provided by the independent scientific experts.

The twin-track approach I have set out underlines the value added of the Community contribution to addressing the health and environmental situation in the Balkan region.

The Commission confirms its commitment to strengthening our medium and long-term support to improve the environmental and human health situation in the Balkan region.

Madam President, the population is concerned, because there are indications of a link between this depleted uranium in munitions and effects on people's health and on the environment.

At the same time, however, we are aware that there is no proof yet of the existence of such a link.

Not a single scientific study, not one of the studies that have been conducted in Spain, Italy or other countries, has come up with evidence.

For this reason, following on from the remarks made here by the High Representative of the EU, Dr Solana, I should like to say that this discussion does not in any way amount to a rehabilitation of Slobodan Milosevic.

The missions undertaken in Bosnia and in Kosovo by the troops of NATO and of EU Member States were missions against a war criminal.

We owe an undiminished debt of gratitude to these people for having committed themselves in this way to the cause of human rights.

Those who bear political and military responsibility also deserve our appreciation.

Let me state that here categorically on behalf of my group.

We hear, however, that the deployed weapons set off chemical processes on impact, processes which result in the creation of uranium oxide, for example, and which may pose problems.

Over the past few days we have been hearing about examinations conducted by the Pentagon in January 2000 from which it emerged that this ammunition sometimes contains small amounts of plutonium too.

This entails risks, and the troops must be instructed to take particular care in areas where these munitions have been deployed.

In view of these considerations, it is indeed necessary to conduct tests for safety's sake.

These tests are not a sign of weakness but a sign of the credibility of democracies which investigate such matters and sweep nothing under the carpet.

We owe that to the military personnel and the staff of non-governmental organisations who were involved, as well as to the civilian population of the region.

We must establish whether there are actually effects on human health and the environment, so that we can either sound the all-clear or take such weapons out of circulation for all time.

At the same time, it is also essential, during the period in which these weapons and their effects are being studied, that existing alternative ammunition be used which is equally efficient without having any of the feared effects.

May I express my thanks to Dr Solana and the Commission for their willingness to keep the European Parliament informed, so that we can make our final assessment in due course on the basis of their information and thus guarantee the safety of our citizens and our troops as well as ensuring the credibility of any military operations we may have to undertake in future in defence of human rights.

Madam President, I would like to start by thanking the Commission, the Council and the High Representative for agreeing to take part in a debate on this subject and to reassure the High Representative that we are not going to reopen here a backdated debate on the motives behind the operations in the former Yugoslavia; it would not be right, apart from anything else because the context has changed radically.

Today we have a reasonable hope of including these countries in the European Union; yesterday we were in the thick of the nightmare of ethnic cleansing and atrocities encouraged by the nationalistic dictatorships of Izetbegovic, Karadzic and Milosevic.

It is appropriate for the European Parliament to be the forum for a responsible, transparent debate on the issue of the possible relationship between the use of depleted uranium shells and a substantial number of deaths and cases of ill health among the soldiers of different countries who have participated in operations, initially in Bosnia and more recently in Kosovo, and on the concern regarding the direct and indirect impact on the civilians involved.

There would be no cause for alarm if there were no more than the suspicion that the frequency of these cases exceeded the average for the same age categories, and it is precisely for this reason that we must establish the exact causes.

To this end, various initiatives have already been undertaken at national and international level.

We call upon NATO itself to support these initiatives, making use of the contribution of the US administration where necessary. In order to obtain all possible reassurance from the world of science, we call upon the Council and the Commission to take an active part in this coordination operation and exchange of information and we urge the Commission to set in motion its own autonomous scientific enquiry.

Lastly, the moratorium and the precautionary principle: this is not a question of asserting a principle, the precautionary principle, which was established in the context of food safety, and transferring it wholesale to foreign policy.

Rather, it is a matter of realising that the military problem has become a civilian problem and concerns the protection, for a long time after the operation itself, of the health and lives of civilians as well as soldiers.

Madam President, the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party wants to see uncertainty replaced by certainty and confidence.

Young men and women must be able to report for peace-keeping and peace-making service in the confident assurance that everything is being done in the interests of their safety.

Every risk must be investigated, every soldier who is concerned must be able to obtain a thorough examination free of charge, and civilians who may have been exposed to danger must receive every attention and, if necessary, be examined, partly so that we can learn from experience.

It was, of course, out of regard for civilians that we intervened in Kosovo and Bosnia, and we did so on sound moral grounds.

The examinations must be thorough, they must be carried out by independent experts and there must be transparency about methods and possible factors of uncertainty.

If there are any reasons at all for concern, alternatives to depleted uranium must be invested in and, until certainty has been arrived at, its use may have to be suspended.

I should like to thank Mr Solana for promising that all information will be published.

We shall hold him to this, and he will also be held to account if the promise is not kept.

I should also like to thank Mr Solana for pointing out our common responsibility for the military and humanitarian action, which is the reason why we are sitting here.

It did in fact produce results and paved the way for democracy in the Balkans.

It was a moral duty to take that action, and we can be proud that we complied with that duty.

Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, Mr Solana, there are few occasions on which it can have been so important that the truth of the matter, the whole truth, emerges in a parliamentary debate as this one.

The vast majority of countries that comprise the European Union, whether they are members of NATO or not, participated in various military and police operations in the Balkans, through their armed forces and security forces.

They did so because they felt that this was the most appropriate way to protect civilian populations and their fundamental rights and to contribute to peace and to the country' s reconstruction and democratic rehabilitation.

The situation is that in some of these countries, including my own country, Portugal, several worrying cases have arisen.

In Portugal, these cases are of leukaemia and other pathologies associated with radiation in soldiers who served either in Bosnia or Kosovo, one of which has already proved fatal.

These cases have raised and continue to raise, in medical, scientific, military and political circles and consequently in the mind of the public of these countries, justified concern at the possible relationship - which, I emphasise, has not been proved - between exposure to depleted uranium contained in used missiles and the outbreak of the diseases I have just mentioned.

It is therefore crucial to ascertain the truth of this relationship, first of all because important human values that require respect and serenity in the face of the legitimate concerns of the soldiers and their families are under threat.

Secondly, because scientific information is as yet incomplete and we need to establish beyond a doubt whether there is a cause and effect relationship between the use of weapons containing depleted uranium and the health problems that we have been seeing.

Also, because it is unacceptable that there should still be controversy over the degree of information that NATO claims to have given the governments and military authorities of the countries participating in missions in good time and the conditions under which their armed forces and the security forces took part in military and police operations.

Lastly, because it would be incomprehensible and even paradoxical for our countries to have participated in missions for peace and to promote human rights in the Balkan region and to possibly left there an unsolved public health and environmental problem that affects precisely the populations that they seeking to protect.

This is a matter which, in any event, must be taken seriously and to its conclusion, regardless of the consequences.

Mr Solana, I thank you for your first speech, not least because of the spirit of openness that you demonstrated.

You were Secretary-General of NATO at the time of the military operations under question and you are now responsible for the implementation of the European Union' s common foreign and security policy.

You are therefore in a position, if you like, to make an enormous contribution to the European Parliament's ability to find, together with the governments of the Member States, NATO and other international organisations, the best solutions to this case at scientific, political or even military levels.

That is what we hope for from the Council and from you.

Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, in 1950, when I was 20 years old, a campaign exploded throughout the entire world: in Europe, in our universities, in schools - they attempted without success as yet to penetrate the churches - and it was the campaign against Ridgway, the "Plague General".

It was the time of the war waged by the US, by the West, by the capitalists in Korea against the rights of the Koreans. The entire communist organisation, the entire hypocritical structure of you good old communists of the '50s, '60s and '70s, mobilised itself to inform us that Ridgway, the "Plague General", was on the 50th parallel - this was before the Atlantic Alliance in the Far East - and was using chemical and bacteriological weapons to defend the unjust, capitalist society oppressing the Third World and his own people.

Communist campaigns, socialist campaigns - for then you had the Stalin Peace Awards at various crucial moments, between 1950 and 1953 - a few trembling papists here and there, would you mind conceding us a moment of respite from your retrospective moralising, from your constant quest to apportion blame?

Of course the Dresden bombings in the Great War may not have been necessary and may have been criminal, but the truth is that you do not gloss over this: you communists will not leave us alone with your pacifist line-up.

Well then, a European Parliament which is now faced with a motion calling for such respite is cowardly, reckless, antidemocratic and irresponsible: antidemocratic in any case because it is disregarding the commitments called for by parliaments and governments in times of need.

We cannot wait to find out the scientific truth about these weapons, but if they had been used to prevent Vukovar being raised to the ground as it was, we would have spared the lives of tens, hundreds of thousands of Bosnians, Kosovars, Serbs and others in Croatia.

I therefore thank you, Madam President, and I await the revelation of the truth which must be ascertained in the face of our tendency to distort and abuse it ...

(The President cut the speaker off)

Madam President, we need to establish the facts in this case.

We have received certain assurances from Mr Solana but we know, and our Italian colleagues in particular will remind us of this, that it will be difficult for those whose sons have died of leukaemia to accept that assurance unreservedly.

These days we cannot easily accept death when better health and prosperity seem to have brought us so near to immortality.

We now need to reinforce Mr Solana's assurance with repeated testing offered as widely as possible and with the maximum openness from the American authorities.

I have been asked, particularly by my colleague Lord Inglewood, who represents the area of Cumbria where test-firing of these weapons has taken place, to insist that the question as to the possible effect upon the civilian population should be taken into account when this testing is carried out.

If he is going to reply to this debate, Mr Solana might like to address that point.

There were a large number of British soldiers in the Balkan War and, of course in the Gulf, and as a British Conservative I will say this: Of course, we are concerned about the possible impact of the use of depleted uranium, but against the background of Mr Solana's statement, we do not believe that NATO should adopt a moratorium on the use of such weapons.

We have to fight terrible wars against terrible people.

Such a moratorium could place our forces at a potential disadvantage and thereby potentially endanger more lives than the NATO forces.

As Mrs Wallstrm has said: The real and immediate danger in the Balkans comes from general environmental degradation following years of neglect, corruption and war.

This is what the European Union needs to address while we monitor very carefully the results of medical testing.

In conclusion let me say that Mr Wurtz's contribution was very revealing of the constant agenda of the left which aims to separate the European Union from the United States and would result in depriving Europe of any real influence in the world.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, it is a quite remarkable as well as a cynical debate that we are holding here.

I am almost inclined to resist any involvement in a discussion about which type of lethal ammunition is the better.

And yet that is what we are doing today.

I have never taken any part in debates about which wars are expedient and which are unavoidable either.

That is not our subject today.

We have a different subject to discuss.

In the past, we have repeatedly said that, if it is necessary to use armed force - and we have always agreed on this - we must ensure that our intervention has no more impact than is absolutely essential and that it does the least possible damage to the environment and to the health of those who survive it.

This, of course, is why we have constantly condemned and denounced chemical weapons, for example, and have always agreed that these weapons must never be used, because the havoc they wreak on the environment and on human health is out of all proportion to their military effectiveness.

If we are discussing today whether munitions containing uranium do or do not cause leukaemia, then I have no desire to hear anyone tell us, not even Dr Solana, whom I greatly respect, whether or not there is definitive proof.

We are not talking about definitive proof, and when we spoke in this House about our own health and about BSE, we certainly all agreed that the precautionary principle had to be applied, even though we were never able to prove that infected substances are the cause of new-variant Creutzfeld-Jacob disease.

We recently discussed the precautionary principle and put it to the vote, and we said that we must ban particular substances or procedures if there are justifiable concerns about them, even if there is no definitive proof.

We know today that there are numerous cases of leukaemia.

And as long as the scientists are still arguing, as long as all of us do not know which of the scientists is correct, we must agree that this ammunition cannot be used until every last aspect of the issue has been resolved.

Surely nothing less than a moratorium on this ammunition would be an acceptable decision for us to take today.

But in addition to this we must also care for the people who live in the regions, for their health and the health of their children.

Mr President, I saw a short film on German television this morning which was produced on behalf of the American army before the Gulf War.

It literally said that dust which is released through the combustion of depleted uranium constitutes a danger if it ends up inside the body.

So the risks involved were known prior to the Gulf War.

Were the allies aware of this before the Balkan War and before the intervention, which, I hasten to add, I do not dispute?

Did the governments and the military know?

If so, why were soldiers not given warnings in a similar way?

Why are you now saying today that the alliance did not have any proof of risk?

People became ill having been to the Balkans, just as they did after the Gulf War.

Nobody knows how many more will fall ill in those regions.

Who will provide them with a convincing answer tomorrow?

The ban on the use of depleted uranium will be the only measure which can restore confidence.

Mr President, the evidence coming from Bosnia in particular points clearly to a massive increase in cases of cancer where bombings took place during the Balkans war and where ammunition rounds of depleted uranium were used.

It is now believed that the depleted uranium rounds were used by the bombers which carried out attacks on the suburbs of Sarajevo and elsewhere during the Balkans war.

The people of the Balkans are entitled to full and unequivocal answers with regard to the carcenogenic effects of the depleted uranium shells which were used during the war.

This Parliament and the European Union should, and must, be most vigorous in pursuing full answers to these most important public health and human rights issues.

On a separate but related matter, I was quite disturbed to read that depleted uranium shells have been fired into the Irish Sea by British Ministry of Defence forces at the Solway Firth between England and Scotland and also at a range on the Cumbrian coast, just seven miles from a British nuclear plant.

This depleted uranium has been used in Cumbria up to 1995, and it is believed that as many as 1400 depleted uranium shells have been fired into the Solway Firth, which is an inlet of the Irish Sea.

As a Member of the European Parliament, representing Leinster, which is along the Irish Sea, I am deeply concerned at these revelations.

I am calling on the British government to make a full statement on the matter.

I want to know whether there are any possible public health consequences from the use of depleted uranium shells in the location to which I have referred to today.

It is up to the British government to make a statement on these matters.

Mr President, the scandal of the depleted uranium missiles is just the latest chapter in the despicable war you have waged against Serbia.

Mr Solana, you are discussing transparency now that the scandal has emerged but you are two years too late.

Do you take us for fools?

Do you really think the United States will let you get away with this even though it has taken forty years to see the films, the documentation and the victims of the human experiments they carried out on their own forces on the ships irradiated following the Bikini nuclear tests?

All we know, at any event, is that you have paid little heed to the precautionary principle that people keep harping on about here.

All we know, as Commissioner Wallstrm has just said, is that the smiling face of your spokesman, Mr Shed, concealed the use of these shells.

All we know is that the incidence of leukaemia among our soldiers is abnormally high.

If a causal link were to be established, then you would be responsible for a war crime, as the statements made referred only to military personnel, as if the uranium were capable of differentiating between military and civilian personnel.

Quite frankly, ladies and gentlemen, if you want the truth, then look for it yourselves, and do not expect Mr Solana, the European High Representative, to condemn Mr Solana, the former Secretary General of NATO.

Mr President, today we are tackling an extremely important subject which requires great reflection over extremely long periods of time, and, moreover, we are doing so on the basis of a wave of emotion which, seeing as we are not specialists, is ill-suited to the politics we are obliged to carry out here.

With regard to the precautionary principle, to which previous speakers have referred, I am somewhat concerned because, although we are tackling the issue of BSE, I do not imagine anyone would ever contemplate saying that we should not eat any type of meat, even in the absence of well-founded scientific results.

As the Commissioner, with whom I am in complete agreement, said just now, we must first examine what the environmental situation in the region was, but we must also ascertain, with great care of course, the relationship of cause and effect between the equipment used - the weapons - and the impact on health.

I must, moreover, point out that depleted uranium is used in civil contexts in many other sectors, and we should certainly investigate these extremely thoroughly.

We must also bear in mind the risk of inciting panic, where strong positions are adopted, among those who send staff to the region and those who are sent there by the Member States.

It is my view that we should analyse this issue extremely carefully and confirm that we certainly all have good cause to be grateful to NATO for its past and future interventions.

We do not support the call for a moratorium.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, we are holding this debate today because of the concern we have for people.

Some of these people are the military personnel, our troops, who are there, but we are also concerned about the civilian population, the millions who live in Yugoslavia and in Kosovo.

We do not seek to establish here and now whether the war in Kosovo was justified or not.

It would be inappropriate to engage in such a debate.

What we must do - and I entirely agree here with the High Representative of the CFSP - is to examine with the utmost care and precision whether a link exists between the incidences of illness and the quantities of ammunition with depleted uranium which were fired during the war in Yugoslavia and Kosovo and in Bosnia too.

If we intend to do that, we must pledge ourselves to certain important principles, so that we at least, as elected representatives of the peoples of Europe, can restore the credibility which NATO has forfeited through this and similar episodes.

Foremost priority attaches to precise and independent tests by international experts with the aid of every possible scientific method.

Secondly, we need a radical change in our information policy, and in this respect I must thank the Council, and above all the High Representative of the CFSP, for their undertaking to make all information available to Parliament.

Thirdly, and finally, we must demand an immediate moratorium on all arms and ammunition of this type until we have the complete results of the tests we have commissioned, so that we can then take our decisions in a responsible manner.

Mr President, to become embroiled in a scientific debate, in which many see a link - and some do not - between the use of depleted uranium and an increase in the number of fatalities, is every politician' s nightmare.

There is the risk that in this way, the political debate tips over into a scientific one.

I believe we should uphold the task of the politician, which is twofold, in my opinion.

First of all, the European Union' s responsibility is towards the local population. It is up to the Member States to assume responsibility for their soldiers.

In my view, it should be the EU' s responsibility to look after the local population out there.

The second responsibility we have is not to be tricked into focusing all statements on the use of depleted uranium.

There might well be other causes for the increased number of fatalities.

I therefore believe that a comprehensive enquiry should be instituted into all the abnormalities which occur locally and in the national armies.

Finally, something which irritates me no end is that Mr Solana, as well as a number of fellow MEPs, establish a false link between the end and means to used to reach the end, or the link between the war and the means deployed.

I was in favour of intervening in the war, but I am against taking irresponsible risks.

Mr President, we have a responsibility towards two parties: on the one hand, the young people who took part - commendably - in the military operations in Bosnia and Kosovo and, of course, their families, and, on the other, the beneficiaries of those peace-keeping missions, the Balkan peoples.

It is true, the direct or indirect relationship between the use of depleted uranium shells and the cases of leukaemia, which are multiplying, has not yet been proved indisputably, although the link appears more than likely, but these cases exist and are so numerous as to justify the greatest concern.

It is therefore right to pursue, with a coordinated approach, all the scientific investigations necessary to clarify the impact of this type of arm on health and the environment, but, in the meantime, it is also right to apply the precautionary principle, which has never been so appropriate as on this occasion, and that is why it is urgent and vital to impose a moratorium.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, daily, and indeed almost hourly, we receive new information about potential dangers.

That is why it is very gratifying that Parliament is dealing with this issue today.

I thank the High Representative for promising us complete information and transparency.

For us too, it is a new experience to be discussing matters of security and defence policy in this way.

It will certainly benefit European security and defence policy to be discussed outside the constellation that prevails in the Member States, where governments and oppositions are constantly trying to score political points on these issues.

In Germany, for example, the Red-Green coalition Government under their Minister of Defence has been trivialising all these risks, which is something that has certainly not been happening here in Parliament.

We in the European Parliament have an opportunity to receive factual briefings and information, and that is a very good thing.

What is damaging - and it has been a feature of this debate too - are belated recriminations about the Gulf War and the war in Kosovo.

Mr Wurtz, if you cite the Charter of Fundamental Rights and our high European principles in this context, I must remind you that, at the time when fundamental European principles were at stake, when ethnic cleansing, expulsions and terror were the order of the day in the Balkans, your political grouping stood helplessly on the sidelines.

This also has to be said in such a debate.

We are calling for relevant information to be collected, for the information available in the Member States to be coordinated at the European level with UN data through the specialised agencies of the United Nations and submitted to Parliament again.

An armed conflict must always be governed by the precept that no more force may be used than is necessary to achieve the military objective.

For this reason we need information and research on weapons systems which are less harmful than the one we have been discussing today.

This is where the European Parliament can exercise its responsibility in the framework of European security and defence policy by making its own constructive contributions.

Mr President, High-Representative, the mandate which you had for action in Yugoslavia was not a mandate to use weapons which the conscience of humanity rejects and condemns and the potential toxicity of which, as measured now, was known to military leaders at the time.

If now that disclosures have begun and more will follow, you feel alarmed by this fact, to seek accomplices in this Parliament that is, I am sorry to say, evidence of cowardice and bad taste.

Mr President, we are worried about the effects of these bombings in the Balkans, we are worried about the soldiers who took part and we are worried about the inhabitants of the areas which became battlefields. We call for a broad environmental inquiry into any deterioration in the environment throughout the Balkans.

Our concern has reached proportions which you cannot begin to imagine here in the House, at least among public opinion in my country.

The joint motion for a resolution also calls for a moratorium...

(The President cut the speaker off) (Applause)

Mr President, just three points, because a great deal has already been said.

First: I should like to say to Mr Solana that when, in 1999, we and some of our fellow members tried to find out if depleted uranium was being used in Kosovo, there was a cover-up and Mrs Wallstrm - I have the Minutes here - said in reply to a question that there was still no confirmation that depleted uranium was used in the conflict.

That is what it says in the verbatim report.

Secondly: depleted uranium is a dangerous and harmful substance, especially when used in shells because on impact it vaporises, produces uranium oxide and turns into a cloud which can be inhaled and the uranium oxide is readily soluble and can get into the water and food chain.

Consequently - and you must know that there is no harmful cause which does not actually cause harm, even in small doses - an ongoing epidemiological study is needed both in the Gulf and in Bosnia and, of course, in Kosovo, although any results there, if they do appear, will not do so until a later date.

Thirdly: if we accept, and you Mr Solana accept, that this research is needed, in short, to uncover the truth, should the precautionary principle not apply?

If someone says to me, or to anyone for that matter, look, we need to carry out a survey because your house may collapse, am I going to stay indoors while the survey is carried out or am I going to get out and wait for the results?

It stands to reason and I do not accept that depleted uranium is the only weapon at NATO's disposal; it has a host of other efficient weapons in its arsenal.

Mr President, we here have now been assured from various quarters that information will be given and matters discussed openly.

Until now that openness has been missing.

Naturally we must have the right information to support our action, but I have the same opinions as have been expressed here with regard to putting the precautionary principle into practice.

We have as our next point for discussion the issue of a rapid reaction force.

In this connection we clearly have to adopt a position on our approach to the matter of people' s health, although we might not see a direct connection, for instance, with leukaemia.

It is very possible that other harmful effects, for example in connection with drinking water, will be evident in the long term.

Can we really work on the basis that when we do good and solve conflicts, at the same time we will be causing the civilian population so much anxiety and insecurity in the future?

Mr President, I find it slightly bizarre to talk about the precautionary principle in relation to weapons, which are after all designed to be bad for your health.

The problem, of course, is that you only have to mention the word "uranium" and there is an outbreak of what can only be described as mass hysteria.

Of course, the illnesses and deaths must be investigated and I welcome the action taken by NATO member states to that end, but we have to make a judgment on the facts and the facts are very clear at the moment.

There is no link between depleted uranium and the illnesses.

If we look at the study of Gulf War veterans that was done in the United States and compare that with the study of the control group, there is no difference in the death rates, or illness rates, or the rates of cancer between the two groups.

We must ensure that we are working on the basis of scientific fact and that is why it is not appropriate to call for a moratorium at the moment, when there is no scientific link between the two.

There are a lot of other issues to do with the Balkan War which we should be investigating, like unexploded cluster bombs and the environmental damage which the Commission has outlined, but let us stick to the facts.

Mr President, I would firstly like to thank all the Members who have spoken, since the way they have spoken and their frankness clearly demonstrate that we all share the same wish for clarification on this situation. The chief concern we all must have is undoubtedly for the people who are currently ill and those who may become ill and suffer in the future.

I therefore once again promise to provide all the information I can.

What you cannot ask me to do is to provide information when I am unable to do so or when I have no information.

This is an issue which by its very nature lies within the remit of national governments and we are necessarily therefore dependent on the information provided by the individual governments.

As I said in my opening speech, I am in contact with the governments and organisations working on this issue and once again I can assure you that the Council and I personally will make available all the information we have with the maximum of transparency.

It would be rather difficult to provide you with information we do not have.

Secondly, I would like to say that, as some of you have pointed out, we must keep all the variables open in the scientific analyses. We must not focus on certain parameters and forget others which may have effects which are equally damaging to health.

I am therefore delighted to have heard both the Commission and some of the Members who have spoken express a willingness to analyse all the aspects which may have an environmental impact.

I can tell you that I, too, am a scientist, a physicist, by training.

I am not going to regale you with all I learnt at the time, even if I could remember much of it, but I do think it important for us to adopt a rational attitude to this problem and to wait to collate all the available information before assessing the full implications.

Right now, nobody should have any doubt but that all the countries and all the international organisations are doing their utmost to find a solution to this problem, bringing together the most relevant information as quickly as possible.

A great many things have been said, all very interesting.

I have taken note of everything, but I do not want to go through each point individually since not many actual questions have been asked.

I would, however, like to respond to some of the statements that have been made in order to prevent any misunderstandings.

Let me, in all frankness and affection, confirm that I received the letter from the representatives of the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance and - as they themselves know, because I spoke to them - I conveyed the message and made the letter available to the Heads of Government and Ministers of the Union.

The letter was answered verbally and not in writing, but you are aware that the decision which the governments took was to continue along the route they had already undertaken in May, which was the time I actually received the letter.

So, please do not think that no one paid any attention to the letter I received.

The message was taken into consideration, but the governments still decided upon a course other than that proposed in the letter.

Letters from any of the members of political groups in this Parliament are always taken into consideration, and I would like you to be assured of that.

I have two observations which are almost personal observations.

Firstly, I make a very clear distinction between ends and means.

I would not like to be accused of confusing the ends with the means.

I am perfectly capable of distinguishing between ends and means and I know very well that ends are the important thing and that achieving the ends depends very much on the means employed.

Different means, and our assessment of them, change over time.

There are occasions when the information available suggests that particular means may be useful or may have ceased to be useful, and in considering these cases we have to take account of the information available at the precise time when decisions are taken.

I would therefore like to make it clear that that I am not confusing ends with means.

I have never done so and I would hope never to do so.

I would like to say something to those who accuse me of having asked this Parliament for its complicity.

In no way am I asking Parliament for its complicity, not now, not ever.

You represent the will of the people of the European Union and you are responsible for your own actions.

What I have, and what I believe I must share with you, are the moments when we have agreed years or months ago.

That does not mean I am using Parliament or making it complicit.

If I say it once or if I say it a thousand times, I fully accept my responsibilities, I always have and I always will, that is my intention, without the need to make anybody complicit.

What I need to do is to ask you to accept your own responsibility.

I am accepting mine and you must accept yours.

And we cannot deny that the resolutions adopted by this Parliament gave me food for thought.

Your resolutions were important to me when I chaired the Council of Ministers of the European Union and also to the Heads of State and Government of the European Union.

That is not making anybody complicit.

That is sharing responsibility like the responsible Europeans all of us are here.

We must be able to share and to accept our collective responsibility.

I have nothing else to say.

I would like to thank you and also to inform you that I shall be coming back here on 31 January for a debate on the Middle East, but I shall remain at your disposal during the plenary session to continue discussing this very important issue since it is one in which we have a lot at stake, namely our credibility and also our ability to continue to make progress in the area of European Union crisis management.

In this respect, ladies and gentlemen, please be assured that you can count on me, at least on my good will. That you can count on my knowledge is not so certain.

Mr President, I also want to start by saying thank you to all the Members of the European Parliament for their statements, because they have underlined the need to take seriously the fears and anxieties in respect of all those who suffer from symptoms and illnesses as well as the need to gather all available information and to examine also the long-term health effects.

The Commission, I assure you, will do all in its power and competence to establish a sound scientific basis in relation to this issue and we will also, of course, cooperate fully with other national and international bodies working in this field: NATO, UNEP, IAEA and the World Health Organisation.

The Commission's efforts will be integrated into our wider programme of support in the Balkans with respect to health and the environment, because we must look at the accumulated effects.

We also welcome the opportunity to report back to the European Parliament on the progress of our efforts to establish a solid scientific basis on the effects of depleted uranium.

We would like to come back to report to you and of course we are always willing to answer any questions that you might have.

Mr President, I just want to take the opportunity of asking Commissioner Wallstrm and others to speak in their respective native languages here in the Chamber - in Mrs Wallstrm' s case, Swedish.

Thank you very much, Mrs Eriksson.

The Charter of Fundamental Rights says that the European Union is a union of free countries, and everyone is free to speak in whatever language he or she chooses.

Mr President, on a point of order.

I have just been looking at the text of the joint motion for a resolution.

I should like to point out that the name indicated as signing for the Liberal Group, the Lord Bethell, is most welcome to join our Group.

I should like to place on the record how pleased we are to have a new member today who signs on our behalf.

Well, by the time of the vote we shall have established which groups Lord Bethell does and does not belong to.

I should like to inform the House that I have received seven motions for resolutions under Rule 37(2) of the Rules of Procedure as well as one joint motion for a resolution sponsored by six groups.

The vote will take place at 12 noon tomorrow.

Mr President, on a point of order.

Perhaps we could just settle that point of order now.

Lord Bethell is, and remains, firmly a member of the British Conservative Group.

Mr Van Orden, I cannot allow you to make statements on behalf of Lord Bethell unless you have written authorisation from him.

Mr President, since we are discussing the joint resolution on the Balkan syndrome, I would just like to point out that my own name and that of my group have been included erroneously on this joint resolution.

Mr Wurtz, I explicitly said a joint motion for a resolution sponsored by six groups, not seven.

I am thoroughly familiar with the sensitivities of your group on this point, which is why I specified it quite explicitly.

The next item is the report (A5-0392/2000) by Mr Newton Dunn, on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy, on the proposal for a Council Regulation [COM(2000) 119 - C5-0272/2000 - 2000/0081(CNS)] on the creation of a Rapid Reaction Facility.

Mr President, this proposal is about money for an instant, non-military response by the Union to crises.

It is first pillar - for those who understand Union jargon - and is driven by the Commission.

It is not a military, rapid reaction force, which is, of course, second pillar, and driven by the Council of Ministers.

However, I have been invited, lobbied and asked how I am going to deploy the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy's soldiers, tanks and planes.

I have been asked whether we are going to use naval bases in Cyprus and to address a conference of Canadian soldiers.

I want to make it absolutely clear that this is nothing to do with the military rapid reaction force: this is a financial facility for the Commission to respond to crises very rapidly.

Although the Commission will deploy the money as fast as is necessary, Parliament retains control as one half of the budgetary authority.

We shall vote the money and we shall look forward to the reports from the Commission on how it has spent the money.

We expect the Commission to spend the money on responding to crises by buying medicines, hiring doctors or nurses, chartering aircraft to carry the medicines, nurses or policemen - whatever is required - to the crisis, wherever it is - not necessarily within Europe.

In the past the Union has been rightly criticised for being slow in responding to crises.

We have failed to send an immediate response when it was most obviously required, and this proposal is part of Commissioner Patten's praiseworthy efforts to improve the Union's aid programme, which is in a bit of a mess, to say the least.

I hope very much that Parliament will support it, and I will come back to that.

We would be very interested to know whether, when the Commissioner responds to this debate, he would be able to outline the types of situations that he envisages this may be used for - although, of course, we have some ideas ourselves.

I have been asked by a number of colleagues who have read the report why, if it is such a good idea, there are so many amendments in it.

The original Commission proposal was dated April last year, but after that nothing happened.

It was blocked, it appears, by the French Presidency, with no explanation of what was happening.

So I tabled a question at Question Time asking for an explanation and miraculously - but maybe there was no connection - the French Presidency and the Commission got together to negotiate to remove the blockage.

They came up with an alternative text but, I am sorry to say, the Council has never had the courtesy to inform Parliament of the new version of the text.

So the many amendments in my report are an attempt to amend the original proposal and for us to comment on the new compromise text which we happened to obtain, even though it was never given to us officially.

Parliament has only one reading on this, which is another reflection which was not corrected at the Nice Summit of the democratic deficit.

It should, of course, be codecision, but it is not.

However, we were able to threaten to use our single reading to withhold it - like the famous isoglucose case some years ago - and if we withhold an opinion, nothing further can happen.

So we have an effective veto.

But, happily, the committee in Parliament has looked at this proposal in great detail and is in favour of it.

Hence the many amendments proposed by the committee.

Finally - I am not going to go into the details of the amendments - I am happy to say that the committee adopted the amendments almost unanimously, with the single exception of the British Conservatives. They will no doubt explain why that was so.

That was the party which I felt obliged to abandon because it had become totally negative about Europe.

I very much hope that when we vote on this proposal they will at last feel positive and give it their wholehearted support.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the Committee on Budgets welcomes the proposed rapid reaction facility.

We support this Community mechanism, which is designed to make resources available for urgent non-combat activities related to crisis management and conflict prevention.

It is right and fitting that the European Union should help to preserve or restore public order and to facilitate dialogue, conciliation, mediation and the prevention of human rights abuses.

All of this, however, can only be achieved or become achievable if the facility really is able to respond rapidly.

That is why we emphatically support the Commission's proposal that implementation be based on the committee system, including the involvement of an advisory committee, with the emphasis on the word 'advisory'.

Now over the years, as you know, the Commission - with Parliamentary backing, I hasten to add - has been pursuing a strategy of gradually transferring activities from the ambit of the common foreign and security policy, in other words from the second pillar of the European unification process, to that of the Community, the first pillar.

This trend is continued by the current proposal for the rapid reaction facility.

But the funds for this purpose must be allocated under Heading 4 of the Financial Perspective.

And all Members of this House have been made aware by at least the last two budgetary processes just how tight our finances are in the foreign-policy budget.

Every year, this allocation has been the subject of our bitterest budgetary wrangling with the Council.

We have no need of a crystal ball to predict a similar situation this year.

For that reason we have asked the lead committee to do two things: firstly, to call on the Commission and Council to outline their intentions and particularly to explain how they intend to divide up responsibilities between themselves in this field and how they intend to finance the relevant activities, and, secondly, to add a recital to the proposed text stating quite clearly that rapid reaction interventions must be financed within Heading 4.

Should that be impossible, provision must be made for a revision of the Financial Perspective.

In addition, we want an obligation to consult Parliament on each action to be financed under the facility.

The rapporteur and the lead committee have complied with these budgetary wishes. For this we are very grateful to them.

Mr President, the European Commission boasts a whole raft of competences which are important in terms of a civil contribution to keeping those situations under control which threaten to get out of hand.

Those competences can be deployed in the stabilisation phase following a violent conflict, to prevent the situation from hitting crisis point again.

In addition to the usual aid personnel, these competences also involve monitors, the deployment of government officials, trainers and police.

They translate into projects and aid policy specifically designed to bring stability to a certain region.

We very much welcome the dimension of political and organisational coherence in all these civil instruments in the form of a rapid reaction facility.

In this way, the EU' s responsibility for the international legal order can be developed much more effectively.

Furthermore, it gives the Commission and the competent Commissioner a chance to bring forward their own initiatives and proposals in this field.

In our opinion, the interplay between the rapporteur and the Commission has led to an excellent resolution.

Particular efforts have been made to avoid introducing or maintaining superfluous structures which delay the decision-making process.

The rapporteur is right to point out the need for funding this facility and the need for a well-trained unit for financial management and implementation.

My group prefers the Commission text to the rapporteur' s amendments on a number of scores.

For instance, I find the list of examples and goals in Article 1 (1), which is what the rapid reaction facility will serve to achieve, very useful.

The report mentions the clear involvement of the European Parliament in the policy.

Given the fragmented commitment of the Member States, also in the future, the report is right to call for a system of information exchange.

Who knows whether more far-reaching coordination and guidance will be possible in the time to come.

We learn from our knock-backs, albeit with some delay.

Bosnia-Herzegovina and Kosovo are important examples where a great deal went wrong and, slowly but surely, we learnt from our mistakes.

The rapid reaction facility is, as far as this is concerned, an enormous step forward.

We hope, of course, that it will need to be deployed as little as possible, but that is wishful thinking.

We know that in politics, it is useful to have this option up your sleeve, as a complement to the rapidly mobilised military unit which falls within the remit of Mr Solana.

We think that in future, the European Union' s civil instruments will matter most in the sphere of maintaining law and order, and this is, of course, also what we want.

For we too, like everyone else, would like to choose civil instruments over military instruments, but we need not press this point too much in this arena, given the large degree of hesitation whenever the need arises to deploy military instruments.

Mr President, I would like to start by congratulating Mr Newton Dunn, who guided us so expertly through this complex preparation of the report in the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Security and Defence, and has done so again.

By way of example and evidence, I can confirm that only one amendment was tabled for the plenary with regard to his report.

Our group will, incidentally, support that amendment.

The proposal to institute a rapid reaction facility by means of which financial resources can be freed up quickly, receives the unqualified support of my group.

It is our express preference to deploy civil instruments first in the event of a threatening conflict situation.

This is the second concrete step in that connection, after formulating the requirement of a rapidly mobilised police force.

We are waiting with bated breath for a detailed proposal for a total package with so-called "headline goals" in this area.

We would like to see a balance struck between the EU efforts in the fields of civil and military crisis management.

The EU must be able to respond quickly in emergency situations with a wide and well-attuned range of instruments at its disposal.

This is why simple procedures are being proposed for the rapid reaction facility.

Comitology can be avoided by remaining within the Community framework.

However, in theory this limits the number of countries where the instrument can be deployed, but we do not foresee any practical problems.

Where is the European Union not active?

In cases where the Commission makes a formal proposal - which is understandable - to deploy the facility so as to guarantee the implementation of EU programmes, we would like to see the term 'EU policy' added.

In order not to hinder effectiveness, we have suggested not defining the financial boundaries beforehand, or including timeframes in the scheme.

The rapid reaction facility must be flexible by nature.

We would ask the Commission, especially in the beginning, to carry out many and frequent assessments, and to report on these to our Parliament.

In this context, we are also very keen to find out how the facility will relate to the ECHO programme.

This is a new instrument, and we can learn from its growing pains.

Finally, I should like to ask whether the Commissioner would be prepared to discuss possible scenarios for commitment at some point in the future, for we are now theorising about instruments, but we must also talk about the practical implications at some stage, and for this purpose, a scenario discussion would, I believe, be very desirable.

Mr President, when things go wrong in a certain region, the world has come to expect ever more from Europe, and rightly so.

We have the means, the organisational set-up and intention to help in emergency situations, and from that point of view, Africa can expect precious little from America under Bush.

That is why I welcome the Commission proposal to set up a rapid reaction mechanism alongside the military unit and to supplement ECHO.

This new mechanism will certainly meet a need, so much so that demand could soon exceed supply.

In my opinion, the resources available for this year are an insult to the serious commitment of the RRM.

Even if the amount is doubled or trebled in later years, it remains a joke compared to the many initiatives which can qualify for RRM action.

It is about fast decision-making, acting and funding.

The impressive list of operations from the otherwise excellent Newton Dunn report comes, therefore, as a bit of a surprise.

It contains many important tasks of a not entirely pressing nature, such as providing education, monitoring elections or clearing mines.

Could the Commissioner clarify what, according to him, the scope of application will need to be, also in the light of limited financial resources?

The RRM initiative, a first pillar construction under the remit of the Commission, appeals to me.

It is of utmost importance for our Parliament to be totally involved.

Will we be informed about proposed action in good time?

We often hear about issues of competence and rivalry between Mr Patten and Mr Solana; a distribution of tasks between the governments and the Commission in terms of military and civil affairs is very much an option on paper, but could well lead to major problems in reality.

Can the Commissioner give us any reassurance in this respect?

European politics, military and civilian action must be coordinated effectively.

This is another expectation which the world has of us, and rightly so.

Mr President, ever since Amsterdam the Union has been proudly proclaiming its role as a fire brigade for crises in Europe.

The only problem is that it does not even possess buckets with which to draw water.

With the rapid reaction facility, the Union has now acquired some buckets at least, and I do welcome that.

However, I should have liked to see this fire brigade equip itself with hoses too, but Members of this House are among those who have told us that, while this fund does not meet all our needs, fire hoses are simply expensive commodities.

Nevertheless, the facility is a step forward, but I must re-emphasise that it is still a lopsided mechanism, because it only funds action after the event.

Far greater importance surely attaches to action before the event, to preventive measures.

Police forces alone cannot prevent crises, which is why we also expect funding to be provided for the European civilian peace corps that Parliament called for in its resolution of 1999, and we ask Dr Solana to pursue these things more persistently.

Mr President, I would firstly like to congratulate Mr Newton Dunn on his report and for the ease with which the committee has taken on board all sorts of suggestions.

We consider the Commission' s initiative to be an important one.

Nevertheless, I must point out that, although in our Group, the Confederal Group of the European United Left/Nordic Green Left, there is, understandably, no single point of view on this issue, the majority of us are in favour of this rapid reaction force.

We believe that it is important, that it must be established as a European Community policy, and that greater emphasis must be placed on conflict prevention as part of Europe' s contribution to peace.

We would therefore have liked to have seen greater funding allocated, and better coordination between the various applicable programmes to improve their effectiveness, as well as greater co-responsibility when it comes to the eventual - and sometimes, unfortunately, necessary - military intervention, which would perhaps not become necessary if the earlier stages were carried out properly.

Mr President, the discussion on the rapid reaction facility is starting to drag.

Member States are still not agreed on the nuts and bolts of this mechanism. Apparently, it will also be some time before agreement is reached, and that while the financial implications for the Member States are minimal.

There is no need for them to increase their contributions to the Union' s external policy, they only need to grant approval to facilitate the shifting of existing resources.

Laborious negotiations have once again shown that ambitious goals regarding one of the Union' s external policies evaporate in practice because of the firm positions held by the national Member States.

Removing the geographical restriction of programmes created by the Union is not a licence for the European Union to intervene anywhere in the world at will.

I therefore applaud the specifics which have been added to the report of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Security and Defence Policy with regard to this proposal.

This mechanism specifically focuses on actions within the context of European programmes.

This mechanism can provide help where the implementation of those programmes is at risk due to crisis situations.

However, I do not share the conclusions of the report on a different score.

Indeed, unlike the rapporteur, I wish to retain the crisis committee from the Commission proposal.

In this way, we will prevent a situation from arising where initiatives meet with insufficient backing within Member States.

Furthermore, we will lend the Union' s and Member States' initiatives the necessary coherence. Not insignificant, in the light of all the criticism which the Union' s external action has had to put up with over the years.

I also have my reservations about the suggestions made in the explanatory statement with regard to the amendment of the legal basis of this regulation.

Article 308 is the only article on which this proposal can be based.

Moreover, I wonder whether the addition of Article 179 will benefit the speed of this mechanism.

It appears to me that codecision for Parliament will delay matters unnecessarily.

What we do need to be able to do is to call the Commission to account afterwards on the use of this mechanism.

Mr President, the proposal for a regulation creating a rapid reaction facility is one of those which are founded on thoroughly laudable intentions but which are liable to fail as a result of red tape and turf wars.

The European Union has played a rather unconvincing role hitherto in the realm of rapid reaction and conflict resolution.

The reason for this does not seem to lie so much in a shortage of manpower or financial commitment as in a failure to manage, plan and coordinate initiatives and activities.

Be that as it may, the declaration of intent to become more active in the resolution of conflicts and in crisis management must be interpreted as an important step in the right direction.

The EU has sometimes done marvellous things to improve the situation in crisis-torn areas, especially with financial resources.

But money is no substitute for political will and political influence.

If the EU wishes to play a more prominent role in future, it must have the political will to involve itself more actively in the implementation of appropriate measures.

I am only the representative of a small country, but I can assure you that Austria, with its long tradition of neutrality and non-alignment, has amassed a particular wealth of experience in the domains of political mediation and crisis management, which makes parties to a conflict more willing to accept it as a mediator.

Perhaps this is one of the very areas in which the EU should be making greater use of the experience of its smaller countries.

Crisis management and mediation attempts are not so much about huge financial resources and large bloated organisations as about the trust that warring parties are prepared to place in an offer of intervention.

And this is precisely where the EU has been failing.

We have an image problem in the eyes of the parties to the numerous conflicts in the world today.

That cannot be surmounted with new administrative units and financial plans alone.

What is really lacking is a credible desire to assume greater global responsibility in the realms of mediation and crisis management.

Mr President, I hope I have the Commissioner's attention, as he is in conversation with Mr Brok at the moment.

Throughout this Parliament we have been calling for the Commission to introduce more efficient financial management and administrative procedures so that it can deliver external assistance and implement its programmes such as mine action urgently, in times of crisis or when lives are at stake.

It seems to us that this was the underlying motive behind Mr Patten's proposal for the rapid reaction facility.

I hope this is the case and I would ask for a reassurance on this point from the Commissioner.

It is a pity that the term "Rapid Reaction Facility" has been used for what after all should be a procedural matter, a financial management instrument.

It is easily confused with "Rapid Reaction Force"; it has been confused in the media and even in Parliament's own session news this week.

Perhaps in the interest of clarity and to avoid confusion, the Commission could change the title to something like "Urgent Financing Facility".

We support the principle as I have described it, but one or two unfortunate elements seem to have crept in.

Firstly, instead of referring to the facility in the context of CFSP and the Commission's own first pillar external actions, it has been put into the context of the common security and defence policy.

Now we have expressed our concerns about the EU meddling in military matters on many occasions and our reservations have not been eased by developments at Nice.

The Commission's financial facility should not be mixed up with these defence issues.

Secondly, there is a thread of political correctness running through the proposal.

I am baffled for instance by the idea that the fight against gender discrimination would fall into the crisis management category, triggering the use of the rapid reaction facility.

Thirdly, for us more importantly, Mr Newton Dunn, the rapporteur, has taken the opportunity to introduce an amendment in pursuit of one of his pet subjects, namely the establishment of a European public security force, in other words a European gendarmerie or armed police.

This is the main reason why we cannot accept this report.

We do not want a European army and we certainly to not want a European police force.

We do want the Commission to carry out its external assistance with greater efficiency and we welcome measures to that effect.

Mr President, the European Parliament has always upheld the need to increase the European Union' s non-military intervention capabilities.

We therefore welcome the Council' s proposal and support Mr Newton Dunn' s report, which puts forward proposals that improve the text.

These are clearly issues which come under the first pillar.

Nevertheless, we all know that, in the context of the second pillar, the military mechanism of a rapid reaction force, designed to fulfil Petersberg-type tasks, is being created.

It is envisaged that these tasks will be carried out in third countries where the non-military rapid reaction mechanism will also operate.

But how, and in what cases?

What kind of procedures will this relationship employ?

I therefore think it would have been beneficial for the document to have addressed this aspect as well.

As a Member of this Parliament, I wish to contribute to the breaking down of some of the barriers that separate fields of competence from one another so that greater cooperation within the European Union is achieved.

Mr President, my party fully recognises the need for the developed countries to make available resources for international crises and for our response to be rapid and effective.

In this context, the Commission's proposal looks attractive in that it provides the mechanisms for affording a response to crisis situations.

However, we believe that for our efforts to be both rapid and effective, they should be planned, funded and executed on a truly international scale, utilising the resources and the capabilities of the whole free world, including the technical genius and the good will of the United States.

The mechanisms for ensuring this already exist in the form of the United Nations and its various agencies.

Although imperfect and always capable of reform, these agencies have provided good service and have relieved much suffering.

For the future, the way to ensure that responses are maximised is to continue working through these agencies, ensuring that resources are used wisely and efficiently.

As far as the Commission's proposal is concerned, this is simply reinventing the wheel, putting the political ambitions of the European Union before the needs of suffering people.

People in crises need a European rapid reaction facility as much as a fish needs a bicycle.

We should abandon these grandiose plans and instead support and develop the existing agencies which have a better track record that the EU will ever have.

Mr President, in discussing this matter I very much welcome the proposal from the Swedish Foreign Ministry that I have just seen today for a goal-oriented action plan for conflict prevention, because as I have said before, we in the European Union should be sending a philosophy for peace to areas of conflict and not just armies.

The European Union is the best example in the history of the world of conflict resolution and that is something we tend to forget.

Look at the last century: the first half of it was marked by the worst conflict the world had ever seen: two world wars and millions of people dead and killed.

Yet who could have foreseen that in the second half of that century those same people would come together in the European Union.

As I know from my own experience, the principles at the heart of European Union will resolve conflict wherever they are applied in the world.

Therefore do you not think it is a very positive and sensible suggestion for the European Union to have a department that does precisely that?

In other words, the Commission should have a department of peace and reconciliation and a Commissioner for peace and reconciliation to go to areas of conflict in advance and apply the principles of conflict resolution, particularly those principles at the heart of European Union itself.

Mr President, I am very sorry to have heard in the debate MEPs from my own region in the UK from different parties say that they will be opposing this report.

I am pleased to support the rapid reaction facility and I do so as a Member of Parliament's Development Committee.

In the week that 600 people lay dead after the earthquake in El Salvador, this European Union must be able to move more quickly just as we failed to do in response to the impact of hurricane Mitch in that same country back in 1998.

I ask Commissioner Patten in closing the debate, first to assure us that the facility will be utilised in response to crises world-wide in support of the EU's development goals and not just in Europe's own backyard.

Second, could he tell us how he could make such a promise when year after year the Commission proposes funding interventions in Central and Eastern Europe and in the former Yugoslavia at the expense of budget lines benefiting the developing countries.

Third, will he undertake to bring forward a detailed operational relationship between the rapid reaction facility and the financing of ECHO and indeed explain why he has not at one and the same time brought forward proposals to speed up our humanitarian assistance as part of the reform programme which he knows we support.

Finally, can he tell us is he shares our belief that development is the best form of conflict prevention and to commit himself to enhancing the EU's development programme to avoid the need for crisis intervention in future years.

Mr President, I am delighted to be able to respond to the excellent report by Mr Newton Dunn, on the rapid reaction facility.

He is a friend and colleague.

We used to be, indeed, fellow tribesmen before he wandered, I hope temporarily, off the reservation, but I am not at all surprised, knowing the author, that this is such an excellent report.

The rapid reaction facility, as it is called in the report, is of course now called the rapid reaction mechanism to avoid any possible confusion with the rapid reaction force over which, let me repeat for the benefit of readers of parts of the press from the country I know best, I have no responsibility whatsoever.

That is a negative "no" rather than an affirmative "no", just for the benefit of the correspondence columns of The Daily Telegraph.

I have to say I did listen to the speech by my friend, Mr Van Orden.

I thought that it was a good example of dancing on pinheads.

I must say that his principal objection concerned what I think is Amendment No 9 and, as I shall say shortly we are opposed to Amendment No 9.

But, if there is some confusion about the nature of what we are attempting to do, I have to say that it is partly because of what some of those who agree with the honourable gentleman have been saying about these proposals.

If Conservatives like my honourable friend do not approve of this, I have to ask the question, not entirely rhetorically, what the hell will they ever approve of?

In the days when I was chairman of the party of which the honourable gentlemen is a member, we actually believed in trying to speed up the delivery of financial assistance.

We actually believed in trying to cut through red tape.

So, I wonder what the hell my honourable friend and his colleagues actually believe in these days.

I think it would be desirable to look beyond those correspondence columns of The Daily Telegraph for one's information on an important subject like this.

Now, I am responsible for ensuring that the Commission is able to respond swiftly and effectively in a crisis both on its own and, as is perhaps more likely to be the case, as part of an overall European Union response to crises including those in which the European Union rapid reaction force might find itself deployed.

The lesson of recent years has been very clear.

Responding to crises very often involves the deployment of a wide array of tools, sometimes encompassing the military, frequently including policies and programmes for which the Commission has a responsibility or involvement from trade policy to humanitarian aid, from the provision of election monitors to assistance on the ground with customs missions, border management, assistance to the independent media and so on.

Too often in the past, take the Balkans for example, we have just not been able to respond with the efficiency or timeliness that developments in the real world demand.

Or, we have had to wade through procedural treacle in Brussels which has bogged down officials who should have been devoting every effort to getting the job done in the field.

That, I fear, was my impression when I came into this job.

We are trying to rectify these deficiencies.

Weakness is exposed by real events, not theoretical models.

I have devoted a great deal of my attention since I became a Commissioner to trying to improve that delivery on the ground.

I think we have started to make progress, as I believe our response to recent events in Serbia has demonstrated.

There the Commission was in the all too unusual position of being praised by the local government and by other donors for the rapidity with which we were able to deliver.

But this is still too rare, and getting help where it is needed fast still requires a great deal of effort on the part of our officials to cut their way through bureaucratic thickets.

We owe it to them and to those we are trying to help to equip them properly to do the job.

That is what this proposal for a rapid reaction mechanism is all about.

Just as the wider reforms which we are introducing to our external assistance programmes across the world are designed to ensure that the European Union aid programme begins to earn and to deserve a reputation for excellence.

The rapid reaction mechanism will allow us to activate very rapidly and to disburse quickly Community funds in response to crises or emerging crises.

The draft regulation under discussion in the Council reflects the amendments submitted by Parliament.

We want to ensure maximum flexibility both geographically and bureaucratically, dispensing with complex comitology rules, for example, in favour of straight provision of information to the Council and the European Parliament and simplifying as much as possible the decision-making process.

The aim will be for the rapid reaction mechanism to be activated to cope with the initial limited period of a crisis, pending the coming on stream of the regular Community programme, be it CARDS or TACIS, or whatever.

Interventions under the mechanism will be limited in time and amount up to EUR 12 m each time.

Just before coming specifically to the amendments let me respond to one or two points in the debate.

Both Mr Newton Dunn and Mr Wiersma - who spoke shortly after him - suggested that I should give examples of when the rapid reaction mechanism would be useful.

Almost the first problem I had to deal with when I became a Commissioner was how to deliver oil rapidly to the democratically controlled municipalities in Serbia.

Frankly, it strained our administrative creativity to get that done.

We have actually managed to do it in a way which I believe satisfied the Court of Auditors as well as getting assistance into those municipalities very rapidly.

The only other country, the only other donor which actually got involved as well, because of the complexities of what we were taking on, was Norway to which I pay particularly warm tribute, but it was a difficult job, it would have been easier if we had had this mechanism in place in order to do it.

I was asked about conflict prevention and I very much agree with what the honourable gentleman, my honourable friend I might say even though we are not members of the same party, Mr Hume, had to say about this, who knows more about conflict prevention than most of the rest of us put together.

The important thing about conflict prevention is that it should be quick and effective, and I repeat the word "quick".

Now, Mr Howitt challenged me to say whether I believed that development assistance is the best form of conflict prevention.

Sensibly used development assistance along with a generous and sensible attitude to the trading relations between countries is by far the most effective way of trying to cope with conflicts, a point made admirably the other day in an excellent article in The Financial Times by Martin Wolf bringing together the findings of a number of academic studies on conflicts in Africa and in other societies.

So of course I agree with that, but the Commission will actually be bringing forward in the next month or two a communication on conflict prevention in which we will try to pull together some of the imaginative ideas which are being developed both in the Commission and elsewhere for conflict prevention which is increasingly, as we have to cope with the dark side of globalisation, the major subject on the agenda of Foreign and Security Ministers.

But in providing the assistance, in providing the resources to deal with conflict prevention, I just want to make one point.

It is not a question of the Commission raiding one budget in order to find money elsewhere.

The Commission only has the money which the budgetary authority provides, which the Council and which Parliament provides, and my view, which I will be rehearsing once again in the General Affairs Council next Monday, is the Commission for too long has allowed others to get away without setting priorities and has been landed with all the political odium of setting priorities itself.

I think we need to engage Parliament and Ministers much more in discussing the relationship between our political and development priorities and our external spending around the world, because if we only have a limited amount of money to spend, as we will have for the foreseeable future, for ever as long as there is a finance minister, we will always have to make very difficult choices between priorities, and not everybody will like what those choices are.

But I agree with what the honourable Member said about development assistance and with his view that it should be primarily directed towards the alleviation of poverty.

Let me deal with the amendments proposed by Parliament.

Of the 38 put forward, the Commission can take on board 34, either as they are or with small drafting changes.

That is a measure of how close we are on this issue.

We have difficulty with four amendments.

Firstly, Amendment No 9: the first part talks about the need for the rapid reaction facility to be supported by the setting up of civil headline goals.

We are happy with that notion, but we cannot go along with the European Public Security Force suggested in the second part of the amendment, which is plainly well beyond the Commission's remit.

I hope my honourable friend, Mr Van Orden, took note of that and that I can at least dismiss that nightmare.

Amendment No 14 adds a new recital on the financial rationale behind the budget line created for the mechanism and its budget provision.

This amendment seems to stem from an earlier misunderstanding of the whole mechanism which later discussions in the European Parliament have cleared up.

It is now very clear that there is no question of moving activities or budget out of CFSP or to hijacking options under that pillar into a Community framework.

The mechanism is wholly a Community instrument, and so is the origin of its budget.

We cannot accept Amendment No 28, because the "Community" is not the Budgetary Authority.

Only the Budgetary Authority is entitled to determine annual financial provisions in the budget.

Finally, the Commission would not of itself have been against Amendment No 29, but we have in a spirit of compromise accepted the demand put forward by the Council to limit the duration of operations, given the considerable flexibility achieved in other respects.

These are not, I am sure as honourable Members will appreciate, exactly fundamental differences.

That is because basically we share the same objectives: to improve our performance considerably, to improve our response in crises.

That is, I repeat, what this mechanism is all about.

I very much welcome the support which overwhelmingly most honourable Members have given it thus far.

I hope very much that honourable Members will give it a fair wind this week because, like you, I want to have it operational as quickly as possible.

This is all about the credibility and the effectiveness of the European Union around the world.

If honourable Members do not support this, I repeat, God knows what they think the European Union is for.

The next item is the following oral questions:

B5-0560/2000 by Mr Brok, on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy, to the Council, on the Democratic People's Republic of Korea,

B5-0825/2000 by Mr Brok, on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy, to the Commission, on the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.

Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, allow me to say a few words on the question tabled by the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy, especially on the basis of the findings obtained by Mr Santer and other colleagues of ours on their visit to North Korea.

I believe that we in the European Union have a more important role to play there than we have previously done and that our policy cannot stop at support for the KEDO programme.

It is certainly regrettable that, with eight Member States having now established bilateral diplomatic relations, we have not been able to adopt a concerted approach in our dealings with North Korea.

Last year was an exceptionally interesting one in the Korean peninsula, especially on account of the rapprochement between North and South Korea and the reuniting of families that was made possible by this thaw in North-South relations.

We must be aware that this area still has the potential to be a major trouble spot, but there is nevertheless a real political opportunity now to achieve a lasting peace settlement.

That is why it is essential that the European Union, as an international player in a multipolar political world, should become active in this domain.

It is a matter of supporting a policy which can pave the way for democracy and human rights in North Korea and which, on that basis, can play a significant part in the development of ever greater understanding between the two parts of Korea, an understanding which, following the meeting between the two Presidents, has sparked off the first public debates about national reunification for many decades.

Such a policy must also be combined with a means of obtaining details of the food situation and the health system in North Korea and must enable us to incorporate appropriate measures of aid into a political strategy so as to bring about an improvement in the general situation and perhaps also to initiate the development on which the long-term peace of the region depends, for the peace of that region, of course, is of global importance too.

As an arms supplier, North Korea is an important player on the world stage, and its development of modern weapons of mass destruction and delivery systems makes it a country which could undoubtedly pose a serious threat to other parts of the Asian continent and to other continents.

Madam President, I believe that we must therefore seek improvements in these domains, so as to curb the proliferation of armaments and thus contribute to global stability.

I hope that you will support this motion for a resolution and that the Council and the Commission can agree on a coordinated approach with Parliament which will enable us to make our contribution in that part of the world, not least in our own interests.

Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, during the meeting held in Pyongyang between 25 and 27 November of last year within the framework of the political dialogue, the European troika emphasised the most important parts of the European Union' s strategies towards the Democratic People' s Republic of Korea - strategies which had been approved by the Council at its meetings on 9 October and 20 November.

Allow me just briefly to mention the three most important of these strategies.

First of all, the European Union' s support for work on achieving lasting peace between the two Korean States.

Secondly, the importance of the Democratic People' s Republic of Korea' s adopting a responsible attitude when it comes to the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons and ballistic missiles, as well as putting a stop to exports of missiles.

Thirdly, respect for the UN' s Convention on Human Rights.

When it comes to establishing diplomatic relations with the Democratic People' s Republic of Korea, the Council agreed on 20 November of last year that the interested parties must consult between themselves and inform the Council of the content of their discussions with Pyongyang.

The Council has repeatedly urged the Democratic People' s Republic of Korea to comply fully with its commitments under the Non-Proliferation Treaty and cease to produce, test or export any missiles or missile technology.

The European Union has also called upon the Democratic People' s Republic of Korea to sign and ratify the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty.

Furthermore, the European Union has informed the Democratic People' s Republic of Korea that it expects concrete measures to be taken on these issues.

In all contacts with the Democratic People' s Republic of Korea, the European Union has emphasised its great concern about the serious violations of human rights in the country, about the number of political prisoners, about the absence of national legislation and about the Korean authorities' refusal to cooperate with international mechanisms in defence of human rights.

Demands have been made for improvements on these issues.

We shall continue to highlight the importance of these issues.

The European Union welcomes the decision by the Democratic People' s Republic to resume its reporting under the UN Convention on Civil and Political Rights during the year 2000 and hopes that the country will now, on the basis of its own report, be able to enter into a useful and constructive dialogue with the UN Human Rights Committee

On the issue of measures to be taken, the Council has called upon the Commission to begin dealing with the issue of technical measures of support which may be taken within those sectors to which priority has been given.

The Council and the Commission will, as soon as possible, be examining what measures are possible in order to open the European market to North Korean products.

Feasibility studies will be conducted in those areas regarded as having priority.

The European Union will make efforts to extend the political consultations with the Republic of Korea, whose efforts to effect a rapprochement between the two Korean States are fully supported by the European Union.

It is also a question of establishing areas in which joint measures might be taken, for example on the issue of technical aid and economic cooperation with the Democratic People' s Republic of Korea.

Madam President, I very much welcome the opportunity of saying a few words on this extremely important subject.

Recent events on the Korean Peninsula are of great interest and concern to all of us in Europe and the contribution that we make in helping to promote reconciliation on the Korean Peninsula, in helping to bring, as it were, the North Korean government and society in out of the cold.

Those efforts reflect the extent to which Europe has a global role to play and they match, in a sense, the role that Japan has been playing the Balkans - helping to support stability there.

We similarly have responsibilities in other continents.

A European Union approach towards recent developments in the Korean Peninsula was agreed at the General Affairs Councils of 9 October and 20 November last year.

This approach aims, as I have said, to support the inter-Korean reconciliation process in order to bring about peace and stability on the Korean Peninsula.

Taking this approach as the basis for Commission action, the Commission will maintain and is considering increasing its assistance to North Korea.

Overall, in the last few years, that assistance has totalled - including the contribution to the Korean Peninsula Energy Development Organisation - about EUR 275m.

However, any increases should be measured in response to signs of progress of the DPRK in areas of principal concern to us and, I know, to Members of this House.

Respect, for example, for human rights; non-proliferation issues; access for the population to external aid; better operating conditions for NGOs - a point I was able to make to the DPRK Foreign Minister in Bangkok last summer - and the opening up of the DPRK's economy and the structural reform that will be a necessary part of that.

This approach has been outlined to the North Korean authorities at the recent Senior Officials Troika meeting in Pyongyang at the end of November.

I understand that my services are keeping Parliament fully informed of this issue.

Parliament has shown an active interest in this subject for some time.

The humanitarian and food assistance delivered to the DPRK - around EUR 200m since 1993 - will continue.

A new food security programme for 2000, totalling EUR 20m, has just been adopted by the Commission.

I should point out that we have moved from regular food aid to structural food assistance and, in particular, the provision of inputs and technical assistance to enhance agricultural production.

The implementation of humanitarian projects approved in the year 2000 will extend well into the summer of this year.

Humanitarian aid - mainly medicines, water, sanitation and winter clothes - is planned to continue on a more selective basis, but at a level adequate to respond to real humanitarian needs.

We also have the scope to match, with additional assistance, any further progress made by the DPRK authorities, notably in terms of access to the most vulnerable populations and the improvement of working conditions for non-governmental organisations.

In addition, the Commission is now considering possible measures in the fields of technical assistance and trade, which could be gradually extended if North Korea makes progress in the areas I have mentioned.

As a first step, these measures include a general increase in the DPRK textile quota by 60%, 50% in the case of a few product categories.

A fact-finding expert mission will be sent shortly to assess needs and identify areas in which pilot technical assistance projects could be pursued.

But they certainly include an area which, I know, has been of interest to Mr Ford - that is the whole question of the energy industries in North Korea which will be so important to the country's economic future.

As to the establishment of diplomatic relations between the European Community and the DPRK, the Commission is considering the appropriate timing of such a step in close coordination with Member States.

Finally, clearly the Nobel prize-winner, President Kim Dae-Jung, has been typically visionary in the efforts that he has made to promote reconciliation on the peninsula.

Equally clearly, President Kim Dae-Jung has been very realistic about what can be achieved in the short term.

I do not think he makes extravagant claims about the pace and development.

What is important is to keep our eyes on the horizon and to keep working towards it.

We should take our inspiration from President Kim Dae-Jung, who is one of the great statesmen of our age.

I hope that with his encouragement the European Union will continue to play its part in ensuring that the Korean Peninsula, the region and, indeed, the world, enjoy peace and prosperity.

The consequences if we were to continue to isolate the DPRK, if the DPRK was to continue to be prepared to be isolated, are too grim to contemplate.

Madam President, the resolution on North Korea, on which Parliament is about to vote, has a political significance of the first water.

Not only will the European Parliament itself establish its position on the northern half of the Korean peninsula, but it will also have defined the new direction of this position for all the European institutions.

In my capacity as president of the ad hoc delegation, whose visit to North Korea inspired the drafting of this resolution, I should like to share three key considerations with you.

The first is the advent of a new era in bilateral relations between the two Koreas, characterised by the policy of rapprochement, or Sunshine Policy, of President Kim Dae Jung, who made an important initial gesture with his historic visit in June 2000 to Pyongyang.

Europe has a duty to support the efforts of the Korean people as a whole and the Korean political leaders with a view to achieving stability and lasting peace in Korea.

This is the context in which our policy on Korea must be viewed and the scope of our policy actions must be defined.

Secondly, Korea is the last nation in the world that is still divided by a wall.

Following the example of Germany and Yemen, Korea can now begin to see the prospect of cooperation with a view to overcoming this internal frontier.

Europe, which the two Korean states have asked to assist them in defining new economic and political relations within Korea, must accept the challenge and point the Koreans towards the path to integration after a long and difficult time as a divided nation.

The European example of the gradual creation of area without internal frontiers is being called upon to serve as an example in this instance.

Once again we have a political responsibility to provide every conceivable aid to a Korea which is slowly overcoming its historic divide.

Finally, I would like to tell you that, more specifically as regards North Korea, confrontation and isolation must be consigned to the past once and for all.

The North Korean leadership seems willing to be open and to pursue dialogue with South Korea, the United States, Europe and Japan, and although, in the final analysis, they must be judged on their actions, I am convinced that a European policy of dialogue, structured and critical dialogue, will make a significant contribution to changes in the Democratic People' s Republic of Korea that will benefit the entire world.

Madam President, can I say we have made enormous progress over the last three years in terms of relations with the DPRK.

We have now had three interparliamentary delegation meetings and the resolution calls for the Koreans to come here again to continue the dialogue.

We have seen the European Commission move from not talking to the North Koreans to having an ECHO representative in Pyongyang and we have now moved from five Member States with diplomatic relations to, I understand, thirteen in the process of establishing diplomatic relations with the DPRK.

I would like very much to see the European Community also establish diplomatic relations with the DPRK.

We give money to the KEDO project as Mr Patten has said, we give humanitarian and food aid and are hoping to give other structural assistance, a total of EUR 275 m.

It is crazy to be doing that without having the ability to have a political dialogue.

We need a dialogue on human rights, we need a dialogue on weapon sales, we need a dialogue on economic development.

The reality is that with the collapse of the Soviet empire, the failure to make the transition from the Stakhanovite heavy industries of the past to the new light industries and a series of natural disasters, the economy is in complete crisis.

Observers are estimating that the resulting food crisis has led to the premature deaths of 3 million North Koreans, one in eight of the population.

Today their only exports are raw materials and military hardware.

If we can find a solution, we can help the people of the DPRK to help themselves with food aid and assistance in restarting and rebuilding agriculture, mining and non-nuclear energy projects.

And if we involve ourselves in removing the imperative to export military material then we may force the incoming Bush administration to reconsider its apparent blind commitment to national missile defence with the threat to world peace and stability that poses.

I would like to congratulate President Kim Dae-Jung of the Republic of Korea on his commitment to the sunshine policy which will allow the normalisation of inter-Korean relations and welcome Kim Jong Il's positive response.

Europe should pursue this not only because it is currently the policy of the Republic of Korea but because it is the right way to go.

Our advantage is that we are not Japan or the United States and we can act as honest brokers in this most dangerous area of the world.

Mr President, it would appear that the hopes raised by the June Summit between the two Kims from North and South Korea are not going to be fulfilled. The optimism is fading.

North Korea is finding it difficult to make good those few, largely symbolic commitments it made in the military field, it is delaying the reunification of families who were separated by the war and have remained so for 50 years and it is showing no sign of intending to make the return visit of Kim Jong Il to Seoul, planned for spring this year, a practical reality, and it is not yet known when or whether this will take place.

President Clinton's decision not to go to North Korea, even though he wanted to in order to finish his presidency with a historic visit, could now mean a long pause in Korea's process of opening up to the outside world.

In spite of this, I hear tones of optimism and I see European countries queuing up - Mr Brok touched on the issue just now - and falling over themselves in the rush to recognise the Stalinist Pyongyang regime, turning a blind eye to what goes on in the country, to the tragic violations of human rights.

Therefore, I say: yes, certainly, let us encourage rapprochement between the two Koreas; of course we must provide assistance for the North Koreans to save them from starving to death - Mr Ford mentioned this just now - but, at the same time, we must lay down stringent conditions to ensure that the aid reaches the places where it is genuinely needed and does not serve to support a paranoid, unpredictable regime which is wont to resort to the threat of missiles and nuclear arms to ensure its survival.

Madam President, I should like to thank the honourable Members for the valuable interventions that have been made in this discussion on the important issue of the European Union' s relationship with the Democratic People' s Republic of Korea.

Allow me just to make a few brief concluding remarks.

It is gratifying that an agreement has now been made within the European Union to make a better attempt to coordinate the issue of establishing diplomatic relations with the DPRK.

A number of EU Member States, including my own country, have had diplomatic relations with the Democratic People' s Republic of Korea the whole time. Others have recently decided to establish relations, while a further group is waiting to take a decision on establishing relations.

I personally believe that a diplomatic presence is of great importance.

Twenty years ago, I myself had the opportunity to serve in Pyongyang and know what it means to be confronted directly with the reality of that country.

I would also remind you of the statement made by South Korea' s President Kim Dae Young on his visit to Stockholm in connection with receiving the Nobel Peace Prize in Oslo.

He made a public appeal at that time for a more important role for the European Union where the situation on the Korean peninsula is concerned.

I believe we must take his appeal seriously.

We should be prepared also to respond to this type of appeal when the time is right.

It is important for us to agree within the European Union about what we are to do when we adopt a position on such measures.

We ought to have an agreed view on to what extent there are reasonable opportunities of making progress in what we are doing, and it is obviously also important for conditions in the Democratic People' s Republic of Korea to be such that it makes sense to do something.

I must inform you that I have received a motion for a resolution under Rule 42(5) of the Rules of Procedure.

The vote will take place at 12 noon.

We shall resume at noon for the voting.

(The sitting was adjourned at 11.45 a.m. and resumed at 12 noon)

Mr President, our group, as you know, did not vote for the Sjstedt report in committee.

We would support it here, however, if Amendments Nos 5 and 6 were adopted.

We have discussed this with the other groups.

In the case of Amendment No 5, I am informed that other groups would be able to support the amendment if two linguistic alterations were made.

The first is the replacement of the word 'review' by the word 'examination' as the English translation of the German berprfung; this is only a linguistic adjustment.

The second, however, would be an oral amendment.

We ask that the word Rechtssicherheit in the German version of Amendment No 5 be replaced by the word Klarheit and that the English term 'legal certainty' be accordingly replaced by the word 'clarification'.

May I ask you to note this oral amendment and to put the adjusted version of Amendment No 5 to the vote.

Mr President, I am prepared to support those amendments that have just been proposed concerning Amendment No 5, because the proposal including these changes is significantly better than the original version.

I would therefore encourage MEPs to approve the oral amendments which Mr Liese tabled from the Group of the European People' s Party.

Report without debate (A5-0379/2000) by Mr Bowe, on behalf of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, on the implementation of Directive 96/59/EC on the disposal of polychlorinated biphenyls and polychlorinated terphenyls (PCBs and PCTs) [2000/2112(INI)]

Report (A5-0367/2000) by Mr Cunha, on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries on the proposal for a Council decision setting the terms for financial support to Guinea-Bissau in the fisheries sector [8263/2000 - C5-0361/2000 - 1998/0355(CNS)]

Report (A5-0360/2000) by Mr Van den Bos, on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation, on the proposal for a Council decision concerning the conclusion of the Cooperation Agreement between the European Community and the People' s Republic of Bangladesh [7595/1/1999 - COM(1999) 155 - C5-0356/2000 - 1999/0086(CNS)]

Report (A5-0392/2000) by Mr Newton Dunn, on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Security and Defence Policy, on the proposal for a Council regulation creating the Rapid Reaction Facility [COM(2000) 119 - C5-0272/2000 - 2000/0081(CNS)]

Mr President, I want to propose a technical oral amendment to Amendment No 28.

I apologise for not spotting the technicality in committee.

Amendment No 28 reads at present: "The Community shall each year set a global ceiling for funding action under this Regulation."

As Commissioner Patten pointed out during the debate, it is not the "Community" which sets the budgetary ceiling, it is the Budgetary Authority.

I should like to propose orally that we delete the word "Community" and insert instead the words "Budgetary Authority", so that the amendment would now read: "The Budgetary Authority shall each year set a global ceiling for funding action under this Regulation."

Report (A5-0338/2000) by Mrs Oomen-Ruijten, on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs, on the situation of frontier workers [2000/2010(INI)]

Mr President, I would like to correct an apparent slip of the pen by means of an oral amendment.

I would point out that only 'the country of employment principle' is referred to in the paragraph, when it should read 'the country of residence or employment principle' because of course I cannot determine what choice the Commission has to make, it must do that for itself.

But I would like to add 'the country of residence or employment principle' , twice.

Mr President, it has been agreed with the rapporteur, Mrs Oomen-Ruijten, that when it comes to Amendment No 2 of Paragraph 6, we should regard this amendment as an addition to the original paragraph.

This means, therefore, that if Amendment No 2 is approved, the original paragraph will also have to be put to the vote.

Mr President, I would suggest we vote on Amendment No 6 first, and then on the original paragraph two, because that would be a more logical way of proceeding.

After the vote on Amendment No 6

Mr President, I would now like us to vote on the paragraph all the same.

After the vote on paragraph 6

Mr President, you mentioned that I had signed that motion on behalf of the Liberal Group.

I want to make it absolutely clear that this is a mistake, or if it is not a mistake, it is some mischievous prank by the dirty tricks department of the Liberal Party.

I was born a Conservative and I trust that I will die a Conservative.

We would never have thought otherwise.

It was a mistake on the part of the services.

Mr President, I would like to make it just as clear that although my first name is Bertel, I have not become a Lord.

Motion for a resolution (B5-0037/2001), on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Security and Defence Policy, on relations between the European Union and the Democratic People's Republic of Korea

EXPLANATIONS OF VOTE- Sjstedt report (A5-0387/2000)

(FR) We think the report presented by Jonas Sjstedt, on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left, on the protection of natural habitats in Europe is particularly important, especially for France, as this is one of the countries where the implementation of the Habitats Directive, which is now over eight years old, and the Wild Birds Directive, which is now over 20 years old - as well as the establishment of the Natura 2000 Network - has suffered the greatest delays, to the point that it has been seriously compromised.

Yet, the more time that passes, the more the (semi-) natural habitats are destroyed, and the more difficult it becomes to preserve or to re-establish the ecosystems in all their diversity and richness.

Far from being "marginal" , the need to maintain and promote biodiversity (and hence the diversity of the ecosystems) stands out as a political issue of prime importance, with universal implications for our living conditions (including for climate change).

It is not a matter of setting up localised "reserves" where species would be protected as if they were in a museum, but of incorporating environmental concerns in all Community and Member State policy.

The implementation of the Habitats and Wild Birds Directives must henceforth be implemented speedily and effectively across the board.

(NL) The VU&ID (Flemish People' s Union) MEPs Nelly Maes and Bart Staes did not support the amendments tabled by the ELDR and PPE-DE Groups in relation to the habitat directive. We regard these amendments as an attempt to undermine the existing habitat directive.

We would point out that the existing habitat directive affords the government sufficient opportunity to step in when the implementation of existing projects is hampered by the habitat provisions.

After all, Article 6 (4) of Directive 92/43/EC states: "If, in spite of a negative assessment of the implications for the site and in the absence of alternative solutions, a plan or project must nevertheless be carried out for imperative reasons of overriding public interest, including those of a social or economic nature, the Member State shall take all compensatory measures necessary to ensure that the overall coherence of Natura 2000 is protected.

It shall inform the Commission of the compensatory measures adopted."

The VU&ID MEPs have since submitted a parliamentary question to the Commission, asking it to provide an overview of all the notifications it has received in this matter since the directive came into force.

I am in total agreement with the Habitats Directive and its objectives in terms of protecting the endangered outstanding natural heritage of the countries of the European Union.

This heritage and its biological and genetic diversity are the planet' s most precious assets and we must indeed ensure that they are protected, reproduced and handed down to future generations.

Even so, I voted against the Sjstedt report for two crucial reasons.

Firstly, it is unacceptable to blackmail European appropriations allocated to our countries by making them conditional, in article 11, upon compliance with the Habitats Directive as it stands.

If it were simply a matter of ensuring that European funds are not used to finance projects destroying these outstanding ecosystems, then I should have endorsed the resolution and voted in favour of it, but it is unacceptable and unprecedented to make a European Union policy conditional upon compliance with another and that social conditions should be subject, for example, to environmental conditions.

My second reason is that the resolution does not clarify the concept of "disturbance" and the legal discussion, which is so deliberately vague that legal battles could be revived, which might lead to bans on traditional hunts where these are authorised under the Birds Directive and the subsidiary law in the states.

It is precisely because the European Union deliberately maintains this ambiguity that some countries experience problems in issuing their "Nature 2000" lists and in implementing the Habitats Directive calmly, without resistance on the part of the farmers in those countries, even though everyone acknowledges the noble nature of the objectives of the directive.

Mr President, last summer I went on holiday to Guinea-Bissau, and, as is my wont, I exchanged a few words with one of the local elderly pensioners, or rather with a fisherman from Guinea-Bissau would have dearly loved to have become a pensioner.

Having been told that I am the representative of the Italian Pensioners' Party, he complained to me: "I go out to sea to fish, I work whenever it is possible and I would like to work many days so that I can have a pension as well.

However, unfortunately, because our sea is fished by European Union fishing boats, I cannot find enough work to contribute to a pension, and I do not see anything of the European Union financing allocated to the Government of Guinea-Bissau for the Government does not give me anything at all".

I therefore voted for the report, but on condition that things improve in future.

This report and its amendments deal with financial support to Guinea-Bissau in the fisheries sector.

Despite our many reservations, we voted in favour of them out of solidarity with the people of that country, especially its fishermen.

Firstly, because the objective of the fisheries agreements between the European Union and third countries are, as is explicitly stated in some other reports, intended to spare European Union fisheries resources and, consequently, to increase catches from the waters of other countries.

Next, because we do not know exactly how this aid will be used and what its precise ultimate destination will be.

Unfortunately, however, too much of this aid is often nothing more than a de facto rebate granted to the European companies investing in these countries.

Moreover, such aid is often also misappropriated by the local administration.

Despite all that, at the end of the day, this money, which is supposed to assist the local people, will, even so, be better employed over there than the money given to major employers over here who are shedding jobs.

Mr President, after staying in Guinea-Bissau for a fortnight last summer, I went on to Bangladesh, where I did not stay very long for it is not a very wealthy State.

I approached an elderly man there as well, and he, aware that I am the representative of the Italian Pensioners' Party, asked me: "But what is a pension?"

Sadly, Mr President, the people of Bangladesh are so badly off that they do not even know the meaning of the word "pension".

So I said to myself: "When the Van den Bos document is put to the vote, remember to vote for the motion, Fatuzzo, but also remember that we ought to monitor the transaction and ensure that the aid given to the people of Bangladesh through this agreement also serves to provide a pensioner or two with a State pension".

The Committee on Development and Cooperation welcomes the fact that the rate of growth of Bangladesh' s export industry is thrice that of the country' s domestic production.

These exports, however, are almost exclusively the work of the major companies, mostly Western, which have set up factories in this country.

While there is no doubt that these firms are getting rich by exploiting the underpaid workers of this country, including children, this is not about to enable Bangladesh to emerge from its underdeveloped state or to enable its working population to escape poverty.

The report calls for an increase in "the efficiency and competitiveness of the private sector" on world markets.

This is a clear indication of who it hopes to benefit from the elimination of the "infrastructure bottlenecks" , especially "transport and energy infrastructure" , as well as making "the financial system efficient" , or ensuring "a transparent and accountable institutional environment" , a euphemism for taking action to penalise anyone who, in the widespread corruption, upsets the Western investors.

In these circumstances, the proposal to release European funds is chiefly targeted at supplementing the shortfalls of the Bangladeshi State and at having the European institutions bear the costs of the development of infrastructure that the large corporations need in order to enable them to derive most profit from one of the poorest peoples in the world.

I am pleased to join with our colleagues in the Development Committee in adding my full support for the Commission' s proposal for a new Cooperation Agreement with Bangladesh.

This new agreement is a further sign of our continuing wish to strengthen our relations with Bangladesh.

I hope it will leave the way open for the Bangladesh government to also intensify their efforts to develop the potential of SAARC as a further means of boosting the economy and creating jobs in the region.

The report by Mr Van den Bos and the Miranda resolution clearly set out the main characteristics of the Bangladesh economy and the many challenges facing the government, its institutions, its politicians and its people.

Bangladesh is one of the poorest developing countries.

Almost half of its population of 127 million people is living below the poverty line.

It has lived with and is constantly faced with the dangers of flooding and cyclones.

Despite this, it has managed to show some improvement in the standard of living over the past 25 years.

Economic reforms in the 1990s have recorded significant achievements with GDP, on average, rising to 4.8% during the 1994-1999 period.

Bangladesh is very dependent on foreign aid.

The EU is a major provider of aid-17% of all funds.

The EU is its biggest trading partner. In 1998 we imported 45% of its exports.

Bangladesh has a trade surplus with the EU.

Almost a billion euros have been provided by the EU since 1976 for EU-financed projects: EUR 660 million were provided for food and humanitarian aid; EUR 185 million were provided for the alleviation of poverty and for agriculture.

I fully endorse the objectives of the EU-financed programmes to: Help raise the incomes and improve the food security of the poor; help to improve access of very poor women and children to quality health and public health services; improve the access of these children to education.

This is of fundamental importance to the future of Bangladesh.

I was particularly pleased that Bangladesh joined the ILO' s programme for the abolition of child labour in 1984 and that  significant progress  has been recorded since then.

I welcome these efforts and look forward to further progress in this regard.

I want to fully endorse the main objectives of the agreement, namely: support for sustainable economic development, especially as regards the poorest in society, women and children.

The Development Committee' s resolution stresses the importance of the up-coming general election in Bangladesh in November of this year.

The European Union should respond favourably to the invitations received from both the government and the opposition to send election monitors as was the case in the 1996 and 1991 general elections.

I hope that members of the European Parliament will form part of the team.

Mr President, I certainly voted against Amendment No 9 about creating a European rapid reaction facility.

I nonetheless voted in favour of the report as a whole because I think it good that the European Parliament should once again make it clear that the EU ought to give priority to non-military crisis management measures.

That is an important observation that cannot be repeated often enough.

Against that background, I note that the justification, in any case, refers to the European Parliament' s unanimous recommendation to establish a civil peace corps.

I think it is good for that to be repeated.

That too cannot be repeated often enough.

Unfortunately, the countries holding the presidency - Finland, Portugal and France - chose not to pay any attention to the European Parliament' s unanimous recommendation.

Against that background, I think that the Swedish Presidency has a brilliant opportunity to take the initiative.

I have on a number of occasions had occasion to suggest this directly to Foreign Minister Lindh and Prime Minister Persson.

Unfortunately, however, it would appear that the Swedish Government has not properly understood what is meant by a civil peace corps but believes that other measures under way are the same as a civil peace corps.

It is unfortunate that it does not want to study the report properly and that it does not respect the European Parliament's point of view by at least doing something.

I hope that this is a misunderstanding between myself and the Swedish Government.

In spite of our having discussed this many times, misunderstandings may of course arise.

I therefore wish to take the opportunity to challenge the Swedish Government once again.

Now that Sweden has the Presidency of the Council, it should, if it is serious about the EU' s not becoming a military superpower but a factor for peace, immediately ensure that an initiative is taken in accordance with the European Parliament' s recommendation for a civil peace corps.

Mr President, what is the Rapid Reaction Mechanism?

I asked myself this question when, upon my arrival in hospital to have my foot put in plaster, I saw some doctors knocking a small hammer against the knee of a patient, which immediately jerked upwards.

But then, as I examined this morning's documents, I realised that the Rapid Reaction Mechanism is a major financial initiative which will make it possible for Europe to intervene swiftly and immediately in order to take peace to places where peace is under threat.

This is a commendable undertaking, and I therefore voted for the report, but I fear that it may be too ambitious for us to implement since we do not yet have a genuinely united Europe.

- (DA) We have voted in favour of the report because the intentions behind non-military crisis management are sound.

At the same time, however, we would emphasise that it is in practice impossible to separate desirable civil intervention from unacceptable military intervention.

Moreover, we call upon initiatives to be carried out through international organisations such as the UN, the Council of Europe or the OSCE.

. (FR) Given that rapid police intervention is, like war, the continuation of politics by other means, and in view of the fact that we have no more confidence in European Union policy than we do in that of Member States, we are opposed to any form of military or police intervention by the European Union, wherever it may be.

The report gives the Balkans as an example, but an "independent" European police intervention force would be no better than that provided under the auspices of the United Nations, or the United States, in other words.

At the most, it would support the position in the region held by the major European industrial groups that are casting covetous glances at the market for the reconstruction of what the NATO bombers destroyed.

Indeed, the expressed wish that "the RRF will have no geographical limitation" foreshadows acts of piracy to benefit the former colonial powers in Africa or elsewhere, like those that France has committed in the past to protect dictators from the opposition of their peoples, or like those that Great Britain is committing at this very moment in Sierra Leone.

We therefore voted against the creation of the Rapid Reaction Facility, just as we shall vote against any budget allocations to support it.

We must welcome the fact that the Council proposal follows on directly from the conclusions of the Cologne, Helsinki and Feira European Councils which urged the Union to "improve and make more effective use of resources in civilian crisis management."

The European Union has vast experience and the resources necessary to set up, at very short notice, operations such as the monitoring of elections, border control, police force training and outfitting.

This potential must be exploited to the full, especially as the Union has not been capable of reacting quickly enough and the instruments for funding operations of this type were not flexible enough.

The European Commission does not provide for any "geographical limitation" to the Rapid Reaction Facility (RRF).

It does, however, stipulate that the interventions must have a "short life span" .

If events call for more long-term intervention, then the resources currently available, such as the thematic programmes, should be used.

Under the MEDA Programme, by way of example, the RRF will be used in particular for the training of immigration service officials and cooperation in combating terrorism.

(EL) The proposal for a regulation creating a rapid reaction facility is nothing more than the framework for what may well be non-military but which is equally imperialistic political and economic intervention What the sovereign masters of the European Union want is a rapid facility to mobilise human and financial resources which can intervene directly not just when there is a "crisis" (which the authors of the text would do well to define), but even when there is simply concern that so-called assistance and cooperation programmes with these countries might be at risk or even merely affected.

Of course, the brains behind the text do not conceal their intention to supplement the proposed measures with the European Public Security Force (armed obviously) which can be deployed in "law and order operations".

Typically enough, the Committee on Foreign Affairs outdoes the Commission with its amendments abolishing the EUR 12 million ceiling on each intervention, the Crisis Committee and the nine-month limit on each intervention.

The MEPs of the Communist Party of Greece will never cease to condemn this EU policy, which aims to make third countries politically and economically dependent and suppress the grass-roots movement.

Not only are we opposed to any form of imperialist rapid or even slow reaction facility, we shall do everything within our power to unite all the people in these countries against any imperialist plans to subjugate them and to claim the place which they deserve in a new, fair, international order.

In deciding to create the core of a European army, the Nice Summit has opened a new chapter in the history of the European Union.

For twenty years, it has been attempting to win popular backing by claiming to be building a social Europe.

Faced with failure, following the Balkan conflict, it has had a change of heart.

It now openly admits that its objective is the establishment of a European superpower that will defend European interests "all over the world" .

The imperialist nature of this is plain to see.

It will do so in conjunction with the United States within NATO.

In future, by coordinating its diplomatic and military forces, the EU will be trying to optimise what its Member States have done individually throughout the last century.

This is to be carried out in the name of "maintaining" or "imposing" peace, and "humanitarian operations" .

Both within and outside NATO, which is dominated by the United States, the EU is attempting to 'sell' us on its scheme in the name of Europe' s "independence" vis--vis the United States. We do not need this Euro-militarism.

We are just as radically opposed to this European army as we were to the NATO army, as the first effect will be a dramatic increase in the military budget, which will inevitably go hand in hand with heightened militaristic propaganda.

Scientific and technological research will be siphoned off into the military sector.

It will transfer an increased share of the state budget to businesses in that sector, with the goal of establishing a European military industry (EADS, Dassault, BAE) capable of getting the better of the United States.

The workers have nothing to gain and everything to lose in the EU' s "new" imperial designs.

(IT) There is clearly no doubt that it would be highly appropriate to create a Rapid Reaction Facility and, moreover, the three Community institutions have already expressed positive views.

However, over and above our common goal, we feel that certain elements of the Council's proposal deserve careful consideration.

The first is essentially theoretical: the objectives of the mechanism in question do not appear to be very clear, apart from the tasks of supranational policing.

The rapporteur goes so far as to propose explicitly the establishment of a European Police Force.

And if this were the case we could consider the proposal, but it would have to have a different legal basis and, most importantly, a different Community institutional system from that defined by the recent Intergovernmental Summit at Nice.

In actual fact, in our opinion, the ultimate purpose of the Rapid Reaction Mechanism is to make Community policies and programmes effective more quickly and to maintain that effectiveness more consistently.

Moreover, the original impression came from the description of the conditions for triggering the Facility, which, being very general, still does not give a practical idea of them, when it would have been enough, without prejudice to the normal intervention conditions laid down by Community regulations, to highlight those conditions which, on the basis of their urgency, trigger the Reaction Mechanism.

Then, it appears strange that the governments of the States within which the Mechanism may be triggered are not among the parties notified of the triggering of the Mechanism.

Moreover, it seems odd that they are not notified, since they have been targeted by policies and programmes which, in the case in point, need to be safeguarded.

Finally, objections could be raised to the increase in the volume of information sent to the European Parliament, even through the consultation procedure alone, but, since we hope that the list of topics subject to codecision will be extended, we feel that, in specific cases of geographical or political importance, the Commission must not hold back from informing Parliament.

In the light of these considerations, we support the changes proposed by the rapporteur and we have therefore voted for the motion.

For the past eighteen months, British Conservatives have been calling for the Commission to introduce more efficient financial management and administrative procedures so that it can deliver external assistance and implement programmes, such as mine action, urgently in time of crisis or when lives are at stake.

They support proposals with these objectives in mind and therefore welcome the Commission initiative for a Rapid Reaction Facility (or Mechanism), in spite of its confusing title and some unnecessarily politically-correct elements.

Their fundamental objection is to the amendments which seek to use this proposal as a vehicle for establishing a "European Public Security Force".

This concept, for some sort of European gendarmerie, has far-reaching implications and no place in the Commission proposal under discussion.

We were prepared to support the Commission proposal if it did not contain these amendments (9 or 39) but abstain if they were included.

Mr President, as representative of the Pensioners' Party, how could I not speak on this document, which lays down how the pensions and health care of frontier and other workers, who work in different regions from those in which they live and work at other times of their lives, should be regulated.

A pensioner from the border between Italy and Switzerland, which is party to these agreements, asked me whether it was true that the pensions of people who work in other States of the European Union had been raised.

"If only they had!" I replied.

"I would be very happy, and so would you, for you would be able to find much more, much better work in the other European States.

In any case, I will raise the issue when I give my explanation of vote on the Oomen-Ruijten report, which deals with this subject".

- (DA) The Left party attaches importance to removing obstacles to the free movement of labour.

We have therefore supported this own-initiative report which proposes greater efforts to combat the problems created by differences in social and fiscal systems.

However, we are not in favour of producing a directive obliging the Member States to assess the impact of new legislation on frontier workers.

- (DA) The Danish Social Democrats have today voted in favour of Mrs Oomen-Ruijten' s report on the situation of frontier workers in the European Union.

We have done so because this report highlights the many serious problems faced by frontier workers.

A large proportion of these problems can be solved if the Council demonstrates a capacity for action.

In spite of the failure to introduce qualified majority voting in this area at the Intergovernmental Conference in Nice, we want to use our vote today to send a powerful signal to the Council and call upon them to complete a thoroughgoing review and simplification of Regulation No 1408.

We believe that the rules for coordination must be simple and easy to administer. We cannot therefore support a new directive which adds new procedures to Regulation No 1408.

In connection with the debate, we have emphasised that we cannot support the remarks in the report concerning the financing of social security arrangements through taxation.

In addition, we want to stress that we do not consider, either, that health benefits such as medical treatment can be compared with general services, and that responsibility for this area must continue solely to be the responsibility of the Member States.

For the most part, this report confines itself to general considerations without putting forward any practical decisions.

Even when it does put forward a positive measure such as "proposals to extend access by dependent family members of frontier workers, retired frontier workers and dependent members of their families to health care provisions and benefits" , the Council is asked only "with all possible expedition to adopt a position" .

While we support this request, we abstained from the vote on the report.

All the workers of the European Union ought to benefit from the same social protection, with each of the component areas (social security, retirement pensions, family benefits) standardised according to the practices of the country where they are most favourable to workers.

In the meantime, in order to improve the situation of frontier workers, they and their families should be able to choose, in each of these areas, between their country of residence and their country of employment, according to the situation most favourable to them.

(DE) Finding practical solutions to the problems of the 420 000 cross-border commuters also means making people aware and appreciative of the single market and the freedom of movement it guarantees.

This is why I warmly welcome the fact that Mrs Oomen-Ruijten's report addresses a number of these problems and their origins as well as proposing measures which will mitigate the effects of these disparities between the systems of taxation and social welfare for those who are affected by them.

The discrepancies between national legal provisions and the principle of free movement are primarily due to the fact that Regulation 1408/71 is outdated and, because of the many changes that have occurred in the period since its adoption, can no longer offer employees the legal certainty they require.

The direct consequence of this inadequate coordination is that frontier workers are often at a disadvantage in terms of welfare benefits, unemployment, pension provision and health care.

In the last-named area, I particularly welcome the initiative of players in the health sector to offer 'exportable' services which take account of the specific circumstances of cross-border commuters.

Just as numerous legal uncertainties have arisen in the domains of health and social welfare, a similar situation has occurred in the realm of tax legislation, and the various bilateral taxation agreements have not succeeded in resolving these uncertainties.

This creates areas of inequality, both between cross-border commuters and between local authorities, and these can only be eliminated in the foreseeable future through coordination of all our tax systems on a European scale.

For this reason, we cannot but support Mrs Oomen-Ruijten's proposal that a directive be adopted which commits the Member States to examine all legislative bills concerning tax and social welfare for their effects on cross-border commuters and to create compensatory mechanisms.

Despite numerous opinions that have been delivered by the European Parliament in favour of the harmonisation of social and fiscal legislation, and despite the presentation by the Commission of concrete proposals for the updating and simplification of Regulation 1408/71, the Ministers of the Member States have been blocking this necessary reform process in the Council, thereby preventing the single market from becoming a reality for people in Europe.

Although the directives on conservation of natural habitats, the elimination of PCBs and PCTs, and the protection of waters from nitrate pollution are only inadequately applied in the Member States, this does not mean by any means that these are poor directives which must be changed, as some people in this House would seek to have us believe.

These directives fully live up to the ambitions of the citizens of Europe, who are demanding that greater attention be paid to environmental matters and are seeking arbitration from the European authorities.

The great numbers of complaints and petitions received by the Committee on Petitions regarding environmental infractions and violations of these directives testify to these expectations.

The fact is, if the directives are only partially implemented, it is because the Member States had not weighed the consequences when adopting them.

They had not taken on board the implications of the financial costs or the amendments, which could be fundamental, that these directives would require in their policies.

This is true both of the Habitats Directive and the Nitrates Directive since they both require the review of agricultural and regional planning policies which may cause pollution or destruction of natural environments.

The implementation of the Habitats Directive is intended to provide long-term protection for a European network of biologically outstanding natural habitats and to exempt them from future redevelopment in order to prevent conflicts in land use or damage to those environments.

These objectives have, admittedly, been very badly presented in the Member States, causing occasionally very bitter conflicts between the owners and users of these areas.

Yet there was no shortage of positive results in those instances where proper coordination was achieved, since the Habitats Directive does indeed make it possible to support heritage-friendly management methods by making adequate compensation available.

This Habitats Directive is truly innovative in terms of regional planning and nature conservation in that it reconciles the management and the use of outstanding natural sites in order to make the best use of land.

To this end, the European Union must make every effort to support the implementation of this directive.

The European Union absolutely must not yield to the industrial interests which would negate the very spirit of the directive.

The Commission, as Guardian of the Treaties, must firstly adopt a firm stance with regard to the Member States in order to ensure that they implement these directives and, secondly, to stand firm against attempts to amend these directives even before they have been able to demonstrate their full relevance, particularly in the areas of dealing with nitrate pollution in water and protecting and raising the profile of outstanding natural sites.

For the above reasons, the Group of the Greens supports all the reports presented, particularly the Sjstedt report, which will contribute to improving the implementation of the Habitats Directive.

The reason why we abstained, then, is that we do not feel that the last-minute attempts to change the nature of the report, seeking to weaken the Habitats Directive and to urge that it be amended, are in line with respecting the directives on which we are voting.

(IT) Mr President, I would be most grateful if you would reserve just a snippet of your attention, which I am sure is in no short supply, for the explanation of my vote for the Parish report on young farmers.

I would stress the importance of milk produced by young farmers and of supporting the product at this difficult time for the farming world.

I remember a film from the 1960s, directed by the famous Federico Fellini with Anita Akberg in the leading roll. There was a poster of her urging all the passers-by to drink milk.

She was extremely successful and the ideal actress to persuade the Italians to drink milk.

Well then, I would like similar appeals to be made to the European citizens now as well, so that farmers can sell their milk, which is, I regret to say, under threat from "mad milk".

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the subject of the Parish report is the future of young farmers in the European Union.

Once again we hear calls for new subsidies, for so-called installation aid.

The report presents the situation as if all were well with the farming world.

But nothing is well with it.

BSE has cast doubt on the entire agricultural system.

We spend almost DEM 100 billion of our petty cash on agriculture every year.

That, indeed, represents half of the European budget.

We are starting to ask ourselves what we get in return for this money - swine fever, hormone-treated calves, dioxin-infested hens and now the BSE epidemic.

I believe we are slowly becoming disgusted by this food chain we produce and perhaps disgusted with ourselves too.

Instead of grasses and cereals, we are feeding cattle with corpses of domestic cats, caged rats and other animals, and I believe this is precisely the point that must now be included in this discussion.

The use of waste products and excrement in food production is the logical consequence of a senseless agricultural policy, which undoubtedly has to be brought to an end right here and now.

We must discuss first principles, so that these subsidisation payouts, the instruments of a command economy, can be consigned to the history books.

That is precisely what we have to tell the young farmers.

We must talk about that with young farmers, about the fact that they will have to be able to survive in the market without subsidisation.

This is certainly not the thrust of the report, which is why it must be rejected.

(EL) The report by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development is a move in the right direction.

More funds are needed to set young farmers up and reverse the exodus towards the towns.

Young farmers may be the key to reviving abandoned areas, small islands and traditional communities from which the life force is draining.

What we need is to use new technologies, such as the Internet, to create a new pleasant, cultural, technically advanced environment with a human dimension for them to work in.

One important point not contained in the Agricultural Committee report is that young farmers need to be given a basis on which to develop alternative, organic, family holdings, given that over-intensive farming leads nowhere except to mad cows.

- (SV) We Swedish Social Democrats welcome many of the measures proposed by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development in order to improve the situation for young farmers.

We nonetheless believe that the EU' s agricultural subsidy ought to be reduced considerably and are therefore opposed to the demands for an increase in the agricultural subsidy, presented in paragraphs 7, 11 and 14 of Mr Parish' s report.

We are in favour of assisting young farmers without financial resources to meet the considerable expenses involved in setting up business, purchasing farms and equipment.

We therefore voted in favour of this report in spite of our reservations, for there is no guarantee that the bulk, if not all of this aid will not go to the children of wealthy farm owners and that, once again, those least well off will be left by the wayside.

At this early stage, we would denounce the misappropriation of these funds to benefit the children of wealthy farm owners.

I believe that the report from our Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development is most balanced and should be welcomed.

As a representative of a rural constituency, I am acutely aware of the concerns expressed by farmers over the very future of farming in Ireland.

It seems incredible but it is true, that in Ireland, where agriculture has long been one of the economic bases of the country, farmers are now beginning to wonder whether their sons or daughters will be able to carry on the family tradition.

Mr Parish' s report is very timely, and the study on "The Future of Young Farmers in the European Union" by independent consultants which was commissioned at his request at the beginning of last year provides a much-needed focus on the whole issue.

Young farmers are an essential part of the farming future.

They perform a very important role in the social life of villages and rural communities, promoting a whole range of activities and participating in local associations.

Farmers help to promote a healthy and prosperous countryside by maintaining the landscape.

In Ireland the National Development Plan for 2000-2006 provides a wide range of measures which will assist young farmers embarking on their farming career.

These include a new enhanced Scheme of Installation Aid to encourage the taking-over of farms by younger farmers and assist young farmers as they first set up in farming.

Some 30 million has been provided for this scheme, which I hope will shortly be approved by the Commission.

In addition, a comprehensive range of tax incentives are in place, aimed at reducing the cost of ownership transfer.

These incentives include Stock Relief, Stamp Duty, Capital Acquisition and Probate Tax.

Coupled with the Early Retirement Scheme, it is clear that the supports available to young farmers setting out on a career in agriculture will be of considerable benefit, and these measures should assist in the earlier and more efficient transfer of land to younger farmers.

Many young farmers taking over a holding have to make necessary on-farm investments in order to optimise production efficiency and to ensure the economic sustainability of their holdings.

In this regard some GBP 230 million have been provided for on-farm investment under the National Development Plan.

Investment schemes will cover Farm Waste Management, Improvement in Dairy Hygiene Standards and Housing and Handling Facilities for Alternative Enterprises.

These Schemes will be open to an increased number of part-time and full-time farmers, including young trained farmers, and will contribute to securing the viability of many farmers.

They will focus in particular on young farmers.

It should also be noted that the nature of these schemes shows a clear commitment to the protection of the environment, an issue which will figure strongly in the future development of both Irish and European agriculture.

To conclude, it is imperative that we, at European level, address ourselves towards ensuring a future for European agriculture.

The Common Agricultural Policy has been a European success story, and we want to keep it that way.

The future lies with our young farmers and with agricultural practices which are sustainable and protect the environment.

We must lend our full support to these objectives.

. (PT) The situation and the prospects of young farmers depend a great deal on the situation and prospects of Agriculture in the EU itself.

As we all know, agriculture and the rural world are in decline, a decline in which the common agricultural policy has played a large part, promoting, as it does, land concentration, intensification of production, the gradual verticalisation of agricultural produce, all of which contribute to desertification and rural depopulation, as proved by a fall in the number of those employed and in the number of farms of around 22% and 20%, respectively, since 1990.

Young farmers represent the new lifeblood of farms and are crucial to guaranteeing the future of agriculture in the various regions of the EU.

The fall of around 28%, in the last decade, in farms whose owners are under 35 years of age proves the current negative prospects.

Special measures for Community support for young farmers are therefore crucial, although the fundamental problem lies in the need for a sea change in the CAP.

The Parish report, with which I broadly agree, despite its lack of coherence, does not focus on the necessary changes to policy.

It toys with the existing framework.

Nevertheless, three amendments which I tabled and which I believe to be important have been adopted. These are:

the need to commit ourselves to high-quality, sustainable agricultural production, which yields products which are safe and have a high added value, through support for biological agriculture, support for natural breeds and the consolidation of designations of origin and the creation of support mechanisms for regional products of special quality;

improving appropriations for rural development and structural funds to support and create broad public service networks, create infrastructures and give a boost to local markets in the rural world;

the need to simplify and integrate legislation affecting young farmers.

The fact that we are discussing a report on the situation and prospects of young farmers in the European Union assumes very special significance in the light of the BSE crisis.

What has happened since the well and truly hysterical dramatisation of the crisis in most of our Member States will surely do nothing to motivate young people to remain in farming, let alone encourage them to see their future in rural areas, where, as the report so admirably states, they have a very important role to perform in the social life of villages and rural communities, promoting and maintaining the countryside and contributing to the economic, social and environmental needs of the community,

We have greater cause for concern about the future of farming in the European Union than ever before as a result of this mainly consumer-led crisis of confidence, given that the number of farmers under the age of 35 has been showing the sharpest decline for some time and now stands at 28% and that the percentage of farmers in the population of almost every Member State is falling.

Our report contains all the most important and correct diagnoses as well as all the demands which have to be fulfilled if sufficient numbers of young people are to continue to see their future in farming.

This is a list of demands to which not only the European Commission but also the Council and all the Member States must pledge themselves if they want to prevent the depopulation, desolation and decline of rural areas in the European Union and the accompanying exacerbation of our social and cultural problems.

In the EU we need sustainable, high-quality agricultural production.

We must defend and safeguard the designations of origin of our quality produce, such as our wines, in the wider world, including the World Trade Organisation, because our future in the European Union and that of our export trade depends on top-quality products, for which there is a prosperous and discerning consumer market within and beyond the frontiers of the Union.

There is a tendency to put the blame for the present problems, and especially for the BSE crisis, on the agricultural community, which is expected to produce increasingly cheap food.

Because I was a member of the Consumers' Consultative Council of the European Commission for many years, I should also like to refer here to the responsibility of consumer organisations, which, heedless of producers' incomes, have been pressing incessantly for lower consumer prices for food.

Again and again in the seventies and eighties, and more recently too, they spoke out against the payment of appropriate producer prices in the framework of the common organisation of the markets in agricultural products.

So they too are partly responsible for the industrialisation of farming, for the fact that cows have been turned into carnivores and that the right of farmers to receive proper reward for their efforts has been disregarded.

This has to be emphasised in the present debate.

I am an enthusiastic proponent of this report, because it contains and clearly enunciates all the things that are right and important for the preservation of family-owned farms in Europe, without which there can be no support for organic farming with its high-quality regional specialities, which consumers must learn to appreciate and for which they must be prepared to pay a fair price.

It has been noted that the situation of young farmers is a serious problem in the European Union and they do not have any real prospects despite the support provided by the Union and the Member States.

This is why I consider this report to be so important and why I am delighted that we have voted in favour of it.

The economic situation is unfavourable and sometimes extremely serious, particularly for young people.

There is a real lack of prospects for young farmers, as well as a significant decrease in the numbers of farmers in general, with an increase in the age of those remaining.

What can the European Union do?

The Committee on Culture, Youth, Education, the Media and Sport, having been asked to give its opinion on this subject, did not wish to focus on aspects which fell within the remits of other committees.

We therefore chose to highlight the issues associated with education, training and information policies and the social and cultural life of young farmers.

We note that young farmers experience problems resulting from education and training that is often poorly suited to their needs.

Even Agenda 2000 neglects these fundamentally important aspects.

The European Union must encourage, through its Socrates and Leonardo Programmes, measures to strengthen education and training facilities for young farmers in order to raise their skills to the required level.

IT training must be set up.

Internet access must become a reality, and young farmers must be able to become acquainted with integrated production and marketing management systems so as to manage their holdings effectively.

Depopulation may be combated, in particular by maintaining public services in rural areas (schools, post offices, transport services), and social facilities may be maintained by pooling the resources of several communes, for example, or by resorting to the use of mobile services.

If the right conditions for revitalising farming are fulfilled, then young urban dwellers enthusiastic about nature and keen to improve their quality of life will be able to settle in the country and rural youth will no longer abandon the farms passed on to them by their parents.

- (SV) The Swedish Christian Democrats have voted against the draft report since we find it incompatible with the principle of subsidiarity, in spite of the fact that the subject as such - the situation of young farmers - is of pressing importance.

We especially object to paragraph 10 in which the unreasonable proposal is made that the 'EU should consider making it mandatory for the Member States to provide minimum levels of installation aid to young farmers' .

In our view, this is emphatically not a supranational issue.

Mr President, the Pensioners' Party, which I represent at the European Parliament, considers that the Commission, Parliament and the Council should change a major part of the fisheries policy and calls upon them to do so. The section in question is the part which refers to the now established practice of fishing the waters of other countries and then relieving our conscience by paying a sum of money to the governments whose waters we have fished.

I have always been told to give to those who have not.

However, I am afraid that we Europeans are not giving anybody anything but are going to fish the waters of others instead.

I am quite aware of the problems of fishermen, which we do have to resolve, but we must resolve them in some other way, not to the detriment of the peoples whose only livelihood is fishing.

Mr President, I wish to begin by saying, on behalf of my group, that we are very strongly in favour of continuing a form of common fisheries policy within the European Union, because we understand that the management of resources is the best way forward for securing guarantees for the continuation of social and economic development in a lot of coastal regions of the European Union, which would have no other benefit and could not get employment or other developments except from their own natural resources, for example fishing and aquaculture.

However, that said and giving credit where credit is due, we must also recognise that there are a lot of deficiencies within the common fisheries policy.

In particular, the total objection to having a regionalised policy within the common fisheries policy is incorrect.

This House has rejected that proposal again today.

Regionalisation does not mean renationalisation or moving away from a Community model; it means giving communities which are bordering each other and are fishing similar species the opportunity to come together to manage those species.

On top of that, we must also put greater emphasis on a uniform inspection system across all European Union waters and give more powers to the Community inspectors to ensure that all regulations are being properly enforced.

Finally, I must say that there is a need for conservation.

We have seen a huge depletion in the fishing stocks within the European Union waters.

The way to resolve conservation questions is not by moving to different fish stocks and bringing them into a quota system, but by ensuring that we have certain no-go areas where we can allow fishing stocks to re-mature.

This example has already been proven in certain areas by voluntary agreements in Irish waters and by maintenance of these non-fishing areas - so-called set-aside areas, to give the analogy with the common agricultural policy - for a certain period of time.

That is the one way of guaranteeing that we can keep a food source going, provide employment and protect environmental considerations within our fishing waters.

That is why we supported the Gallagher report.

Mr President, I voted for this report on the common fisheries policy, but I call upon the European Parliament, the Council and the Commission to monitor more effectively one of the factors referred to in paragraph 20 of the report, which is disregarded, namely how and whether the size of the pensions and situation of the pensioners in the fisheries sector and, in particular, in the small-scale fishing sector, are monitored.

We have a responsibility to pensioners to concern ourselves, as well as with all the other important aspects of fisheries, with how the national States protect retired fishermen, as they are the last to receive sufficient protection in the area of pensions.

(EL) My group voted in favour of the resolution.

However, I must highlight one particular issue.

According to current Community legislation, Greek fishermen have exclusive fishing rights within a zone of 6 nautical miles, as opposed to the 12 nautical miles which apply to the other Member States of the EU, especially the Mediterranean countries.

This means that Greek fishermen are not being treated equally and are at a disadvantage compared with the other countries under the common fisheries policy.

Given that, according to the statement in Article 5, paragraph 1 of Annex IX to the International Convention on the Law of the Sea, the Community has sole responsibility for conserving and managing marine fish stocks and, by extension, the competence to adopt the relevant rules and regulations, the Commission should make use of these powers and give Greek fishermen exclusive fishing rights within a zone of 12 nautical miles.

Similarly, the European Parliament called in resolution 4-0018/99 (C-153/1-6-99) for the Commission to propose extending the exclusive fishing zone to 24 nautical miles in order to guarantee a suitable decentralisation policy and protection for the interests of coastal areas.

The Commission should adopt this resolution by the European Parliament.

The parliamentary reports on which we are required to deliver our opinion cover various aspects of the common fisheries policy, including the management and conservation of fisheries resources, structural policy, the European Union' s external relations on fishing, market organisation, monitoring and controls.

The Commission has expressed the following priorities: improving the coherence between the various objectives of the CFP, especially between the conservation of resources, economic effectiveness and employment in fishing-dependent regions; greater consideration of the economic side of fishing; improving the integration of environmental and fishing policy; improving administrative instruments, particularly integrating multiannual instruments; seeking a more transparent decision making process and maintaining the external aspects of the CFP.

We can, of course, support all these points in principle.

I think it necessary, however, to highlight the following points which the Commission does not seem to have emphasised sufficiently.

While it is true that the TACs must be determined chiefly on an objective scientific basis, dialogue with workers in the sector must certainly be established at institutional level and must be stepped up.

The representatives of fishermen must be involved at the earliest stages prior to the scientists' deliberations in order to increase confidence and to enable decisions to be taken which are well-founded and more readily acceptable.

Such consultation will be even more essential when the time comes to draw up multiannual guidelines.

Inspection and penalty systems must absolutely be harmonised between the various fishing areas, in order to prevent distortions between Member States.

The system of inspections carried out by Community countries on third country fleets operating in Community waters must be intensified.

Finally, while maintaining the TAC and quota system at the heart of the CFP, we wish to restate the value we attach to respecting the principle of relative stability and our opposition to the privatisation of quotas.

Mr President, I voted for this report for I - and the Pensioners' Party - consider that, before taking important decisions, the European Parliament - and not only Parliament but all the government bodies - should consult the groups, peoples and citizens concerned.

The document states that the Commission consulted a large number of bodies before taking a decision on the common fisheries policy: representatives of the fishermen, representatives of the companies which live off fishing and representatives of the fishing boat equipment companies.

It has consulted them all, performing a sort of consultation regionalisation.

That is all well and good, but has it also consulted the fish, Mr President?

In 2003, Blue Europe, with its common fisheries policy, will be changed.

2001 already marks the end of one of the fisheries management instruments, the MAGP IV, or the Multiannual Guidance Programme.

We have two years before 31 December 2002 to consider and make a decision on a common policy which, according to the European Commission' s tally, raises 18 questions, ranging from free access to territorial waters, the control and management of the market in fishery and aquaculture products to international fisheries agreements, scientific research into fish stocks and the specific characteristics of the Mediterranean.

The CFP is being reviewed, and even overhauled, against a complex, multi-sided context.

Stocks such as hake, cod, sardine and tuna, are endangered or at risk.

Every year, worldwide, over 15% of fish caught are thrown back into the sea, particularly in the EU, on the pretext of maintaining prices or in order to respect restrictions, whereas countries such as Norway make the most of fish that fall outside the permitted limits.

They make up 20 million tonnes of the total global catch of 122 million tonnes.

International and regional organisations are also concerned about fisheries management, from the UN Food and Agriculture Organisation, and the General Fisheries Council for the Mediterranean, to the North West Atlantic fisheries institutions, in which the EC participates.

Europe has also passed 25 bilateral agreements with countries including Angola, the Seychelles and Madagascar and is attempting to come to an agreement with Morocco, no mean process and one that is currently in difficulties.

More importantly, globalisation, and the associated problem of cheap imports, is now affecting the market.

Essentially, the CFP, which often contains too many excessively obscure regulations, must reconcile contradictory objectives, i.e. conserve fish stocks, according to the precautionary principle, while protecting coastal communities and economies which sometimes depend on the fishing industry for employment, as in the case of the Manche region.

Similarly, we need a clear CFP that is flexible enough to take into account specific regional characteristics, from the North Sea to the Mediterranean and even, as the Italians hope, those of the Adriatic or other sub-regional "seas" .

In particular, we must reconcile the major opening up of the European market, importing 60% of consumption, with the need to protect our fishermen, who see the Japanese, American and Korean markets closing.

In order to handle such diverse problems, the European Commission has used an effective method that involves extensive consultation of fisheries and environmental organisations as well as producers.

(Speech cut short pursuant to Rule 137 of the Rules of Procedure)

Joint motion for a resolution on depleted uranium

Mr President, on behalf of my group I would like to welcome the compromise resolution which we have just passed.

A strong and united voice calling unequivocally for a moratorium on the use of depleted uranium weapons is a positive step forward, even if it does not go as far as we would have liked.

The Greens and EFA were calling for a complete ban on the production, export and use of depleted uranium weapons and we believe that we have a legal as well as a moral basis for doing so.

The UN Convention of October 1980 banned the use of certain indiscriminate weapons; the 1996 resolution of the Sub-Commission on Human Rights also explicitly condemned depleted uranium weapons because of their non-discriminatory character.

The use of these weapons has already, therefore, been condemned in international law.

We would also have been more reassured if the resolution had included our concerns about the methodology which is being used to assess the risks of depleted uranium.

A growing number of scientists are now challenging the conventional methodology, which is based on doses of external radioactive rays rather than internally ingested or inhaled particles.

Research shows that deaths from leukaemia resulting from the Chernobyl explosion have been one hundred times more than predicted by the relevant radiological protection boards, which have based their predictions on external rays.

The enormity of this error conceals the fact that even very low doses of radiation, like that from depleted uranium, can in fact have devastating health impacts.

It is therefore essential that we get this methodology right or else all the tests and screening in the world will be simply worthless.

Finally, I would like to refer to the report on the front page of last week's European Voice, which proclaims that the new EU rapid reaction force is apparently planning to use depleted uranium weapons.

Now remember this is a humanitarian force, which is planning to use a weapon that will leave an enormous legacy of cancers among the very civilians it is supposed to be there to protect.

This is nothing short of scandalous and must be overturned.

Mr President, I voted against this document because I feel that there has been too much hypocrisy at play in this issue.

I suspect, or rather, I fear, that this is what happened:

"Mr President, which weapons shall we use against Milosevic?"

"The ones we usually use!" replied the President.

"Which weapons do we usually use?" asked the general.

"Do you mean depleted uranium shells as well?"

"Yes, why not?" said the President.

"But," the general protested, "they can be extremely harmful to those who use them because they are dangerous in war - we have tested them."

"But, as you know, my dear general," replied the President, "war involves calculated risks and we must run these risks as well."

Mr President, in times of war we have to make do, as they say.

I do not think we can be surprised at these sad incidents, which could only have been prevented by having a united, independent Europe.

Mr President, I supported the joint resolution on depleted uranium and I welcome the fact that Parliament decided to retain the reference and the call for a moratorium on these weapons.

I would have preferred a stronger resolution but I know how difficult it is to achieve that.

What I do want to say, however, is that I deplore the attitude displayed by Mr Solana here this morning.

At the same time as declaring he was in favour of transparency and openness in relation to this issue, he admitted that he only began to take action on it when it became a public issue about a week ago, despite his role as Secretary-General of NATO during the Balkans War.

He also failed to mention or to give a view on the question whether there ought to be a moratorium on these weapons.

I deplore also his attempt to make this Parliament complicit in the decision by NATO to use these weapons.

The use of these weapons was disproportionate to the challenge that was being faced by NATO, particularly in the war against Serbia, and was therefore unnecessary and was a callous disregard of the effects on the population at large.

It was a callous disregard of the effect it would have on the NATO troops, and indeed it was a callous disregard of the after-effects on aid workers and peacekeeping forces, both military and police, in the aftermath of that war.

I would urge, as others have urged, that the new rapid reaction force should not have available to it these types of weapons.

Indeed I will be calling on my own government in Ireland to refuse to participate in this rapid reaction force unless there is a clear commitment that these weapons will not be used.

(EL) he only purpose which the joint motion for a resolution on the "Balkan syndrome" serves is to cover up the criminal policy of NATO and the European Union which, on the pretext of defending human rights, invaded Yugoslavia, causing incalculable personal injury and material damage.

And to ensure that the bombings were even more destructive, they had no qualms about using weapons with depleted uranium shells, despite the fact that they were well aware of their deadly long-term impact from the war against Iraq.

Because the joint motion for a resolution refuses to acknowledge the correlation between cases of cancer and leukaemia in soldiers who served in the occupying forces in Bosnia and Kosovo and during the Gulf War and depleted uranium, it confines itself to a wish list of transparent discussions and working parties and merely calls for the Member States who are members of  to propose that the use of depleted uranium weapons be stopped and for  to study the possibility of using different types of weapons, in other words to continue killing, but with "clean" weapons.

Typically, the proposed amendment from the group of the left calling for a ban on the production, testing, use and sale of depleted uranium weapons was ostentatiously rejected by the conservative majority of the members of the European Parliament, attracting a mere 23% of the votes.

Of course, the European Parliament acted true to form, as the war criminal, the former Secretary-General of NATO and the current High Representative of the EU, Javier Solana, cynically pointed out in his intervention, because it was the European Parliament itself which insisted on military intervention in the Balkans, both in Bosnia and Kosovo.

We would, of course, be deluding ourselves if we expected war criminals to accuse themselves.

That job belongs to the people.

The Communist Party of Greece has repeatedly called both for a ban on the use of depleted uranium and for the occupying forces to leave the Balkans immediately and for NATO and the EU to bear the cost of treating and compensating victims and cleaning up the environment.

The MEPs of the Communist Party of Greece voted against the joint motion for a resolution and call on the people to organise and develop their own united resistance to, and launch their own counter-attack on, the barbaric new order.

- (DA) The joint motion for a resolution contains many sensible ideas but does not do justice to the very difficult situation in which NATO has placed the civilian population in the Balkans, the soldiers who were stationed there and their dependents.

Approximately 20 Balkans veterans have died from leukaemia, and the figure is growing.

American soldiers in KFOR were warned against breathing in depleted uranium.

They were warned against touching anything which might be suspected of having been in contact with depleted uranium; they were called upon to leave areas suspected of having been polluted by dust from depleted uranium weapons; and they were urged to wash their uniforms often.

We do not think that the American army provides warnings of this kind without good reason.

There have also been a number of investigations showing that breathing in depleted uranium is extremely dangerous to health.

The consequences for the civil population in those areas exposed to military action by NATO have by no means been thoroughly investigated.

However, only the future will decide the matter.

We therefore believe it is quite inadequate merely to carry out another investigation into the consequences of using depleted uranium weapons.

We believe the matter has now been quite carefully examined.

In our view, the precautionary principle must, in any case, also cover those who report for international assignments, as well as the civil population in war zones.

These weapons should be covered by the provisions of the Geneva Convention concerning chemical and nuclear weapons.

All production ought to be stopped, and all stockpiles destroyed.

We demand an end to the use of depleted uranium weapons now.

The fact that, for at least 10 years, the armies of the most powerful countries have known about the harmful effects of depleted uranium weapons, including the effects on those using them, proves that army leaders have as much contempt for their own soldiers as they have for the civilian population and the enemy forces.

We have good cause to be outraged at the effects that using such weapons has had upon NATO soldiers.

We have even more reason to be outraged at the effects on the civilian population, the people who were killed by depleted uranium weapons in just the same way as those killed by conventional bombs.

Yet, what should we make of the hypocritical surprise shown by the representatives of all these political parties that took part in the decision to bomb Serbia and Kosovo, the majority of whom did so after supporting the Gulf War?

They gave army leaders a free hand and, today, faced with the public' s reaction, they are pretending to be concerned about the consequences of their decision while trying to shirk their own responsibilities.

We voted in favour of the draft amendment from the Confederal Group of the European United Left which requested a "ban on the manufacture, testing, use and sale of depleted uranium munitions" , even though we accepted that this would not turn an unjust war into a "clean war" .

We voted against the compromise resolution to register our protest against the use of depleted uranium weapons, against warfare itself whenever it is used, but also against the hypocrisy of the parties supporting such wars.

The general public is particularly concerned about the link between the depleted uranium used in weapons and public health.

At the moment of impact, these weapons unleash chemical reactions, whose effects upon soldiers, civilians and the environment are still not known.

Moreover, uranium, even the depleted variety which is 20% less radioactive than natural uranium, is still a form of nuclear waste and dangerous to use.

There may be a link between the cases of leukaemia found in soldiers who have served in the Balkans and the use of such weapons by NATO.

Even though conclusive proof has not yet been brought forward, and even if there is no consensus among scientists, what we have today is more than mere suspicion, as is shown by the results of various enquiries.

This concern is therefore well grounded and should not be treated lightly.

Until we obtain conclusive proof, we should apply the precautionary principle and impose a moratorium on the use of such weapons.

This is the very least on which we can decide today, before a total ban is imposed, should the studies confirm the danger.

NATO should be totally open about the use of these weapons and about the conduct of its operations in general, and the European Commission should itself begin an independent scientific enquiry.

We owe it to all the people who are currently suffering or living under this threat to demand truth and transparency.

At a time when international law is tending towards the obligation to intervene legitimately on humanitarian grounds in defence of human rights, the civilian population cannot be put at risk by the armed forces supposed to protect it.

The explanatory statement sets out our justified concerns regarding this important issue, which affects the health of soldiers involved in operations in difficult areas.

The local populations involved naturally have a vested interest in this, especially in relation to the necessary criteria for the social, economic and environmental reconstruction of the affected areas.

In its entirety, therefore, the resolution is fair and I fully support it.

However, as it stands, paragraph 6 goes too far, as it stands, in calling upon NATO member states to propose a moratorium, as the precautionary principle is included in the draft which urges NATO to consider other types of weapons until the results of the enquiry on depleted uranium are published.

Since I am unable to support paragraph 6, I have therefore decided to abstain from voting on the whole text.

. (PT) We are voting against the joint motion for a resolution that has been tabled because we cannot accept that we are still trying to deny the obvious, i.e. the serious effects on the health of people in areas affected by the use of weapons containing depleted uranium.

Since the beginning of the nuclear age, which started at the time of the Second World War, we have been aware of the risks and the precautions when dealing with uranium and other radioactive substances because this is a highly toxic element (both chemically and radiologically), when inhaled or ingested and is also a threat in genetic terms.

The use of this type of ammunition by the US and other NATO countries during the Gulf war, in Bosnia and in Kosovo has already caused the death of thousands of soldiers, suffering and death for the inhabitants of areas that were bombed and the environmental pollution in affected areas, with medium- and long-term consequences, which will affect not only the present generation but also future generations, which is prohibited by the Geneva Convention. This makes it quite clear that there is no such thing as a "clean war" .

Therefore, given the scale of the crime that has been committed against whole civilian populations, it is crucial that we investigate, try and convict the leaders responsible for this crime against humanity, and immediately ban the manufacture, testing, use and sale of this type of weapon containing depleted uranium, not simply approve a moratorium.

The British delegation of Labour MEPs welcomes the action taken by NATO member states to investigate the causes of deaths and illnesses suffered by troops who served in the Balkans.

We believe that consideration of the use of depleted uranium should be based on scientific fact.

We note that as yet there is no evidence to link depleted uranium and ill health suffered either by troops or civilians.

For that reason, we do not believe that it is appropriate at this time to call for a moratorium on the use of depleted uranium weapons.

Did the discovery of the dangerous nature of depleted uranium weapons really come as a surprise?

We all know that these weapons, used by NATO during the Gulf War (1991), and the conflicts in Bosnia (1994-5) and Kosovo (1999) had serious consequences, firstly, for the civilian population that was bombed, for their environment, and for the soldiers there, whether NATO, Iraqi, Bosnian, Serbian or Kosovan forces.

For a long time, the military and political authorities simply poured scorn on anyone who expressed concern about this matter.

American and then French soldiers had to get organised before the scandal was eventually unearthed, following the suspicious death of an Italian.

There is no such thing as a 'clean' war.

The unspoken confession of forces formerly involved in combat should allow us to get right to the bottom of the responsibilities of the government and army leaders, primarily Mr Solana, the former Secretary-General of NATO.

We must demand a ban on the manufacture, testing, use and sale of depleted uranium weapons.

We are in favour of signing an international treaty and, in the short term, we demand a programme for the medical examination of soldiers who have taken part in operations in the Balkans, members of humanitarian organisations who have worked in the field and the people living in the areas in question.

I voted for the moritorium on weapons using depleted uranium.

Ideally I would have preferred a total ban in view of the very high probability that they cause indiscriminate damage to health.

I further deplore them on account of their unacceptable impact on the human and natural environment more widely.

I particularly wish to register profound concern about the environmental damage that is almost certainly being caused by test firing at the Dundrennan Range on the Solway Firth.

These waters already suffer unacceptable levels of radioactive pollution from Sellafield.

Mr President, after all the distressing incidents which occurred during the bombing of Yugoslavia and the disclosures about the use of depleted uranium ammunition, the top priority today is to ban this type of ammunition, which has dangerous consequences both the second it is fired and for a long time afterwards, and which is undiscriminating, i.e. which makes no distinction between those who are at risk of suffering its effects.

We also need, equally urgently, to formulate a large-scale assistance, prevention and reconstruction policy for the whole of Yugoslavia affected by the use of this ammunition, in order to protect public health and the environment, clean up the ground and the waters and safeguard the unimpeded development of the country and the region in general.

The joint motion for a resolution under discussion does not completely cover the first objective, but it does have the merit of calling for a moratorium on the use of these weapons.

As for the second objective, a few general, abstract references are made to existing assistance programmes which, however you look at it, are of limited scope, while there appears to be no sign of any intention to engage in new, efficient intervention at the level of real needs, as circumstances requires.

For the rest, the motion for a resolution extends - with a few brief references - to very serious matters, such as the analysis of and the need for research into depleted uranium, but makes no mention whatsoever of the constant efforts being made to confuse and conceal the facts, independent research which we all know about and even official texts issued by NATO countries on the danger of depleted uranium and the protective measures which they themselves impose on their forces.

It is for these reasons that I am unable to vote in favour of the motion for a resolution.

I shall return a blank ballot paper because the call for a moratorium on the use of depleted uranium may be a positive step in the right direction, not that this means that war, internationally illegal bombings and other similar, fruitless interventions will stop.

In all events, constant efforts must be made and a mass movement throughout Europe and the whole world must endeavour to bring about a definitive ban on all these weapons, thereby dealing a blow to the high-handedness and arrogance of the militaristic perception of politics and the world.

Finally, I wish to state that I am nonplussed by the political sleight of hand during our debate: just as we were accused in the past of serving NATO and the bombings by criticising Milosevic's policy, now Mr Solana accuses us, in our criticism of the use of depleted uranium, of forgetting the human rights of Milosevic's victims.

In both cases, anyone with a lack of arguments on the matter at issue will forget the principles of rationalism and flirt with the irrational, which is the precursor to any type of totalitarianism or Stalinism.

Mr President, the Union for a Europe of Nations Group voted in favour of the resolution on Communist Korea.

It goes without saying that we thoroughly deplore the deeds committed by the Communist dictatorship in North Korea since 1950.

The scorn for human dignity that has been displayed is nothing more than the result of the unbridled materialism on which Communism in particular and revolutionary ideology in general are based.

This group expresses the hope that North Korea will in the near future resume a policy of genuine freedom that is an indispensable condition for peace.

In this respect, we are delighted that both North and South Korea have been on better terms for some time now.

This drive to find peace is a source of great hope for thousands of families that have been separated for half a century.

We must do all we can to encourage this change.

Nevertheless, we can but condemn the willingness, indicated in the resolution, to entrust the task of managing relations with Communist Korea to the European Union rather than to Member States.

Need we remind you that diplomacy is one of the regal powers of every sovereign state?

Each state is free to conduct diplomatic relations with any other.

Each nation should be able to retain the freedom to conduct the foreign policy of its choice, the one most suited to its political and economic interests.

However, I sincerely doubt that the Community institutions, swollen as they are with fine-sounding but half-baked principles, are mature enough to deal with the reality.

(The sitting was suspended at 1.35 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m.)

Council priorities for the meeting of the United Nations Human Rights Commission in Geneva

The next item is the Council and Commission statements on the Council priorities for the meeting of the United Nations Human Rights Commission in Geneva.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, Members of the European Commission, I am very pleased that, at an early stage in the Swedish Presidency, the opportunity has already been provided to debate this important issue concerning the preparations for the forthcoming meeting with the UN Human Rights Commission.

In the course of the debate, I shall, of course, follow carefully the points of view put forward and interpret the mood of the Assembly before the continued discussion to establish the EU' s position.

The presidency' s objective in the run-up to this year' s session is to unite the EU behind agreed positions, to encourage the applicant countries to back the EU' s statements and resolutions and, as far as at all possible, to muster general support for the proposals - especially, this year, regarding the situations in Iran and Chechnya.

For understandable reasons, it is still unclear quite how the Human Rights Commission' s special session on the situation in the Middle East, held last autumn, is to be followed up.

What is, however, clear is that the issue may be expected to become one of the dominant issues during this year' s session and that the EU will be one of the central players.

In March of last year, the Council requested an assessment of the EU' s human rights dialogue with China.

The conclusions are expected to be adopted at the Council' s meeting at the end of January.

These will define the objectives of the dialogue and specify the forms to be taken both by the dialogue itself and by the regular assessments of the outcome of the dialogue.

It is still unclear whether a resolution on China is to be adopted in this year' s session.

The EU is in close contact with the United States, which was last year' s proposer.

The same applies to another issue that has attracted attention in the Human Rights Commission, namely the resolution regarding the human rights situation in Cuba, for which the Czech Republic and Poland took responsibility last year.

Among the resolutions on particular themes, the EU will, in the future too, take responsibility for the resolutions concerning the rights of the child and the death penalty.

Where women' s rights are concerned, the Human Rights Commission will be deciding upon a number of resolutions to which the EU is strongly committed, even though they are not EU initiatives.

It is as yet uncertain what initiatives will be required from the EU when it comes to the Human Rights Commission' s resolution concerning the World Conference Against Racism, while the EU's participation in the preparations for this World Conference will undoubtedly be one of the greatest challenges during this six-month period.

The so-called omnibus resolution on the rights of the child, prepared in cooperation with the Latin American group, has unfortunately become so extensive that it has become almost impossible to deal with.

It is therefore the EU' s ambition to reduce the size of the resolution to a minimum and, in the process, make the rights perspective central.

This ambition is reinforced by the desire to make a useful contribution to the preparations for the UN' s special session on children in September 2001.

Work in opposition to the death penalty is a priority issue for the EU' s common foreign policy within the area of human rights, as may partly be seen from the EU' s guidelines adopted in 1998.

An important feature of this work is the Human Rights Commission' s resolution concerning the death penalty.

The ambition, this year too, is to achieve as strong support as possible for this resolution.

An important prerequisite for the EU' s active involvement in issues affecting human rights is good access to relevant information.

In this area, the EU countries' and the Commission' s representatives around the world have an important role to play when it comes to gathering information.

Close cooperation with private organisations is a central factor, as is cooperation with regional organisations.

Last but not least, the EU will continue to give every support to the UN' s High Commissioner for Human Rights.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, on behalf of my colleague, Mr Patten, who had to leave to go to Moscow for a meeting, I should like to praise Parliament for holding this debate today, because it affords us a valuable opportunity for an exchange of views on the forthcoming Commission on Human Rights.

It is important that the views of Parliament are taken into account, as the European Union works towards establishing positions on the main issues which will be covered in Geneva.

New positions on the initiatives in Geneva will only be finally determined after lengthy negotiations, which are, of course, an integral part of the process.

NGOs and others are right to highlight the usefulness of discussion and scrutiny of the positions.

Representatives of the presidency, the Commission services and several Member States attended a meeting of the Human Rights Contact Group held in Brussels on 11 January.

A wide range of NGOs got an opportunity to set out their views with regard to key country and thematic concerns and this input will no doubt prove helpful to the deliberation process.

The 56th Commission on Human Rights of last year inevitably had its high and low points.

The adoption of the resolution tabled by the European Union on the death penalty was a welcome achievement.

The European Union may repeat this move this year, reflecting the fact that the issue remains of paramount concern.

The Swedish Presidency has signalled more generally that the efforts made by the European Union in connection with the death penalty will be continued and intensified.

There was disappointment at the adoption of a no-action motion on China.

Some members of the Human Rights Commission voted against, making clear that such motions can only serve to stifle discussion and undermine the very raison d'tre of the gathering.

As I have noted, decisions regarding EU resolutions for this year's 57th Commission in Geneva have not been finalised, as is usual for this stage of the process.

The presidency and Member States are examining the situation in several countries, taking into account, where appropriate, the information from the United Nations' special rapporteurs and other evidence available.

I will venture brief comments on some issues of interest which, whether or not they form part of an EU initiative, will doubtless be topics of discussion for those attending the 57th Commission.

Familiar concerns remain with respect to China, concerns which continue to be heard as part of the EU-China dialogue.

Positive developments in recent months include the signature of a memorandum of understanding on human rights with the United Nations High Commissioner last November.

It is nonetheless essential that dialogue leads to concrete change, a point reiterated by the European Union in Geneva last year.

With this in mind, the human rights dialogue with China is currently the object of an evaluation exercise which will lead to the adoption of conclusions by the January General Affairs Council.

They will form the basis for carrying forward the dialogue in a constructive and meaningful manner.

As regards Iran, the resolution adopted at the 55th session of the General Assembly in New York welcomed the positive changes in that country.

However, it also noted, with concern, continuing difficulties with regard to the restriction of freedoms, the use of executions and torture and discrimination directed against religious minorities and women.

The interim report submitted to the General Assembly last September by Mr Copithorne, the special representative, reflected the need to invigorate the progress towards improving human rights.

Access by the special representative remains, of course, a key preoccupation.

Finally, as a thematic concern, children's issues will deservedly receive much attention this year, not least at the special session of the United Nations General Assembly scheduled for September.

With this in mind, the European Union will continue to play an active role in the resolution on children's rights at Geneva and, as last year, will seek the useful cooperation of the Latin American and the Caribbean group.

Mr President, I would like to congratulate the President-in-Office and the Commissioner for their remarks.

In particular for what they have had to say about the death penalty and the situation in China and Iran.

I only regret that the word Russia was not mentioned by either gentleman because it occurs to me that the situation in Russia is worrying.

This needs to be considered by the Commission in particular if we are to look towards a satisfactory human rights situation in Europe as a whole.

With any luck the timing will be good and Mr Patten will be able to raise certain questions with the Russian President.

It is very timely that this matter should come up because it is nearly ten years since the collapse of the Soviet Union.

At that time we had very high hopes that the whole of Europe would become a human rights-favourable zone but of course things never turn out exactly as one hopes.

The situation in particular in Byelorussia has deteriorated dramatically and there have been the most horrible civil wars and massacres on a massive scale in the Balkans.

We must congratulate ourselves in Europe on some progress but not enough has been achieved.

I am particularly happy to see what has occurred in Poland, Hungary and the Czech Republic.

The human rights situation in those countries has improved dramatically and in the Baltic States with the build-up of the mixed economic system.

Some people do not consider that to be a human right, but I believe in fact that it is and represents another step forward that we should welcome.

It moves me very deeply every summer to see in the resorts of the Mediterranean and elsewhere large numbers of holidaymakers from eastern and central Europe including Russia holidaying in the way that we have done for many decades.

It is, as a British Foreign Secretary, Ernest Bevin, used to say, the main purpose of a foreign policy to allow citizens to be able to travel with a minimum of bureaucratic interference and annoyance.

I believe though that I should mention two or three of the particular problems of Russia.

One of them is one in which I have a registered interest, namely the question of Media-Most, and the alternative television system of Russia.

I hope that Mr Patten is well briefed on the question of the present detention of the chairman of Media-Most, Mr Vladimir Gusinsky.

He is rather surprisingly in his house near Malaga in Spain.

I find it bizarre that the Spanish police are fulfilling a request made by the former KGB in this way.

The war on dissent continues on the part of Mr Putin.

He seems not to have a sense of humour.

He does not like to see himself portrayed on the television by a glove puppet with jokes being made at his expense.

It seems that it is not appropriate for the President of Russia to be lampooned in this way and so he will not tolerate it.

It is a most unpleasant feud made all the more unpleasant by the fact that one side is enjoying the support of the President of Russia.

This is not satisfactory and I hope it will be dealt with during Mr Patten's visit.

Very briefly, the other points I would mention in respect of Russia are the situation in the Russian army, in particular in Chechnya, but also internally because the Russian army is notorious these days for the cruelty which it exerts and in particular the treatment of its young conscript soldiers.

I have also watched with concern in the past year the tendency of the present leaders of Russia - many of whom are ex-KGB because they were appointed by a former colonel in the KGB - to be a little bit trigger-happy in the arrest of so-called British, American and Russian spies.

This is really something that is quite unnecessary I would have thought in the post cold-war environment.

So, with those reservations I congratulate the Commission and the President-in-Office and look forward to an improvement in human rights in the coming year.

Mr President, last year I attended the 56th UN Human Rights Commission in Geneva and last week, I attended the Human Rights Contact Group: much more needs to be done and, if anything, the situation is worsening across the world.

The promotion and defence of human rights is a high priority for the European Union and remains one of the fundamental principles of the Union.

Indeed, I believe the concept of human rights should inform everything we do in the name of democracy because a negative human rights situation is often caused or exacerbated by the absence of democracy and inefficient and corrupt government structures.

Human rights do not exist in isolation, neither should they be considered in abstract.

They are the fundamental rights of all people regardless of who they are, where or to whom they are born.

Yet as we speak in this Chamber, the human rights of men, women and children are being violated.

This is why the Council and the Member States must work for the universal ratification of the main human rights instruments available to all countries, in particular, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, the Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural rights, the Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination against Women, the Convention on the Rights of the Child, already mentioned, the Convention on the Elimination of all forms of Racial Discrimination and the extremely important Convention against Torture.

We also call for immediate measures to be taken to protect homosexual persons from degrading and inhuman treatment to which they are still subjected: because of their sexuality, they still face the death penalty in certain parts of the world.

We also call on the EU to support the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights and the other international organisations and NGOs in the fight against repression of the independent media already referred to by Lord Bethell and the repression of journalists and writers and to urge all states to end censorship, to protect the right of access to official information and to stop the restriction on access to modern information technology, often a saviour to people being repressed.

We also call upon the Council and the UN Commission on Human Rights to give full support to the drafting of the International Convention on the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearances.

Once again, and I hope not in vain, we call for the abolition of the death penalty.

Countries can, will and should be named and shamed, but in this House and together with the Council and the UN Commission, we must redouble our efforts to ensure that men, women and children are born equal and can live as equals, enjoying the fundamental freedoms of human rights.

That is the message that this House must carry to the UN Commission on Human Rights in Geneva and I hope everyone in this House will support such an intention.

Mr President, President-in-Office of the Council, Commissioner, the European Union is an important community of values standing for democracy, humanitarianism and human rights.

This is the basis not only for our internal work but also for our foreign policy.

In many respects, the EU has a good policy on human rights. What, however, is missing is a coherent and consistent strategy for the way in which the work on promoting this is to be carried out.

The various institutions are not always coordinated and there is a lack of follow-up and analysis, and this, of course, reduces our influence.

Prior to the session in Geneva, I and the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party hope for a strong and unified Europe which will vigorously pursue a number of issues.

It was good to hear of the ambitions of the Swedish Presidency here today.

It is good that the Council supports the resolution on the death penalty and on the rights of the child and of women.

On behalf of the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party, I would also call upon the Council to support the drawing up of protocols to the Convention Against Torture, as well as to support a new international convention concerning those who have disappeared.

The issue of refugees must also be raised.

Violations of human rights occur in many countries.

These must always be criticised, and when they occur in EU countries too.

In certain countries, the situation is alarming, however.

I really want to appeal to the Council to try to bring about a resolution on China, where outrages against Chinese citizens are becoming worse and worse, especially violence against Falun Gong members, which has been stepped up.

The President-in-Office of the Council mentioned Iran and Chechnya.

I should also like to add Saudi Arabia, Colombia, Indonesia and Afghanistan.

In these countries, too, the situation is very alarming.

Both the UN and the EU are important voices in the international debate.

Many countries listen and take note of signals from 'Brussels' .

We can make use of this position to fight actively for human rights.

It requires consistency, courage and a more thoroughly worked out strategy.

I hope that the Swedish Presidency can help formulate such a strategy, not only prior to Geneva but also for the future, which is a natural arena for the EU' s foreign policy.

Mr President, human rights are an inseparable part of the basis of human dignity and law in the Union.

They are also universal principles, despite certain differences in emphasis.

However, the EU will have no human rights strategy whilst the responsibility continues to remain primarily with the Member States.

As there is no strategy, tactics then become the strategy.

With human rights that means that political expediency might dictate where and when to intervene when violations are occurring.

To some extent that is inevitable.

A community based on respect for, and defence of, human rights, such as the EU, should, however, be able to achieve a more consistent, determined policy on human rights than is the case at present.

It would be desirable if the Union had a common voice in this important area.

For that reason the opportunity we now have well beforehand to discuss the Council' s priorities in the forthcoming meeting of the United Nations Human Rights Commission is a welcome one.

Human rights violations must be taken seriously at all times and not just when a political excuse is needed.

Human rights have intrinsic value, which becomes blurred when they are used as a tool to achieve other, perhaps quite legitimate objectives in themselves, in individual cases, or when gross violations are kept quiet about for politico-commercial, or other, reasons.

This is a tendency that can also be discerned in our approach to the questions on the Human Rights Commission' s agenda, regionally, nationally and with regard to the issues themselves.

For example, suppression of the freedom of speech or torture with the perpetrators going unpunished, which Amnesty International has recently campaigned against, deserve to be looked into more thoroughly.

Ad hoc action is not enough, then, but neither must human rights merely be a rhetorical sweetener present everywhere, like a political 'NutraSweet' , with no real practical effect.

For the EU' s voice to carry further and more audibly it must have a consistent policy, one that is genuinely its own, and must firm up its work in this area.

Interinstitutional cooperation should therefore become more vigorous in the future and the role of the European Parliament in particular should be made more prominent.

Above all, we here in Parliament should also activate and honour our rhetorical commitments.

That means long-term, systematic involvement in human rights work when it is not directly connected with benefits to be gained or current events covered by the media.

We have to make the reporting and monitoring process more effective, which will require not only good will but also adequate resources and diplomatic willingness.

Non-governmental organisations and civil societies are sources of indispensable help.

They can also bring a breath of fresh air to that vacuum in which we busy about far too much with matters of only rather narrow, topical interest.

Mr President, Mr Vitorino, President-in-Office of the Council, in preparing a resolution on a subject like human rights, there are in fact two possibilities: we can state principles and avoid naming specific areas; or we can do as we have in fact done, namely name a number of specific areas and so run the risk of forgetting some things.

That is partly what this speech is about.

However, I want first of all to say that I am very pleased indeed that something about the situation in China has been included, and I want heartily to support the amendments tabled.

Something ought perhaps also to have been included about the situation regarding religious freedom for the Falun Gong sect, but it was not.

There is nonetheless some quite sharp criticism, and I am very glad about that.

I am also pleased that Chechnya has been mentioned.

I think this is an area to which we do not pay enough attention.

It is an area which may yet become a powder keg for security policy in that area, and perhaps also in our own area.

There are some areas to which I think too little priority has been given.

The Swedish Presidency says that it will give high priority to the work done towards abolishing the death penalty.

I am extremely pleased about that, and I very much agree that this is an area to which high priority should be given.

In this connection, we need to keep our eyes on our so-called friends.

I think we have to be aware of the situation in the United States. Following the American presidential election, the number of death sentences carried out in the United States will reach record levels.

We are in a situation in which there are people on death row in the United States who, we are quite convinced, have not been given fair trials, nor who will in fact be given fair trials unless outside powers help them, for the system will not of itself produce these.

I also think we have to remember another of our 'friends' , namely Turkey - an applicant country - which we do not mention at all in this resolution.

It is a problem that we still have a country so close to us which will not abolish the death penalty, which will not introduce general democratic rights for ethnic minorities and which has not acquired control over the methods its police use, either on the street or in its jails.

Turkey does not comply with the Convention Against Torture.

By establishing a Fortress Europe, we are not doing much to help those people who flee from countries of that type, and allow me, in conclusion, to say to the Swedish Presidency, 'Remember, we do not improve the situation of refugees by building a Fortress Europe around ourselves.'

Mr President, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I believe that the views of our fellow members are clear.

Mrs Malmstrm and Mrs Frahm have just spoken on the subject of China. Lord Bethell spoke about Chechnya.

However, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, you refer to the Union' s consensus position.

We know from experience that the Union' s consensus position is the method that you have come up with in order to avoid adopting any serious position in Geneva.

We already saw this last year, when the Union hid behind the United States and other countries until the last moment in order to avoid adopting any real initiative on Chechnya and on the People' s Republic of China.

Unfortunately, I fear that my own party, the radical party, will again this year be one of the only parties, along with Wei Jinsheng and a few others, to speak up for the issue of human rights in China and Tibet; who will bring the issue of Chechnya to the fore, while the Council, and the European Union which it represents, will again be absent from the United Nations.

You will be working on the matter of the death penalty, knowing full well that this issue today concerns the United Nations General Assembly and the Commission on Human Rights and, thus, once again you will be hiding behind fine principles in, if I may say so, a rather hypocritical manner.

Mr President, in previous debates on the human rights situation I have advocated repeatedly that the European Union should take more preventive action and respond more rapidly to crises.

It therefore surprised me somewhat not to hear either the presidency or the Commission breathe a word about the human rights situation in Africa just now in the introduction.

That is why I shall make bold to start out by drawing attention to a highly topical situation, and one which is potentially very explosive on the human rights front, namely the situation in Congo following the assassination of President Kabila.

Despite confusing, and often conflicting information, it is gradually dawning on us that there is a risk of a power vacuum developing in Kinshasa.

That is why it is so important to quickly and effectively urge the new leaders to do all they possibly can to maintain calm and serenity in Kinshasa and to respect human rights.

At the same time, I believe all those countries that are involved in the conflict, be it directly or indirectly, must be urged in no uncertain terms not to interfere in the current internal crisis.

If the neighbouring countries do not lie low then the crisis could escalate further, with all the consequences this might entail.

It is important for the thread of the Lusaka peace process to be picked up quickly though, and for the inter-Congolese dialogue to be able to start, with the cooperation of all concerned.

I say that with the Rwandan genocide of 1994 in mind, when the international community had to witness the murder of hundreds of thousands of people, which prompts me to push for more assertiveness from the European Union, and greater alertness, also on the part of the UN, where Central Africa is concerned.

This brings me to the agenda of the UN Human Rights Commission in Geneva.

Notwithstanding the numerous treaties and conventions, the rights of women, children and other vulnerable groups are still being violated on a huge scale.

Throughout the world, one woman in three suffers physical abuse.

Fifty million children work in unacceptable conditions and two million girls below the age of fifteen are forced into prostitution every year.

I would like to ask that special attention be given to two forms of human rights violations that have taken on alarming proportions in Europe over the last few years.

Firstly, there is the phenomenon of paedophilia and child pornography.

Whilst we rightly criticise Asian countries because they allow child labour, or African countries because of their child soldiers, we are regularly shocked here in Western Europe by paedophilia and child porn scandals.

I would like to draw your attention to the excellent report by Mr Kirkhope on the subject.

Two new revelations show how serious the situation is.

A network of people offering photographs of sex and acts of cruelty with children via the Internet was rounded up in Italy recently.

Last week, the British police succeeded in shutting the Wonderland club down, seizing 750 000 degrading photographs of children in the process.

A second disturbing phenomenon is that of trafficking in human beings.

Every year, around 30 million or so people are smuggled into other countries, half a million of whom end up in the European Union.

Trafficking in human beings has become a very lucrative international industry, often risking the lives of the passengers.

So many corpses of drowned illegals get washed up on Spanish beaches that it has sparked off a macabre debate as to who should pay for the burials.

In both cases, the desperation of poor people is being exploited by unscrupulous money-grabbers.

In both cases there is a need for information to be provided in the countries of origin, and for coordination between international police forces, in a bid to tackle these abuses.

Sweden has a good reputation when it comes to defending human rights in the world.

I really hope that Sweden will do its reputation full justice over the next six months and put all its efforts into the recommendations that Parliament has formulated in these two important areas.

Mr President, the UN Commission on Human Rights is not just a discussion forum but also an exceptional instrument for the dissemination and defence of human rights.

Undeniably, the composition of the Commission and the dubious solidarity between member states who have little respect for human rights often prevent us adopting clear-cut, distinct conclusions, or even any conclusion at all.

However, the very fact that a serious breach of human rights in a United Nations member state should be mentioned at Geneva is really a political fact in itself.

The countries on the receiving end of the criticism decry "name calling" and are lobbying hard in advance to prevent any discussion, and this is exactly where the European Parliament, being so committed to the defence of human rights, can fully play its part.

In conjunction with the relevant NGOs, and particularly with Amnesty International and the human rights leagues, Parliament can address the Council and Member States in order to insist that, in Geneva, the Fifteen present well-founded common positions on priority issues.

For 2001, the priority issues that I believe should be discussed in Geneva are, first and foremost, the death penalty, torture, forms of discrimination against women, failure to respect children' s rights, freedom of the press and freedom of information.

Among recent forms of human rights violations, the instances of disappearance or extrajudicial execution, often preceded by torture, are particularly despicable.

The victims are undoubtedly always political opponents of the regimes in power.

These violations, against which there is no possible appeal, have been recorded in the Russian Federation (in relation to Chechnya), in Sierra Leone, Indonesia, Colombia, Iran and Iraq, in Palestinian territories occupied by Israel and in Turkey, amongst other places. I could go on and on.

This list is long but it is not comprehensive.

Parliament will do itself credit by demanding that the governments of Europe adopt a firm position on this issue.

We have just approved the new Charter of Fundamental Rights.

We must act in accordance with our principles.

The victims' families are awaiting our action.

Mr President, it is more than 50 years since we adopted the Declaration of Human Rights, but we probably need to ask ourselves whether the human rights situation has in actual fact improved.

That is not an easy question to answer, but we know more today than we once did, thanks partly to the many NGOs and journalists who constantly report on human rights violations around the world, and knowledge is a prerequisite for action.

But there is, in fact, an obligation to act upon information, so that not to do anything is to let down those whose rights are being violated, and in this area the EU has an independent responsibility.

As many speakers have mentioned, the EU has quite a high profile in the area of human rights, and that is both a good and a bad thing.

It is crucial that we are consistent and specific.

In relation to Central and Eastern European countries, we have had success with our policy, which can probably best be characterised as an iron fist in a velvet glove.

However, that is not enough, for human rights violations do not, of course, stop at Europe' s borders.

Therefore, it is also gratifying that we have focused on human rights in connection with the new ACP-EU partnership agreements.

However, we must be certain that we are in a position to follow through and take action if it proves that human rights are being violated.

If we have to introduce sanctions in Central and Eastern Europe, then everyone will be affected.

The situation of the developing countries is quite different in this respect.

If we are obliged to introduce sanctions, which more often than not will only affect the poor sector of the population, we therefore need, where developing countries are concerned, to establish a special strategy with regard to sanctions so that we do not only hit those we really wanted to help, as well as those who have suffered in the past.

This constitutes a very large task for the EU as a whole and also for the European Parliament.

We must be clear which sanctions are to be imposed.

However, it is of course crucial for us to work with human rights more generally so that we can obtain some comparable figures, for Parliament is inclined to intervene as soon as we hear that a human right is being violated somewhere or other.

When we go out into the world, we must try to be very specific and see what the human rights situation is like in the countries concerned. We can organise meetings with human rights activists and human rights organisations in the area and we can arrange for the final report to deal with human rights issues.

I should like, in conclusion, to say that those areas dealt with in the resolution are important, but that they are not, of course, the only areas demanding our attention.

That is why I have touched upon a number of other areas today.

Mr President, I would like to concentrate on three issues in this debate on the preparation of the annual human rights conference in Geneva, and the European Union' s role in this.

I would like to say a few things about the situation in Burma, and in Indonesia, and about the child soldier phenomenon.

It is already almost ten years since Aung San Suu Kyi was chosen as President of Burma and the Burmese Parliament received a majority of her party, the NLD.

Since then, Burma has been suffering under a military dictatorship, scores of MPs have been murdered or have fled, and there is talk of unprecedented acts of terror being committed against political opponents and minorities.

I have long been a member of Pidi-Burma, a group under the leadership of former Premier Bondevik of Norway, and I have visited the refugee camps of the Burmese in Thailand.

I have a rough idea of what is happening in the country.

I now hear that there is a possibility of talks between Aung San Suu Kyi and the military command, and that next month, a delegation from the European Union under the leadership of Sweden is going to travel to Burma.

However, beware of being led up the garden path.

The military regime out there has made so-called concessions before, which later proved to be absolutely worthless, and this often happened just before an EU-ASEAN Summit, or just before the conference in Geneva.

Our advice is please keep a highly critical resolution about Burma to hand in Geneva and do not have any qualms about pushing for investment freezes or sanctions on that front.

I emphasise this point not because I am any particular fan of sanctions, but if there is one country that does deserve them, it is Burma.

Then there is Indonesia, a country in the midst of a democratisation process and where the government is having to deal with tough opposition.

The country is facing enormous problems in a number of regions such as Aceh, the Moluccas, Irian Jaya and Timor.

By all accounts, more than a million people have now fled and tens of thousands have been killed or wounded.

Disaffected soldiers and fundamentalist Muslim groups are mainly the ones to blame for serious violations of human rights.

The government is not doing enough about it and so a resolution in Geneva would be both beneficial and necessary.

The idea would not be to attack the Wahid government, but to urge it to deal with the human rights violations more effectively and bring the culprits to justice.

Lastly, I would like to draw attention to the growing problem, particularly in Africa, of the child soldiers, who are incited to commit the most terrible, drug-induced acts.

We see evidence of this in the Sudan, and Sierra Leone, and the phenomenon is also on the increase in a number of other countries.

What we are talking about here is a double human rights violation.

First, these children are abducted, and then they are brainwashed, using drugs and other techniques, into maiming and murdering people.

And when I look at the regime in Sudan, I feel this warrants additional criticism because it admits these groups to its territory in southern Sudan in order to carry on a reign of terror in Uganda.

These groups also abduct girls from schools in northern Uganda for special services.

What this in fact means is that these children suffer a triple injustice.

There is an urgent need for a robust statement on these practices in Geneva, as I see it, and I also call upon the European Union to table a resolution in this vein.

Mr President, naturally I support the criticism of China with regard to Tibet, of Russia with regard to Chechnya, and I endorse the criticism voiced in relation to the human rights violations in the conflict between Israel and the Palestinians, also when it comes to the repugnant public lynchings that are carried out.

I approve of the criticism levelled at Iran and its lack of religious freedom, freedom for women and press freedom, but do not forget Burma and Indonesia and the child soldiers.

That was the message I particularly wanted to get across.

Mr President, last year, only a few votes prevented the inclusion of the continuing human-rights abuses in China on the agenda in Geneva.

I hope we can be more successful in the coming months in winning over countries that will be represented on the Commission on Human Rights at its 57th session.

Last weekend, in my role as chairman of the Tibet Intergroup of the European Parliament, I attended a conference in Switzerland, where parliamentarians from the EU Member States, the applicant countries and the United States discussed ways of inducing their respective countries to raise the issue of China's gross violations of human rights.

These abuses not only affect the Tibetans but the Uighurs and Mongols too.

Free speech, freedom of assembly and freedom of movement are suppressed.

The Tibetans cannot practise their own religion or celebrate their own culture and certainly cannot engage in autonomous political activity.

Tens of thousands of them have been subjected to persecution, imprisonment and torture.

A sustained campaign is being conducted with a view to converting Buddhist believers into atheists.

We cannot close our eyes to this second cultural revolution.

I am not unaware, Commissioner Vitorino, of the dialogue between the European Union and China.

Nor am I unaware of the role played by China as a member of the WTO and a future global power.

Attempts are being made to deal more sensitively with major trading partners.

I trust that, some day, the old guard of blinkered centralist leaders will be replaced by new reformist elements.

But we cannot wait until that day finally dawns.

We cannot be passive onlookers and fail these masses of people who are being subjected to mental and physical cruelty.

Human rights are not a Western invention.

The new agreements between the European Union and third countries rightly stipulate that contractual obligations will be suspended in the event of either party's failure to respect human rights.

We therefore appeal to the Council and Member States of the EU to take the initiative in Geneva this time; as you said, Mr Danielsson, we are one of the key players.

Along with the United States, Canada and, as I have learned, Switzerland and the applicant countries for accession to the EU, we should try to convince the countries of Africa, Asia and South America that it is high time the subject of China was put on the agenda in Geneva.

Human rights are not of secondary importance. Human rights are universal fundamental rights.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I should first of all like to say thank you for the strong support which I understand that this Assembly and its honourable Members have given to positive action by the European Union in the course of the Commission' s forthcoming meeting in Geneva.

I would also thank you for the many practical points of view which have been presented in the debate.

Allow me to comment on a few of them.

First of all, Russia and, more specifically, Chechnya.

Lord Bethell is right. It was Chechnya and not Russia that I mentioned.

I just want to emphasise that it is the Council' s view that the situation in Chechnya is still serious.

It cannot perhaps be said to be as urgent as it has been in previous years, but it is our judgement that we ought to follow up the resolution presented and adopted last year because of the serious situation in Chechnya.

We have not therefore in any way forgotten this important issue.

A number of speakers discussed the situation in China.

I want definitely to repudiate notions to the effect that the European Union is trying to hide behind other countries when it comes to combating violations of human rights in China.

At the same time, it is important that, when we do something about the human rights situation in China, we can in actual fact bring together a sufficiently large group of countries in the UN Human Rights Commission in order to achieve some progress.

There are problems here, to which many of the Members referred in their speeches.

Right now, we are engaged in a dialogue with China.

There will be an opportunity here next month to have a discussion with the Chinese about how the European Union views the situation.

However, we also need to conduct further discussions with the incoming administration in the United States because the United States is traditionally the proposer and has been so where this resolution is concerned.

I can therefore promise the honourable Members that the European Union is continuing to pay attention to the situation in China.

Mrs Frahm discussed the issue of the death penalty, which is incredibly important.

Obviously, the European Union must distance itself from the death penalty wherever it is used - including, of course, in the United States.

I am particularly grateful that Mr Johan Van Hecke and others have discussed the human rights situation in Africa and am only sorry that I myself did not do so in my introductory speech. It is, of course, not only a question of concern about human rights.

Rather, we all know that, in many African countries, the problems are more deep-seated. It is not, therefore, only human rights that are the problem.

That must not, of course, prevent us from paying attention to the problems that exist.

I can promise Mr Johan Van Hecke that the European Union will take careful account of what has been said in this debate where Africa in particular is concerned.

In conclusion, a few words about the situation in Burma/Myanmar.

This year too, the European Union is preparing a proposal concerning the situation in Burma/Myanmar, to be presented at the meeting of the Human Rights Commission.

It can only be seen as one element in a general strategy for discussing the human rights situation in Burma/Myanmar.

For example, Sweden has for many years been responsible for a resolution in the UN' s General Assembly about the situation in Burma/Myanmar, and the European Union as a whole is actively engaged in the discussions in the International Labour Organisation (ILO) when it comes to the fact that forced labour still exists in Burma.

A range of measures have been mooted there, which the European Union strongly supports.

I would therefore express my thanks for all the practical points of view and promise to include them in the Council' s continued deliberations prior to the Human Rights Commission' s important meeting in Geneva later this year.

Mr President, Mr President-in-Office, ladies and gentlemen, let me very briefly say and reiterate that the Commission will fully take into account the opinions expressed by the parliamentarians and emphasise that in my presentation I did not touch upon all the subjects that could be taken into consideration.

That is why this debate today is extremely important, as is the parallel debate with the NGOs, so that we can gather as much information as possible and incorporate it in the position of the European Union in preparation for the meeting of the Commission on Human Rights.

A few concrete words on some of the remarks.

First of all, addressing Mr Thomas Mann, I emphasise once again that the Commission is looking forward to evaluating the dialogue on human rights with China and we hope to see concrete conclusions from that evaluation at the General Affairs Council this month, as the President-in-Office said.

In our concerns, of course, we did not forget Africa, or Russia, or Burma, or even some horizontal issues which are extremely important, like the protection of minorities, discrimination of all kinds or the abolition of torture - I think those are recurrent concerns as far as defending human rights is concerned.

I would conclude by emphasising that we place great emphasis on preparing the position of the European Union for the UN General Assembly on Children's Rights, and I welcome the willingness of the Swedish Presidency to take this position very seriously in September.

Let me also tell Mr Van Hecke that I fully share his concerns about the threat of trafficking in human beings.

May I remind you that the Commission has just adopted two proposals for framework decisions, one aiming to fight trafficking in human beings for sexual exploitation and the other to fight against trafficking in human beings for economic exploitation.

These will be two important penal instruments to harmonise the legislation to combat criminal trans-national networks that exploit trafficking in human beings.

We are in the lead in raising awareness and giving the police and the judiciary of the fifteen Member States the necessary harmonised legal instruments to fight against those threats to human rights and to stability in the 15 Member States.

Thank you very much, Commissioner Vitorino.

I have received seven motions for resolutions, pursuant to Rule 37(2) of the Rules of Procedure.

The vote will take place tomorrow, Thursday, at 12 noon.

(The sitting was suspended at 4.10 p.m. and resumed at 4.30 p.m., pending the beginning of the statement by the Presidency-in-Office of the Council)

It is my very great pleasure to welcome Mr Persson, the Swedish Prime Minister.

Mr President-in-Office of the Council, I would like to say that it is an honour to welcome you to the Chamber for the first time, for the start of the Swedish Presidency, We wish you every success.

Without further ado, I shall give you the floor.

Thank you, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, for your speech.

I shall now give the floor to Mr Prodi, the President of the Commission.

. (DE) Madam President, Mr President of the Council, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, President of the Council, you have offered to cooperate closely with the European Parliament and the groups.

We are happy to take that on board, for we do indeed have good contacts.

I can tell you on behalf of our group that you also have our full support in relation to the substance of your statement, in which you give priority to a European Community approach, rather than to intergovernmental cooperation, the cooperation between governments that we firmly reject in the Community framework.

We must not relapse into intergovernmental cooperation.

You have a very sympathetic country as your neighbour - just as we find Sweden sympathetic.

We hear somewhat more about a European Community approach in Finland, and I would like to see Finland and Sweden of one mind on these issues.

You are following in the footsteps of previous presidencies and that means you are taking over a mortgage, namely the mortgage of the Treaty of Nice.

I cannot agree with the view you set out here, that the Treaty of Nice is a success.

But a mortgage is also an opportunity, because it can be paid off.

We would like to join forces with you in the coming weeks and months in paying off the mortgage of Nice.

That is why our Group of the European People's Party and European Democrats will at this point say neither yea nor nay to the Treaty of Nice.

I have just passed on the European People's Party's resolution from the Berlin Congress to the presidency of the Council, represented by Mr Danielsson.

Mr Romano Prodi, our Commission President, referred to the need to work closely together, not just in the Community framework of our European parties, but also with the national parties.

This EPP Congress decided the principles I want to put to you with no votes against, with all 42 national parties voting in favour.

Firstly, on the intergovernmental conference system: a conference that drags on for weeks and months must become a thing of the past; it is not a model for the future.

We are decidedly against adhering to the old system.

(Applause) Secondly, given that the preparations have to begin under your presidency and should then lead to a decision in Laeken under the Belgian Presidency, we call on you to organise a conference fairly quickly, based on the methods and model of the Convent, with greater participation by the European Parliament and the national governments, and above all, of course, of the Commission too.

We call on you to start the debate soon and we also call on you, Mr President of the Council, to remedy the mistakes that have emerged in the Treaty of Nice even before the Treaty is signed.

We have heard that Poland was to be given fewer votes in the Council of Ministers than Spain.

That was corrected, because supposedly it was just a typing mistake.

There are other typing mistakes: the Czech Republic and Hungary, which have the same size population as Belgium and Portugal, are only to have 20 MEPs, while the other two countries have 22.

Let us also give the Czech Republic and Hungary 22 Members in the European Parliament and let us not begin enlargement by discriminating against these two countries.

You can correct that before the Treaty is signed, for if it is merely a technical error, surely it does not need any political decisions.

I turn now to the question of transparency. We note with great concern that through its activities the Council's General Secretariat has created a number of screens at top level, with the refusal to pass on information either to the Commission or to the European Parliament and Mr Solana, for whom I have a high regard, is of course more preoccupied with his job as High Representative.

Please see to it that we have transparency; that is the great hope we place in your presidency.

(Applause)Mr President, since I carefully read everything you say in your capacity of distinguished Swedish Prime Minister and President of the Council, I noted your address to the Nordic Club on 5 October, in which you said you place high hopes in the Council of Ministers.

I hope Maastricht taught you otherwise.

The Council of Ministers does not need to be strengthened, it needs to become more transparent and to be reformed, so that the doors of the Council are also thrown open to the public.

My third and last point is enlargement.

Here we are of the same mind: we regard enlargement as a moral, historic and political duty and one that must not be delayed, whatever the decision we take on Nice.

Let me conclude by saying that Europe must become more competitive.

You had many gratifying things to say about the euro.

I agree, but you must have the courage to strengthen the euro in Europe by telling the people of your country that the euro is a necessity and that Sweden is accompanying us along this road.

(Applause)I wish you success, and your success will be our common success.

You are not a member of our party, nonetheless I wish you success because what is at stake is the biggest E of all, namely Europe, so let us work together.

Madam President, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, Mr President of the Commission, ladies and gentlemen, first of all I would like to welcome the President-in-Office of the Council, Prime Minister Persson.

This is the first time that Sweden has held the presidency of the Council and it has outlined its priorities, the famous 3 Es, which are in line with the manifesto of the European Socialists and Social Democrats, because I am able to say with pride that Mr Persson and his party belong to my own political family, and the statement which the Swedish Prime Minister has made here in favour of the European social model and its ability to adapt in this era of globalisation is a further source of pride.

On employment, I would like to tell him that he can count on our support at the Stockholm Summit for talks on employment, innovation and the term upon which he ended his speech, social cohesion.

On enlargement, I hope that Sweden' s enthusiasm for enlargement will help the European Union to find greater favour with the Swedish people.

On the environment, we support Sweden' s initiative to put sustainable development into practice.

Madam President, the President-in-Office of the Council has referred to an issue we consider fundamental and that is the image of Europe held by public opinion in Europe.

The barometer of European public opinion, published in recent days in various newspapers, illustrates the schizophrenia we face.

The people of Europe, even the British, are asking for more European solutions to problems, yet at the same time they still have very little confidence in European institutions.

This is an issue which affects us in the Commission and Parliament, but also the national governments.

We see evidence of this in the mad cow problem.

The Commission, by which I mean the Santer Commission, fulfilled its role, as did the Prodi Commission.

Parliament set up a committee of inquiry in 1997 and, this weekend, we have seen once again, in the case of Austria and Italy, how governments finally recognise the problem when they have no other option.

They are still burying their heads in the sand, when what we need are European solutions to European problems.

The next issue which is going to keep the Swedish Presidency busy, and indeed which is going to keep us all busy, from the year 2001, which is just beginning, until the year 2004 - a four-year period in which many elections are to take place, including European elections, is the 'post-Nice' scenario.

I would like to appeal to the Swedish Presidency.

You are admittedly no past masters at negotiating the institutional labyrinth of the Community.

You do, however, have recognised experience in the areas of democracy and transparency, and that is what we need at this moment in time.

You therefore have a special responsibility.

Indeed, I welcome the commitment you expressed to arriving at a clear agreement on such a sensitive issue as access to documents, but we have to go further than that.

You went through the five days of the European Council in Nice, and you will have been as exhausted by it as your colleagues.

I agree with President Prodi that it is not the Monnet method which is in question here, but the intergovernmental method because, and I would like to point this out to him, and this is an ongoing scandal, our ambassadors are still in the process of concluding negotiations.

You said that the Treaty would be signed within a month.

We shall have to wait and see what changes are introduced into the Treaty.

We must see an end to this method.

Therefore, apart from what you said at the end, there is a positive element in Annex IV in that it does not refer to another Intergovernmental Conference. You mention a Conference of Member States.

Moreover, you have said specifically that Parliament has a unique role in taking the initiative, and as we are being innovative here, I am going to accept President Prodi' s proposal, a Commission initiative which I welcome.

We have four years to get to work.

He proposed a three-phase operation, with the first phase consisting of open deliberations.

I would urge the Council to become involved in this first phase, which you have to begin and end at Laeken, during which we have to determine the method we can use to make progress, and consider not just the future of the Union but the future of the enlarged Union because, post-Nice, those countries are already on side and they must learn how we operate, which is no mean feat.

Therefore, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, I would also ask you to put forward initiatives for the Laeken Summit at the end of the year.

Secondly, what method should we adopt? For me and my group the method should be the democratic method employed in all our countries: open debate in Parliament, recorded in full.

These days it is available on the Internet.

That is a way of adapting and improving the Convention method, nothing more.

Naturally, thereafter, the debate should be redistributed through all forms of the media, but civil society should not be placed in opposition to Parliaments, because we live in representative democracies and we have to work out a complex system.

Lastly, Madam President, and this is my final point, I believe that the Conference of Member States must be the last act, when decisions on practical matters are made, and it should not be a tiresome and endless process.

That brings me, Madam President, to what really is my final point, to say that you could have added another E to the European process, and I say this as a Spaniard, and that would be the Spanish word for 'hope' - esperanza.

Madam President, Commission, I would like to welcome the Prime Minister here.

The next six months will be an exciting period.

Important political tasks await us, and a successful presidency may hopefully also have a positive effect on public opinion.

It can show our fellow countrymen at home that good things can be accomplished together in the EU.

It can show our European colleagues here that Sweden is not in opposition to the European project but, rather, wishes to take a constructive part in it.

The Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party fully supports Sweden' s decision to make enlargement a priority.

There is no task more important than creating a united Europe, and the negotiations really need to take a major leap forward this spring.

We would also like to have a date for when the first countries will be able to join us.

Another issue - in which the Prime Minister has the support of both the Liberals and of large sections of Parliament - concerns openness.

Public access to documents is an important democratic issue, which is central to citizens' confidence in the entire EU project.

During the autumn, the Council has been treading water on this issue - the work on Article 255 - and it is time that we saw some results.

We have great hopes of Sweden and of Sweden' s role in promoting and powerfully defending the model applied, for instance, in Sweden and the Netherlands.

As a case in point, why not begin by opening up the meetings of the Council of Ministers?

The issue of democracy is also closely related to the events which are now to take place post-Nice.

The EU' s tasks and powers must be more clearly defined.

We Liberals also believe that Europeans need a common European constitution.

Citizens must be involved in the work which will follow on from the conclusions of the Nice summit.

It is up to Sweden to initiate the phase which President Prodi calls 'open reflection' .

It would be nice to be told in rather more concrete terms how the Prime Minister views this task, the method and these issues, which require further work before the Belgian Presidency begins.

Madam President, President of the Commission, President-in-Office of the Council, I have chosen to speak Swedish today, since it is my country' s second native language.

Mr President-in-Office of the Council, I really believe that the expectations at the start of the Swedish Presidency are very high following our experiences with the French Presidency.

Personally, I am convinced that Sweden will once more confirm the rule that the smaller Member States are often more impartial, something which will favour the common European interest over narrower national interests.

This is your first presidency, and your Ambassador - if I may say this in public - has very nicely compared a first presidency with losing one' s virginity.

He certainly did not wish to lose it in a violent manner.

I can assure you that the European Parliament can make a presidency easier and that you will therefore lose your virginity in a very gentle and amicable way.

My Group wants to see progress particularly in the following areas.

Sustainable development must become a reality now.

The objectives and indicators must be confirmed in Gothenburg in accordance with what you have told us.

Civil crisis management is something which can be promoted under a Swedish Presidency.

Conflict prevention in all areas of foreign policy is very important to our Group.

We welcome your promise of a programme in this area.

Something which perhaps does not have as clear an emphasis on the Swedish agenda is a comprehensive reform of the EU' s agricultural policy, based on the fact that our food must be made safe again.

The environment must no longer be damaged and animals must no longer be mistreated.

I have been following the Swedish debate and learned that you suddenly discovered that you are really a vegetarian, or at least a part-time vegetarian.

May I welcome you to the club.

It may come as a surprise to yourself and to the citizens of Sweden, but this is one of a number of areas which require more, not less, of a European input.

Environmental taxes are an obvious example.

Everybody appreciates that the insistence on unanimity needs to be abandoned in this area.

As my colleagues have also pointed out, what we need here is a Community method, that is to say strong common institutions - namely the Commission and Parliament - instead of a method of intergovernmental cooperation.

To a large extent, the method of intergovernmental cooperation consists of meetings behind closed doors which are outside parliamentary control.

This will not lead to the openness you are striving for.

I should like to call this a 'Swedish paradox' .

You must realise that, in order to have openness, the method of intergovernmental cooperation needs to be abolished.

In the wake of the Nice Summit, it is important that we introduce a comprehensive reform of the EU in which the national parliaments and the European Parliament take an active part.

I hope you take up the challenge set out by the President of the Commission.

Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, President-in-Office of the Council, there are several points in the programme of the Swedish Presidency which we in the United Left support.

In our opinion, the priorities - enlargement, the environment and employment - are important as well as justified.

There are also other positive features of the programme which deserve to be highlighted.

These include measures to combat trafficking in women and the efforts to attain lasting peace in Palestine.

Where the discussions on enlargement are concerned, we consider it to be of vital importance that the EU take into consideration the specific needs of the applicant countries and that these countries not be offered a second-class EU membership.

In relation to this objective, the outcome of the Nice Summit is a failure.

No reforms to the EU were actually made there which would facilitate enlargement.

Instead, the decision process became more complicated.

It is also totally unacceptable that applicant countries such as the Czech Republic and Hungary should have been directly discriminated against in that they will receive fewer places in the European Parliament than EU countries with comparable populations.

This is an embarrassing mistake which must be rectified.

My first question to the Swedish Presidency is therefore the following: Are you prepared to deal with, and rectify, this mistake in the Accession Treaties which are now about to be negotiated?

Certain EU countries want to exclude citizens of the future EU countries from the Union' s labour market for a long period.

Instead, it is of vital importance that all those working in an EU country should be obliged to observe that country' s agreements and laws on the labour market, so that free movement does not result in dumping where social provisions are concerned.

Real left-wing politics must give top priority to employment even in matters of economic policy, instead of to the dogmatic monetarism which currently dominates the EU and economic and monetary union.

Such a policy would also require democratic control of the European Central Bank.

Irrespective of their political complexion, present-day EU governments have, however, made the adaptation to EMU their priority, rather than welfare and the fight against unemployment.

In various parts of the European Union, there are growing demands for the continuous deregulations and free speculation we are witnessing today to be replaced by a situation in which unbridled capitalism is controlled by political decisions.

One of the demands being made is for taxation on currency transactions, a so-called Tobin tax.

Several members of the Swedish Government have talked in positive terms about this idea.

Now - during this presidency - is your golden opportunity to take initiatives.

My second question to the presidency is therefore the following: What initiatives regarding a 'Tobin tax' are you planning during your presidency?

During the next six months, the most important question regarding environmental issues will be the negotiations in connection with the Kyoto Protocol to reduce emissions of greenhouse gases.

It is extremely important to reach an agreement over this issue, but even more so to reach an agreement of substance.

In our opinion, such an agreement must be based upon genuine reductions in emissions and not upon rich countries' (which are already responsible for most emissions) being given the right to buy an opt-out via trade in emission rights.

Sweden' s action in the settlement regarding genetically modified crops, which was recently finalised, was disappointing.

Sweden actively opposed public registers of GM crops.

We hope that Sweden will mend its ways and refrain from working towards revoking the de facto moratorium which exists on the issue.

From an environmental point of view, EU legislation in this area is still inadequate

Unfortunately, it seems that the Swedish Presidency does not want to do anything to essentially change the EU' s irresponsible refugee policy which, with the Schengen Agreement as its instrument, every day gives rise to new tragedies.

Instead, we have seen how Sweden accepts deterioration, most recently by increasing the responsibility borne by transporters.

This involves a kind of privatisation of the screening for asylum purposes, where the fate of many asylum seekers is in practice decided by airport personnel outside the European Union.

The greatest disappointment among Sweden' s actions is probably, however, the militarisation of the EU.

Not only does Sweden give up its policies of non-alignment and independence, but it is now also going to work actively towards implementing the militarisation of the EU.

The EU army will even include Turkish troops.

Troops that one day can commit acts of cruelty in their own country or occupy a neighbouring country are allowed to serve in the EU army the next day.

As a NATO country, Turkey also demands influence over EU policy in this area in order to make NATO' s military resources available.

Consequently, my third question to Gran Persson is the following: Can you promise that Turkey will not be given any such influence?

I am looking forward to the responses to my three questions. These concern the possibility of no longer discriminating against Hungary and the Czech Republic under the Nice Agreement, what you are going to do to make the Tobin tax a reality, and how you view Turkey' s participation in, and influence over, the EU' s military forces.

With these words, the United Left would like to wish the Swedish Presidency every success.

Madam President, firstly, I wish the Swedish Presidency every success in the knowledge that their success will certainly be Europe's success as well.

I want to welcome the Swedish Presidency's presentation here this afternoon as one that appears to be extremely constructive and pragmatic.

I also welcome the comments made by the Commission President, Mr Prodi.

The Swedish government has made it clear that it intends to prioritise what is known as the 3 Es during its presidency of the Union, and this relates to addressing the key problems of enlargement of the Union, employment matters and promoting environmental issues.

I would certainly welcome the intensification of the enlargement negotiations between the applicant countries and the European Union.

We should recall that the accession negotiations are broken up into nearly 40 different chapters of talks, covering every ambit of social and economic activity that is carried out by the European Union.

Presently, many of the more difficult chapters of discussions still remain unopened, and these include agricultural issues, the free movement of persons, the implementation of EU social and employment legislation and the incorporation of many EU directives and regulations in the field of environmental matters.

This is the core of the problem when it comes to the issue of enlargement of the European Union.

Applicant countries want the EU leaders to give a fixed date for the next enlargement of the Union.

However, the EU governments are seeking the conclusion of the more difficult chapters of talks between the applicant countries and the European Union before such a date can be announced.

However, the fact that EU leaders were able to agree a reform of the decision-making procedures within the EU institutions at Nice before Christmas is certainly a step in the right direction.

Applicant countries can now take solace from the fact that the EU has reformed its internal decision-making procedures so that the mechanics of the enlargement process can take place in a streamlined and structured manner.

I welcome the fact that the Swedish government is going to ensure that employment and environmental matters stay at the top of the agenda during its presidency of the Union.

It is imperative that the European Union guarantees that the benefits of new information technologies are incorporated across all sectors of European industry.

Equally, it is important that there is an intensification of support for employment initiatives in urban and rural blackspots.

Finally, I hope that the European Union and the United States of America can come to an agreement in Bonn in May of this year so as to guarantee that environmental targets to reduce the effects of global warming can be reached.

Madam President, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, President of the Commission, I would like to thank you for attending and for your substantial speech.

If you will allow me, I would like to ask you a brief question on an urgent matter.

In a few days' time, the Union is due to make a statement on Afghanistan.

It will have to adopt a common position. in recent weeks, the Security Council imposed an embargo on just the Talibans. Mr President, I would like to know if the European Union will also adopt this position.

As to the future of the European Union, we have given ourselves over to a certain amount of posturing, trying to make an impact.

Some forecast that we will vote against the Treaty of Nice, a perfectly legitimate action, I feel.

There has been no response on democracy, no response on the rule of law; the programmed destruction of the Commission was consummated in Nice.

Many members and, I hope, the majority, will legitimately come out against this Treaty.

Having said that, we are used to a great deal of flexing of muscles in the House and we will have to see what will happen when Parliament enters the ring to vote.

Mr President-in-Office, I am not sure if you should be too concerned, since the past has many things to teach us.

I am not, of course, Mr President, asking you to make a statement against the Treaty of Nice, I am merely asking for your understanding.

At the signing of the Treaty of Cologne, the Council, of which you were a member, threw Parliament a bone in the shape of the Charter of Fundamental Rights in order to keep it quiet.

A little too late, Parliament realised that this was indeed its intention and, this is the important point, that this was what you decided at Nice in the way you decided it, in other words, the weighting of votes in the Council and the membership of the Commission.

Having said that, at Nice, it was no bone that was tossed to Parliament, Mr President-in-Office, but a poisoned chalice.

Suggesting an Intergovernmental Conference in 2004 to Parliament and the Commission is like offering a poisoned chalice because there will be no Parliament in 2004. We will be busy with the pre-election campaign for the preliminaries in January and February 2004 and then with the election campaign proper in March, April and May.

The elections will be held in June, then we will have a well-earned rest in July and August. There will be the low-level preparatory meetings in September, the great budget issue in October and November and finally the Intergovernmental Conference in December.

Mr President, from now on, if you could show a little understanding and ask your colleagues in the Council either to bring forward this conference to 2003 or to postpone it until 2005, you may be able to salvage the honour of Parliament, which very often does not seem to know the meaning of the phrase.

Madam President, the Group for a Europe of Democracies and Diversities would like to congratulate Sweden on the Presidency. We think it is a good custom for the presidency to alternate.

We are looking forward to the Gothenburg Summit and hope that a great many citizens will be there under the alternative arrangements.

We call upon the presidency of the Council to re-open the negotiations on the Treaty of Nice so that this can be scrutinised democratically.

At present, the outcome is more centralism and less parliamentary democracy.

It is also startling that the negotiations ended with a decision to hold all summits in Brussels, with the Swedish Prime Minister' s not knowing about this decision when we believed he was involved in making it.

It is provocative that Czechs and Hungarians can be treated as inferiors and be given fewer seats in Parliament than countries with fewer inhabitants.

It is unwise to introduce majority voting for the purpose of appointing the individual countries' Commissioners. In that way, they of course become the EU' s representatives in the Member States instead of the Member States' representatives in the EU.

With an EU government formed through majority voting, an EU State is on the horizon instead of the electorate' s preferred vision of a Europe of nations and democracies.

We call upon Sweden to introduce genuine flexibility in the negotiations on enlargement so that the majority of the countries can be involved in the collaborative work and participate in the next elections to the EU Parliament in 2004.

The Treaty of Nice has been called an enlargement treaty, but it is a non-binding declaration which specifies the seats and weighting of votes in Parliament, while the binding enlargement protocol of the Treaty of Amsterdam is to disappear.

We call upon the Swedish Presidency to ensure that an improved Treaty of Nice only comes into force when the EU admits new countries. Otherwise, we shall in fact end up saying yes to a treaty of enlargement, without obtaining any enlargement.

We run the risk of the Treaty of Nice' s becoming merely a treaty for deepening the Union, with more Union and less democracy, and that is something I am sure would not be to the taste of the new Swedish President-in-Office of the Council.

. (DE) Madam President, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, Mr President of the Commission, ladies and gentlemen, I may happen to be wearing my Nice hat today, yet I cannot get away from the fact that in Nice, as before in Amsterdam, we once again found that as an instrument the Intergovernmental Conference is finished.

On the other hand, I do not believe the much-praised Convention is fully developed yet as a procedure.

It could, however, serve as the blueprint for a workable procedure.

So in regard to the distribution of powers between the Member States and the Union, a question addressed both by the President of the Council and by the President of the Commission, let me outline my idea of an effective procedure.

During a first stage, parallel to the discussion begun under the Swedish Presidency, at the invitation of the European Council and in fact as early as possible there should be a discussion and opinion-forming process at the level of the national parliaments, which would then, just like the European Parliament, have to submit a proposal by, say, Spring 2002 on this distribution of powers.

Only on that basis should a Convention be convened, with the participation of constitutional experts, experts in European law, representatives of the national parliaments, of the European Parliament, of the national governments, but also of the governments of the candidate states and, of course, of the Court of Justice and of civil society. They would be charged with drafting a proposal for a inventory, and to do so by around Spring 2003.

On the basis of that proposal, the Commission in turn would be instructed by the European Council, in stage 3, to submit a proposal to it on the distribution of powers which could conceivably happen by the end of 2003.

In stage 4, I am envisaging rather more stages than the Commission President before the Intergovernmental Conference is convened, this proposal would have to be submitted for fresh discussion at national level, which would have to conclude by mid-2004.

Then, in stage 5, the Intergovernmental Conference would be convened, which should be brief and efficient.

In that way, we will ensure that we have a procedure that effectively includes the national parliaments, which has not been possible so far with the Convention, and that an agreed proposal is submitted to the Heads of Government.

Instead of the institutions acting side by side, as they have done in the past, they would therefore be acting together.

. (DE) Madam President, in order to remove all doubt I would now like to make a clarification.

On Sunday, 14 January Austria had its first suspected case of BSE.

Allow me to inform the House that the institute in Tbingen informed us yesterday that the results were negative.

I hope the same will apply to all future suspected cases in Austria.

Madam President, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, ladies and gentlemen, Commissioners, it is so pleasant to see Sweden holding the presidency of the EU for the first time.

We Moderates have always fought for Sweden in Europe, but unfortunately we have to point out that Sweden is only responsible for 'half a presidency' since it is Belgium, instead, which will be responsible for the issues relating to the euro.

On the other hand, we hope that Sweden, as the country holding the presidency, will be able to achieve the success required in the work of enlargement.

The common security and defence policy has to be made more concrete during the Swedish Presidency.

Development in this area has been surprisingly rapid, but the ambitions must now be given some substance.

Relations between the EU and NATO will be of the greatest importance.

Commitment and the ability to solve outstanding problems are required if we are to avoid confusion and if we are to give the EU a complementary role in NATO' s military power.

I hope, therefore, that the fact that NATO does not even get a mention in the Swedish programme is more of a chance occurrence than part of a strategy.

In ten years' time, the EU will have the most dynamic economy in the world.

Sweden is one of those countries which have made the furthest strides in the development of the new economy.

We have companies which are world leaders in telecommunications and the Internet.

This is mainly due to the series of deregulations which took place under the Moderate-led government between 1991 and 1994.

The markets for telecommunications, mail, electricity and rail traffic, as well as agriculture, were liberalised.

At the time, Mr Persson was mainly opposed to these initiatives, but he seems to have changed his views.

I am delighted about this and I hope that Sweden, encouraged by good experiences, will be able to push through this kind of development.

The Stockholm Summit will provide an excellent opportunity.

May it become a deregulation summit for jobs and prosperity.

The debate surrounding globalisation and free trade has received increasing attention.

The time has come to get rid of the EU' s final protectionist barriers.

The EU, together with the new administration in the USA, can remove customs barriers for agricultural products and the textile industry.

That, if anything, will show solidarity with the poor of the world.

Unlike the Left Party which supports the Swedish Government, I find it gratifying that the Swedish Presidency states in its Programme that one of its main priorities is to devote itself to making the EU force the pace of development within the WTO towards tangible liberalisations.

This declaration is totally in line with Sweden' s tradition of free trade and openness towards the surrounding world.

The Minister of Commerce in Sweden, Mr Pagrotsky, has, however, described the Tobin tax (as it is called) as a nice idea, and the Prime Minister has expressed his sympathetic understanding of those who, by organising riots and disturbances, sabotaged the WTO meeting in Seattle.

The Tobin tax is a threat to the poor of the world.

A Tobin tax would only serve to undermine the efficiency of the market.

I would therefore like to ask the following question: Could the President-in-Office of the Council, here before Parliament, give a clear statement as to whether the Swedish Presidency is for or against the introduction of a Tobin tax?

Madam President, Members of the Commission, ladies and gentlemen, I am delighted to welcome the Prime Minister of Sweden, Mr Gran Persson to Parliament.

I usually look forward to all Presidencies, but this presidency is something quite special, and my expectations of it run particularly high.

In my opinion, the priorities stipulated by Sweden, the three Es, are sound priorities.

They concern a limited number of important areas well in line with the EU agenda.

The most important one is, of course, enlargement.

It is a task of historic significance to unite East and West on our continent after years of Cold War.

I myself cannot imagine being able to participate in the completion of any greater or more important task in the whole of my political life.

Sweden' s ambitions of speeding up the process in this area are entirely legitimate.

I hope that the negotiations with the first countries can soon be brought to a successful conclusion and that a target date can soon be set for the accession of these first countries.

I realise that this is going to be difficult.

I also realise that it must be based on realism and that false hopes should not be created.

But, at the same time, it is important for the populations of the applicant countries not to give up hope, but to see the light at the end of the tunnel.

Sweden has been pressing on with the issue of employment.

In Stockholm, the intention is to combine employment, social policy, knowledge development and economic policy into one integrated policy.

The method applied is the open coordination method.

What we in Parliament would like is to have a part to play in this method - just as we have in the case of legislation - since it is becoming increasingly important.

I would like to receive some indication to this effect.

The third priority concerns long-term sustainable development.

This is not only a question of economic and social sustainability but also of environmental sustainability.

The EU is, after all, fairly successful where environmental policy is concerned.

This is partly due to the fact that those with the least ambitions are unable to block decisions, but it is also due to the fact that Parliament has the right of codecision on environmental issues.

What is missing in the strategy is a link between environmental policy and the previously mentioned areas.

Such a link must be made before the meeting in Stockholm and must be one result of the meeting in Gothenburg.

It was important, especially for the enlargement process, that there was agreement in Nice.

All was not entirely well, however - for example, when it came to the complicated rules concerning codecision making.

The way in which decisions were made behind closed doors was not good, either.

Sweden has openness on its agenda and will push the issue of making documents available to the public.

I trust that Sweden will also actively pursue the goal of a more open decision-making process.

I sincerely hope that Sweden can make a contribution to this issue.

I would also like to say a few words about crisis management.

Active crisis management and military non-alignment is not the same thing as passivity, nor has it ever involved passivity.

Active crisis management is about trying to prevent conflicts.

Sweden and Finland have been the trailblazers in applying civilian methods to crisis management and in resorting to military action only as a last resort. This is good and will be developed in the future.

There is a large majority in favour of this.

Once again, I wish to welcome Sweden as the country holding the presidency.

Madam President, Prime Minister, I too would like to welcome the Prime Minister here.

It is not quite the same as at home in the Swedish Parliament, but you get used to it fairly quickly.

Many issues revolve around the three Es.

Allow me to highlight a fourth one, namely E for Empathy.

We were all deeply shocked after the Christmas celebrations by the image of people struggling for their lives off the coast of Turkey in their attempt to get to Europe.

Many people died in their fight for a better life.

I know that you, Prime Minister, expressed your dismay after the awful tragedy last year when 58 Chinese people were found dead in a container in Dover.

Europe must not be transformed into some kind of fortress.

The European asylum and refugee policy must be characterised by dignity and humanity - that was your message at the time.

Well, the development in Europe has taken a wrong turn.

It has been proposed that the penalties for trafficking in human beings be made more severe.

This is necessary, but the proposals are unfocused in their effect.

Non-profit-making organisations - churches, religious orders, asylum organisations and private networks which support asylum seekers - are threatened with penalties.

In Sweden, protection against the violation of the sanctity of churches has prevailed since the Middle Ages.

European leaders should reflect on why trafficking in human beings to Europe is dramatically increasing.

To impose a visa requirement on 130 countries is not worthy of a democratic Europe.

The basic rule must be that people have the right to travel freely to the EU.

Is the Swedish Presidency prepared to work towards making the list of countries from which visas are required considerably shorter?

I am an ardent supporter of the EU and have for a long time now wanted to see common rules within the asylum and refugee policy, but we Liberals are not prepared to accept any kind of 'cordoned-off' Europe.

This, Prime Minister, is an opportunity for the new presidency to make an important contribution towards humanity and human dignity in the spirit of Raoul Wallenberg, whose memory you have so commendably honoured.

Mr President, as representative of the people and the regions, we regard Sweden as an ally in our defence of things that are dear to us, such as linguistic and cultural diversity, but if you are going to talk about involving the national parliaments more we would want the same amount of attention to be devoted to the institutions of our constitutional regions, and of our governments.

We would like our regions to be able to engage in direct dialogue, so as to remove the disparity in employment levels that can exist between different regions and one Member State.

We welcome Sweden as an environmentally friendly presidency, but Sweden would be acting completely out of character if it were to send MOX fuel to Sellafield.

This would be in direct contradiction with the signing of OSPAR, under the terms of which all parties are called upon to defend the non-processing option.

Not only is it fundamental to the enlargement to see the acquis communautaire adopted in the material sense prior, more than anything we want attention to be given to the ethical dimension.

I am talking democracy, respect for human rights and minorities, so that Europe is able to become a real community of values, in short, a Community with a capital 'C' .

Mr President, the programme of the Swedish Presidency is a fine piece of work, but there is still no indication as to how it is to be executed at a practical level.

How does the presidency propose to implement this ambitious programme?

As well as the Swedish priorities, there are all the matters left unresolved by the French still to be dealt with.

This is the first time that Sweden has held the presidency of the European Union and it has rightly made enlargement an important priority.

But is it not taking a rather over-optimistic view of how much willingness there is within the European Union to admit the candidate states?

The decision not to quote statistics in relation to accession speaks of a healthy sense of realism, given that this is determined by the accession criteria.

It is important for the candidate states to be offered a brighter future, in freedom, necessitating an increase in employment levels and the promotion of sustainable development through environmentally-friendly technology.

The goal of closing as many negotiating chapters as possible with the candidate states over the next six months, is a worthwhile one.

However, we would do well to consider that the internal market must be able to continue to function efficiently in the enlarged Union.

When it comes to the enlargement negotiations, how does the presidency propose to deal with the directives that have not been correctly implemented in the current Member States for some time?

On a final note, the proposal to integrate environmental aspects into other policy areas, such as taxation of energy, is to be welcomed with open arms.

This integration is an excellent point of departure for the sixth environmental action programme, as are the concrete goals and indicators that are to be included in this programme.

However, it is still unclear to me as to how this is to be combined with the proposed liberalisation of the WTO.

Mr President, Sweden has every right to be proud of its policy of making equal rights for men and women a reality.

You can imagine that I was rather surprised to see just how male-dominated your own retinue is.

A key aspect of your line of argument is that the people of the European Union should be our first priority.

Now I come from a country that sets great store by the expression: 'not words but deeds' and you will soon have this opportunity.

For example there is a regulation on the table which regulates access to documents from the Council, the Commission and Parliament.

There are five questions I would like to ask you.

Firstly, what do you propose to do with the heavily criticised Commission proposal in this sphere?

My second question is this: are you going to radically adapt the current French Council proposal with a view to achieving greater transparency?

Thirdly, are you prepared to get off to a flying start in bringing the Council working groups together, so as to be able to reach an understanding with Parliament as quickly as possible?

Fourthly, will you grasp the nettle of radical change and make the Council documents available on the Internet now, thereby putting transparency into practice?

My fifth question is: do you consider that European citizens are less entitled to openness with regard to the Brussels administration than American citizens are as regards their Washington administration?

Lastly, a final question: do you have the courage to initiate your own process of openness in relation to the post-Nice era, of precisely the kind put forward by the President of the Commission?

What would your answer be to that?

I think, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, that it is extremely important for us not just to hear fine words, but above all, what will your deeds be?

Mr President-in-Office of the Council, I wish Sweden good luck in its first presidency.

The three Es are three good priorities that we share.

I would like to talk briefly about enlargement.

We support this as much as you do.

We must never forget that success is largely dependent on our ability to manage our internal affairs properly as well.

The legacy of Nice is not a good legacy.

You will have to deal with it.

However, to move on to your second priority, employment, which relates to my temporary position in Parliament.

In the course of its development, the Union had five years to prepare for the external market, but with binding legislative instruments.

It was the same for the euro.

We are currently taking on the new challenge of improving employment and even achieving a return to full employment, as some dared to say at the Nice Summit, with our approval and we have all seen what could be achieved without binding legislative instruments.

This means, however, that we should reinforce convergence and incentive instruments.

This primarily means better coordination between macroeconomic, especially, in our case, macrofinancial policy, and employment policy in the European Union.

Mr President, you will be chairing the new European Council in the spring, which will be the first Council to deal with general macroeconomic objectives along with employment objectives.

You will set a precedent by forcing discussion and by forcing governments to compare results, rather than merely intentions.

We also need coordination of all the various aspects of European policy in order to promote employment.

Our competition policy is one of the best-defined policies and one that works the best. Should its only goal be to achieve healthy economic competition?

Mergers and restructuring are frequent occurrences.

What is their added value in terms of employment and growth?

The Commission applies the current criteria.

The Council would probably be well advised to adjust the balance of these criteria.

Competition should also work in favour of employment.

We have the same need for internal policy coordination in the Union reforms of public procurement contract procedures or in the regulations for services of general interest.

I did have more questions but I am out of time.

Mr President, Parliament is a place where we do not actually debate very much.

You will get used to it and you will find it does not sadden you too much.

Mr President, President-in-Office of the Council, I should like to congratulate Prime Minister Persson on an ambitious and results-oriented programme.

I hope it means that the EU will take several steps forward and that it will also reinforce the image of the EU in Sweden.

Among the issues closest to people' s hearts, one of the most important nowadays is that of food safety.

I have noted that the Prime Minister has expressed his hesitancy about eating meat in view of the ways in which animals and meat products are treated.

Despite the fact that I am an old farmer and an inveterate meat-eater, I can nowadays understand people who feel like that.

Parliament will be adopting positions on some eighty food safety directives.

We are now beginning to discuss the proposal for a European food authority.

I would be interested to hear what the Prime Minister' s attitude is to such an authority.

In a common market, common rules and regulations as well as common controls, and - if the rules are not followed - a common system of sanctions are required.

Such an overall solution requires more than the proposed food authority.

My opinion is that it has to function in cooperation with the EU' s Food and Veterinary Office in Dublin and with the Commission.

Within the sphere of influence of such a triangle, advice and consultation, risk assessment, risk management and sanctions could be dealt with within the framework of existing regulatory mechanisms and could provide an identical level of food safety throughout the Union.

I hope to have the support of the presidency for this idea.

Mr President, representatives of the Council and the Commission, ladies and gentlemen, it is very gratifying that the Swedish Presidency has accorded the environment a high priority. This is vitally necessary, and it also entails responsibility.

To reverse the deterioration in the living environment requires radical political decisions - a break in the trend.

Expectations are high in view of the statement of Mr Persson, the President-in-Office of the Council, to the effect that sustainable development on the EU' s agenda will lead to a green strategy for the 21st century.

This involves providing the economy with ecological ground-rules, integrating environmental issues in all other policies and introducing the necessary means of control.

It is therefore incomprehensible that the Swedish Government is acting in opposition to such environment-related taxes at EU level as minimum levels of carbon dioxide and energy taxes.

Why was a negative decision made on this in Nice?

Another question of great immediate interest is how the Swedish Presidency is planning to assume the task - which it has inherited from Nice - of formulating a strategy for the political future of the EU.

You, Mr President-in-Office of the Council - along with a large proportion of the population of the Member States - are, of course, opposed to a federal development of the EU.

What is your vision and how do you envisage subsidiarity and the division of powers in the future?

How is the President planning successfully to maintain a Swedish policy of non-alignment and neutrality while, at the same time, his task during the presidency is to continue to develop the EU' s military capacity?

Finally, I would like to congratulate the Swedish Presidency.

Mr President, I would firstly like to wish the Swedish Presidency of the European Union luck.

As the President-in-Office of the Council knows, the work of a presidency does not consist solely of defending its national interests, but also of seeking consensus so that European integration may move forward.

And the only way to move forward is to establish harmonious cooperation between the three institutions: the Council, the Commission and Parliament.

We are therefore reassured to receive the offer of cooperation you made Parliament today, especially in view of the statements to which Mr Poettering referred just now, in which, apparently, you declared that the Commission is an institution suffering from a serious democratic deficit and that, following the 1999 elections and the low turnout of citizens in your country, the European Parliament should be dissolved.

I do not know whether these reports are true or not, or whether they have been denied or not, but I believe, Mr President, that these statements require some explanation.

Having said that, when discussing the Europe of values, you referred to the need to export the system of the Charter of Fundamental Rights to third countries.

I do not know exactly what you meant by that.

If we are to expect third countries to adhere to certain values, to which we have not ourselves been capable of adhering, then perhaps the most logical interpretation is that you have now become a fervent supporter of making the Charter of Fundamental Rights binding in nature and perhaps even including it in the Treaties.

In opening your speech, you referred to the European Union project, which you defined as an association of welfare states.

The welfare interpretation of a Europe with emphasis on the tangible, on cash, the net beneficiary and the net balance, is a legitimate but incomplete vision of Europe.

Mr President-in-Office of the Council, the Europe of welfare must be subordinate to a Europe of values, since the essence of the European Union is an ongoing appeal for peace, understanding, harmony and solidarity, and we would appreciate your continuing to bear this in mind.

Mr President, President of the Commission, ladies and gentlemen, it is, of course, not possible for me to comment on all the views, but I can discuss some of the main features of several of the speeches.

Naturally, I will not go into questions relating to Swedish domestic policy, since we can deal with such matters in other contexts.

Instead, I will concentrate on the major European issues.

I sense a strong desire on the part of several of the representatives - not least on the part of the representatives of the large political groups - to work together with the presidency towards greater transparency.

This is an issue on which, as you all know, there are different approaches within the Union, which is why we are going to have a difficult and complicated task on our hands over the next few months.

Nevertheless, we think that one of the essential prerequisites for building confidence in the European Union, in its policies and its institutions is that there be transparency; that it be possible to follow the way in which an issue is dealt with; that accountability can be demanded; and that debate can be engaged in.

In that way, a European political space can be created for conducting a debate, which in turn is the prerequisite for building institutions which will go on to create increased democratic legitimacy.

What has been said by Mr Poettering, Mr Barn Crespo and others on this subject is, of course, excellent and something to which I subscribe.

Many have referred to enlargement, especially Mr Barn Crespo in his powerful visionary speech.

I have also been asked by Mrs Malmstrm whether we can specify a date for when the first applicant country will gain accession to the Union.

This is something which I - which we - wish to see, but we are not going to give that indication.

We will not conduct that debate until we know that the substantive negotiations which will have to be held are also to be successful.

I think we would be giving the wrong signal if we were to indicate a certain point in time when the first of the countries currently negotiating membership were to join the Union.

It would be the wrong signal because we would first like to see the difficult negotiations with which we are faced result in a breakthrough.

Such a breakthrough can take place during the Swedish Presidency and we may then very well be able to specify a date in Gothenburg.

I hope that this will be the case.

I would like it to happen, but I am not sure if it will.

When we talk about the major issues and enlargement, it seems that we are more or less in agreement.

There is no firmer support for enlargement than that offered by the European Parliament.

This is more a project of the European Parliament than of any other institution.

It is Parliament that has been responsible for enlargement.

Naturally, I am extremely anxious that it should also be possible for the Treaty we signed in Nice to be approved, because that in turn is the prerequisite for its being possible to implement enlargement.

I hope we can resolve the differences on factual matters which exist between the Commission, the Council and Parliament so that we can make some progress on the issue of enlargement.

Enlargement is our common responsibility, an historic opportunity to put an end to the division of Europe into East and West.

I agree with what Mr Andersson said in his speech, to the effect that the Treaty of Nice - despite its flaws and shortcomings - nonetheless opened the door to enlargement, something which it is important to mention.

In their speeches, several Members have also talked about the environmental issue.

I attach great value to the statements of Mrs Hautala and others.

In my opinion, the environmental issue should not be seen as a brake on economic development but, instead, as a driving force.

All the major environmental problems we see at present will be resolved by new technology.

This is something of which I am convinced.

I am also convinced that we, in practice, already have the technology. It is available.

We know what, in all likelihood, needs to be done.

When our citizens see what is happening, for example on the climate issue, and that we cannot get together and produce some kind of joint response, that is naturally something which will undermine confidence in our institutions.

I therefore believe that the Gothenburg Summit will be an important point of departure, enabling us to show that there is a path to success whereby new technology, research, development and faith in human ability are in actual fact promoted through political investment.

If we place the emphasis on this, we shall also be at the cutting edge of the technological development which is a prerequisite for a competitive Europe.

Look at environmental concern as a driving force and not as a brake and as nostalgia for a time which has passed.

Look at environmental concern as a visionary contribution to a better and more modern Europe.

We ought to be able to adopt that approach alongside the creditable work Commissioner Wallstrm is doing with her environmental care programme for issues relating to chemicals and the way in which the use of these is regulated.

Add all this together, and we should be able to obtain a promising outcome in Gothenburg.

I take note of what you have said about the environmental issue and I share your views to a great extent.

Employment is, of course, largely a policy which already is, and for the foreseeable future will remain, a responsibility of the national parliaments.

In the open coordination which is a feature of the Lisbon process, we have found a way of jointly pursuing the development of employment in the Union.

I fully share Mr Rocard' s view that, if we are to come closer still to full employment, the macroeconomic discussion is going to become ever more central.

To put it more simply: how can we make use of the fact that we are cooperating within a European union in order, for example, to provide more stimulation for economic growth?

Our situation is such that we are not vulnerable to outside influences.

An isolated country is vulnerable, but not so a union of countries.

This is something we should discuss, and - I freely admit this - it is particularly important in the case of those countries which are already cooperating over the euro.

They have more opportunities of taking advantage of their situation or of stimulating more robust economic growth and, in that way, increased employment.

I am quite sure that discussions of this kind will take place in the group of euro countries.

After all, the work which forms the core of the European Union has to do with the internal market and that method of working in terms of community legislation that is in the spirit of Monnet.

That core has, of course, already been built.

What has now been added is cooperation within another field, something which we, for instance, call the Lisbon process.

Irrespective of which form of cooperation we choose, the same requirements for openness and transparency apply.

I do not wish to see a situation in which States and governments hold discussions between themselves which could be considered as being closed and secret and which make public control impossible.

Irrespective of which methods we apply, openness is of fundamental importance.

Many other things have been said which I feel strongly about, but let me just say that there are two contributions which I find to be of a special and exceptional nature, but which are of central political importance and which, I want to emphasise, I have subscribed to.

What Mr Olsson says about food policy, food quality, the interest of consumers in their right to protection and the renewal of consumer confidence is very much in line with my own thinking regarding the presidency' s approach.

Mr Olle Schmidt talked about policy on refugees and about a generous attitude on the part of the European Union towards those who turn to us in search of safety and protection.

The Geneva Convention must, of course, form the basis of any thinking about this subject, but we should also have ambitions over and above this.

As a wealthy section of a global community, we really should be able to afford such a policy.

These are ambitions we could very well have arguments and discussions about, and it is an area in which we could take the Union forwards.

I am very sympathetic to what Mr Olle Schmidt said in his speech about a humanitarian refugee policy.

In conclusion, I would like to say that those of us involved in the Swedish Presidency will frequently be in your beautiful building to conduct talks and discussions, but we would also like you, for your part, to get in touch with ourselves.

We will also be happy to receive you as guests in our somewhat cold and distant country, a country which, however, will be full of warmth and fellowship on such occasions. Of that I can assure you.

I am looking forward to cooperating with all the political groups in Parliament with a view to developing the European Union.

. (DE) Mr President, I want to thank the Presidency of the Council for taking such a positive approach to the Stockholm summit and aiming at economic sustainability, which lies in the interests of full employment, economic reform, innovation and the future viability of the European Union.

What we need in Stockholm is not a deregulation summit.

We need a summit that makes it clear at what European Union level we can regulate everything best, so that we really can make progress in using the single market in the interests not just of the economy but also of the people, of the workers.

So I would like to make a request to the Swedish Presidency. If you want to show greater transparency and greater democracy, specifically in relation to coordinating economic policy, make a start by involving the European Parliament in the macroeconomic dialogue, in every initiative and in elaborating the basic features of economic policy.

We will first submit our proposals in the framework of a legislative procedure.

We will see whether the Swedish Presidency really is taking this issue of overcoming the democratic deficit on board and is proceeding pragmatically, by small steps.

That is a very cordial request by the European Parliament, which has been calling since 1994 for an interinstitutional agreement of that kind to be reached.

I would ask the presidency to pursue the Lisbon process consistently, ensuring that all policy areas referred to in it keep the same status.

That means we really do implement an appropriate and adequate policy mix, by pursuing a policy of social integration, full employment and economic reforms based on clear timetables together with quality benchmarks.

The same applies to financial policy, for we must begin by making it clear through our investment policy that the people of Europe can achieve added value through cooperation at European level, through investment in people, but also in infrastructures.

Let me address one last comment to the Swedish Presidency: we place our hopes in you to ensure that the citizens of Europe, most of whom are very worried, can face the introduction of the euro without fear.

Please work very closely with the Belgian Presidency and call on all the players in the villages, towns and capitals to cooperate. For the euro is a bold historic project that can only succeed if we all pull together.

Mr President, Commissioner, as you heard from our Group chairman earlier in the debate, the EPP visited Berlin last week.

Before leaving, I and some colleagues were able to visit Potsdam where of course the conference took place where President Truman, Prime Minister Churchill - bizarrely replaced by Mr Atley mid-conference - and Marshal Stalin agreed to confirm the Yalta division of Europe.

The Swedish Presidency, as we have heard during the debate, has raised high hopes that we may achieve over the next six months the restoration of a unified Europe, but I believe the time for rhetoric has passed and what we are all looking for now are results.

I wonder if four questions could be transmitted to the Swedish Presidency.

First of all, does it intend to convene a council or a special meeting to which the government representatives of the candidate countries would be invited, not only to facilitate the negotiations, but to give the important signal to the public that enlargement is not merely a political exercise, a mirage, a constantly distant objective, but that we are genuinely making the progress which is required?

Secondly, could the bureaucratic negotiations be tempered by an understanding of the past?

It does seem cruelly difficult in a sense that the way the enlargement process is presented is merely a question of conforming to some technical acquis, ignoring, perhaps, the specific difficulties that the Baltic Republics and other Central and Eastern European countries faced under the Soviet system.

With the timetable which we have set ourselves: does the Swedish Presidency agree that this necessitates transitional periods, and, finally, can we confirm that no new hurdles will be placed in the path of the candidate countries.

Clearly today it has been Sweden's day.

We all very much hope that in six months' time in Gothenburg, once again, it will not only be Sweden's day, but Europe's day.

Mr President, I warmly welcome the Swedish Presidency, although the situation in which they find themselves as they assume the presidency may not be a very enviable one.

We have recently had perhaps the most confused Summit the EU has ever seen.

Problems are being thrashed out right up to the time the agreement is about to be ratified, and that does not, on any account, give a good picture of summits generally or the work of the Council.

For that reason, it is very satisfying to note that Sweden, as the country holding the presidency, has indicated its desire to help steer the work of the Council in a specifically more transparent direction.

The programme of the Swedish Presidency is full-bodied and ambitious, and it really is time environmental issues in their broadest context were finally taken to the core of any debate in the European Union.

The programme of sustainable development drafted for the EU, which has been agreed will form part of the Rio Plus process at the Gothenburg Summit, must contain all those elements of sustainability that have been prioritised for the presidency of the EU.

In my opinion, all three E' s are a guarantee of this sustainability.

But I am nevertheless slightly worried, and I will now address my words to the Commission, about the timetable for drafting the subjects for debate, for example, for the Gothenburg Summit.

How will this timetable make it possible for the European Parliament to be fully involved in the drafting of the programme relating to sustainable development, for example?

However, I would like to thank the country holding the presidency for including the issue of the northern dimension on the agenda.

And I would once more like to address a question to the Commission, which is how adequate resources - staffing resources, for example - can be guaranteed so that this northern dimension policy also receives the go-ahead for an extension from the Commission.

Mr President, I too should like to welcome the Swedish Presidency and its programme which contains many good priorities.

Just like a whole succession of speakers here today, I am worried about the tendency to frequently and stridently emphasise the intergovernmental model at the expense of the model we commonly call the 'Community approach' , i.e. one which involves the Commission' s being given a greater role and importance.

I note the Prime Minister' s assurances of openness, irrespective of which model is chosen, but the question is, of course, more far-reaching than that.

The interesting contribution by Commissioner Prodi confirmed the challenges we face.

I listened with interest to the Prime Minister' s comments on the environmental issues.

They sound fine, but there is a problem in that the majority of today' s environmental problems are directly linked to energy consumption, and the problem is that Europe at present has no energy policy.

The Member States have not even managed to agree about a common charge on carbon dioxide.

The Swedish Government has stated that it wants to see such a charge, but only if a unanimous decision on this can be reached which, however, is the same thing as no decision at all.

For ten years, this question has been blocked by individual governments.

What makes the Prime Minister and the Government think that it could be resolved at this present time?

Without a charge on carbon dioxide, the EU will not be able to meet the requirements of the Kyoto Protocol.

Furthermore, the strategy for sustainable development, which is going to be taken up for discussion in Gothenburg, will be severely compromised if the EU does not take a coordinated grip on these energy issues.

Commissioner Prodi raised the issue very creditably, and many other speakers have done the same.

The question is whether the Swedish Government will be prepared to think again.

Finally, I wish to say that I, just like Mr Olle Schmidt, would have liked to have seen a fourth 'E' , standing for empathy and relating not only to the refugee issues but also to relations with the Third World.

Reference has been made here today to the Tobin tax, but I think that this will be impossible to implement.

One way of accumulating more money for global issues would be to encourage all Member States to fulfil their commitment to giving 0.7 per cent of their GNP in aid.

In addition to this, as Mrs Carlsson said, the rates of duty on products from developing countries should be reduced.

Is the Swedish Government prepared to act in this spirit?

Mr President, Mr President of the Council, ladies and gentlemen, this debate has made it very clear that the majority of Members of the European Parliament is disappointed by the outcome of Nice.

The real reason is as follows. In Nice, transparency and democracy for the European Union fell by the wayside.

We find the Council applying the qualified majority principle in more and more areas.

That prevents any scrutiny by the national parliaments, whose decisions can, of course, be outvoted by the respective majorities in the Council.

But this democratic scrutiny has, unfortunately, not been replaced by democratic scrutiny by the European Parliament nor, unfortunately, by codecision by the European Parliament.

Here, I am convinced, lies the crucial weakness of what was decided in Nice.

Mr President of the Council, Sweden has a great tradition of democracy and transparency.

I expect the Swedish Presidency to support us in our endeavour to remedy these weaknesses of Nice and to strengthen the legitimacy of democratic decisions in the European Union again, and I am convinced it will do so.

I want to address a second point.

During its term of office the Swedish Presidency must prepare for the introduction of the euro, i.e. of the notes and coins, in 12 European Union countries.

The question we keep asking ourselves is this: who actually represents the euro externally?

I am persuaded that the European Commission ought to undertake to do more here than it has to date.

The French Presidency gave us clear information. Accordingly, the president of the 12 EU countries represents the euro externally.

That in turn leads to a paradoxical situation.

The Swedish Finance Minister represents the European Union externally for general economic policy questions, while when it comes to the euro, to the euro currency, this job goes to the Belgian Finance Minister.

If even we in the European Parliament cannot understand that, how are the citizens of the European Union supposed to understand it?

How are the markets to understand it?

We must do our outmost to return to a sensible situation here.

You, Foreign Minister, can make a major contribution here.

If you manage to persuade your fellow-countrymen that the euro is a good project, that it is stable from within, that its external stability is also constantly improving; if you can persuade them to support this great project of European integration, you will also help ensure that the citizens gain a better understanding of this aspect of the European Union.

The next item is Question Time (B5-0001/2001).

We will examine questions to the Council.

Subject: EU-China Summit In a new report the IOM reveals that the Chinese white slave mafia is very well organised and that women are being sold on markets throughout China.

The profits are comparatively high (often over EUR 30 000) and the IOM fears there will be a dramatic increase in trafficking in Chinese women both internally and to Western Europe in particular.

At the EU-China meeting on 23 October 2000 the European Council and Commission discussed the question of responsibility for the repatriation of illegal Chinese immigrants.

Did the Council also bring up the problem of the widespread trafficking in Chinese women and girls?

The Council felt that it was a very positive development to be able to open a dialogue with China concerning migration issues, particularly those concerning illegal migration and repatriation of Chinese citizens who have been found residing illegally on Member States' territory.

Prior to the summit meeting with China, a meeting was held in Brussels with officials from the country holding the presidency, the Commission and a Chinese delegation in order to identify and establish areas of possible future cooperation.

Particular emphasis was placed on the exchange of information between authorities and organisations working on issues concerning trafficking in human beings and illegal migration.

There are plans for further meetings of the same nature, and the next one will be held in Beijing in a few weeks' time.

Preparations for the meeting are currently under way at expert level.

As Mrs Theorin undoubtedly is aware, the European Council in Santa Maria da Feira expressed its concern regarding the tragic events in Dover last year and condemned the criminal acts committed by persons profiteering by such smuggling of human beings.

The European Council gave the Union the task of intensifying cooperation in order to combat such cross-border crime.

The French Presidency responded to the urgent request by the European Council and put forward several initiatives as elements in the fight against the criminal networks which organise smuggling and trafficking in human beings.

Even if the specific problem mentioned by Mrs Theorin was not discussed at the EU-China meeting on 23 October of last year, the Council is very much aware of the problem concerning trafficking in women and girls.

It is about trafficking not only from China, but also from certain other countries not far from the EU.

As the country holding the presidency, Sweden has, in the autumn of the year 2000 and in the context of the ASEM collaboration (in which China also takes part), raised the issue of trafficking in women and children.

The first step was an experts' meeting at the end of November last year attended by experts in the field from both Asia and Europe.

The recommendations from this meeting will be presented at ASEM' s meeting of Foreign Ministers in Beijing in May of this year.

Swedish Presidency, I am very pleased that this issue is being treated seriously by the Council, because it is extremely serious.

Tens of thousands of women and girls are bought and sold in China every year, many of them to the West.

The most popular areas are the poor provinces.

In a new report, IOM has stated that the authorities in the West have met with quite serious difficulties when they have tried to get to grips with trafficking in women from China, and that this trafficking will increase dramatically if forceful measures are not employed.

Trafficking in women is also rife within China.

As a direct consequence of the one-child policy and the preference of Chinese families for sons, there are currently 70 million unmarried men in China.

The International Coalition against Trafficking in Women reports on town councils buying hundreds of women who are then distributed to the single men in the town on the grounds that they are to be pitied.

It is a very good thing that you formed this council after the Dover scandal.

I wonder whether the expert organisations, for example IOM and the International Coalition against Trafficking in Women, will be included in this Council.

In what way is the Council prepared, by using its contacts with China, to bring the matter of trafficking in women in China to the fore?

There is every reason for the working parties which have now been appointed to quickly and effectively make contact, within the framework of the Union's work, with other international organisations working with these issues.

IOM is probably the organisation with the most expertise in the area.

I assume that such contacts will be established very quickly.

Allow me also to point out that the fight against trafficking in women is in general underlined as an important issue in the programme of the Swedish Presidency.

We will gladly work towards combating this dreadful phenomenon on a broad front, that is to say, not only with regard to China, but globally.

As the author is not present, Question No 2 lapses.

Subject: Facilities for EU citizens in Mecca In accordance with Article 20 of the EC Treaty, every citizen of the EU is entitled to protection in third countries by the consulate of another Member State if the citizen' s own country is not represented there. What facilities are provided by the EU for EU citizens in Mecca during the Haj?

The honourable Member should be made aware that two decisions have been adopted in application of Article 20 of the EC Treaty.

The first concerns assistance for citizens of the European Union from the diplomatic and consular representations.

The second relates to implementation measures for the aforementioned decisions.

The annex to this decision states the conditions under which the Member States' diplomatic representations may assist each EU citizen.

The United Kingdom is providing consular services in Mecca during the Haj pilgrimage.

There are several consulates in Jeddah which can assist EU citizens during the pilgrimage.

Mr President, I thank the Swedish representative for his reply but it does not satisfy my enquiry.

He is quite right to say that certain types of consular services are provided in Mecca during the Hajj by the UK Government for British Muslims.

However, those consular services are not available to Muslims from other EU Member States who would be there under the same terms and conditions operated by the Saudi authorities as UK Muslims.

It seems a little bizarre that whilst we are supposed to have equal representation and treatment for all EU citizens, in circumstances like the one I have described, there is unequal treatment and unequal representation for EU citizens.

Could the Swedish minister please assure us that he will take up this matter and examine circumstances in which this kind of unequal treatment takes place, to ensure that regardless of religion or nationality people receive the same treatment from consular services by individual Member States?

I can not only assure Mr Bowe that the matter will be taken up, I can even reassure him that his concern is somewhat unfounded.

The decision that I referred to previously stipulates that if the person seeking consular help is a citizen of one of the Member States of the European Union, the diplomatic or consular representation from another Member State shall treat the person seeking help as if he were a citizen of the Member State represented by the embassy or consulate.

There is therefore no need for the discriminatory situation feared by Mr Bowe to arise. Instead, an EU citizen will be treated equally.

I am convinced that, in this case, the United Kingdom's representation is acting with solidarity and treating all EU citizens equally.

This is at least stated in the decisions that have been taken.

Subject: Market monitoring and the EC labelling system Is it possible at present to guarantee an adequate level of efficient market monitoring with regard to compliance with the provisions of EC labelling at European level?

The Council is very keen to have effective market monitoring so that it is possible to be sure that the fundamental requirements of the directives relating to EC labelling and drawn up on the basis of the 'new approach' are complied with.

This approach is a new way of harmonising technical requirements for products in the directives.

The monitoring of how this EC labelling of products is used is a common concern for the Commission and the Member States.

It is primarily the Member States' responsibility to ensure, by means of approval or in some other way, that these bodies comply with the requirements for competence and that they operate effectively.

The Commission has been assigned a central role for ensuring uniformity and a high standard with regard to the monitoring bodies.

The supervisory bodies are national, and the Member States notify the Commission of which national bodies are to carry out the control.

In turn, the Commission sets up programmes to ensure that the market monitoring is organised in a uniform way between the Member States.

In order to monitor the new approach, the bodies whose names have been notified by the Member States will, for example, establish collaboration groups for each directive.

. (DE) Mr President, the EC label is an important factor of consumer protection.

But it is a purely quantitative measure.

All that is necessary is to prove compliance with existing European legal provisions.

That is certainly not enough for the consumer.

Consumers also want quality testing and certification procedures so that they can find out whether a product is of above-average standard and therefore also meets their requirements.

That is why third-party certification is quite crucial, especially for safety components.

We saw from the rail accident in Eschede that very serious accidents can occur if the railways only do their own monitoring, without any third-party certification.

Do you think that in future we should place more emphasis on third-party certification in the European Union?

As I said earlier in my initial reply to the honourable Member, in the first place it is the Commission which is to ensure uniformity with regard to the assessment of so-called compliances.

I would therefore like to propose that, in the first instance, the honourable Member turn to the Commission for any further information concerning this matter.

Subject: Hunger strike by political prisoners in Turkey The spectre of death is haunting dozens of political prisoners in Turkey who have been on a hunger strike to the death for the past two months in protest at the inhuman conditions in Turkish prisons.

At the same time, the Council of Europe has announced that torture continues to be standard practice in Turkish police stations, while Amnesty International has denounced the torture, the impunity and the general violation of human rights by Turkey and called on the European Union to demand an immediate end to torture and not in 2002-2003, as provided by the procedure for Turkey's accession to the Union.

Will the Council make representations to the Turkish Government to take measures to improve the situation in Turkish prisons so that the prisoners also end their hunger strike?

Will it adopt Amnesty International's call for an immediate end to torture in the context of the procedure for Turkey's accession to the European Union?

The Turkish Government is, in all probability, well aware of the Union's firm conviction that the situation in Turkish prisons needs to be improved and torture abolished.

The Council welcomes the fact that Turkey has begun a reform of the prison system and that the country is also willing to cooperate with the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture.

Torture is one of the most pressing problems in Turkey.

The Council has also given the issue priority in the draft partnership agreement that exists for the accession of Turkey, specifically by referring to strengthening legislation and taking all measures necessary to strengthen the fight against torture and to ensure that the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture is obeyed.

This means among other things that the Council expects Turkey to make significant progress in this area before the end of this year.

With regard to the standard of Turkish prisons, the EU has repeatedly demanded a prison system in Turkey which conforms to international standards.

Therefore, in its medium-term priorities in the draft partnership agreement for accession, the Council has included the requirement that conditions in Turkish prisons be changed to conform to the UN's rules as regards minimum standards for the treatment of prisoners.

With regard to the lives which have unfortunately been lost during the recent riots in Turkish prisons and the report on torture and abuse during the transport of prisoners, the European Union has raised the issue in bilateral contacts with Turkish authorities.

Naturally, the EU does not tolerate torture and abuse of prisoners.

In their contacts with the EU, the Turkish authorities have denied all allegations of torture and abuse.

The Council will, of course, continue to monitor the situation closely.

I too am one of the members who have huge hopes of the Swedish Presidency on the question of human rights, because it is the presidency of a country which has shown through its deeds that it has tremendous compassion and that it is revolted by opportunism when it comes to human rights issues.

And I should like to say that the President-in-Office's "yes, but" stance worries me somewhat saying that the Council will continue to monitor developments, that there may have been some unfortunate incidents, but Turkey has given its assurances that nothing is amiss.

I should like to ask the President-in-Office if, in the wake of this tragedy which we have watched unfold, with over 60 officially dead, with maltreatment, with people who may be in prison because they spoke in their mother tongue, with some 200 prisoners continuing their hunger strike, the Swedish Presidency will publicly take an initiative and demand explanations and undertakings from the Turkish Government and, likewise, if the Swedish Presidency will finally take an interest in securing the release of Leyla Zana, the MP awarded the Sakharov prize by this Parliament;

Allow me just to remind you that, according to the Council, the partnership agreement with Turkey, which currently exists in draft form, offers an excellent opportunity for continually 'keeping a tight reign' on Turkey when it comes to torture, the conditions in prisons and human rights in general.

The Council naturally intends to use all opportunities that exist within the framework of this agreement to ensure that developments in Turkey head in a direction which is compatible with the common values we hold in the EU.

A large proportion of the prisoners in Turkish prisons must be regarded as political prisoners.

In Turkey, people are also still being convicted on political grounds.

I was present myself at a trial on 21 December last year in Djarbakir in south-east Turkey where a Syrian priest was threatened with three years in prison for simply talking about the genocide committed against the Armenians and Assyrians in 1915.

This was his only 'crime' , and for this he was to be convicted.

Will the Council demand changes to Turkish criminal law and raise specific cases like this one, involving people being imprisoned on political grounds?

In actual fact, I can answer Mr Sjstedt's question in the same way as I answered the previous question.

In declaring Turkey an applicant country for membership of the EU, which was done at the Helsinki Summit, the EU now has completely new opportunities of closely following developments in Turkey and of pointing out every deviation from the standards which should apply to a candidate country.

I therefore see it as a very urgent task, also under the Swedish Presidency, to ensure that developments in Turkey proceed in such a way that we can gradually see the country draw nearer to the European family in a more concrete way than we have seen up to now.

Subject: Open Council meetings The Swedish Presidency has declared openness to be tremendously important to the work of the European Union.

How many of the Council meetings to be held during the Swedish Presidency between 1 January and 30 June 2001 will be completely open to the public?

As has undoubtedly also emerged from the presentation of the work programme by the Prime Minister a short while ago, the Swedish Presidency attaches particular importance to the work of the Council' s being open and accessible to European citizens and to legislative work' s being open to public scrutiny.

The Swedish Presidency is actively working towards making as many debates as possible open within the formal frameworks which apply.

The Council's Rules of Procedure do not permit completely public Council meetings, which is something Mr Sjstedt is also aware of.

However, public Council debates can be held.

In Helsinki in December 1999 the European Council decided that, on a half-yearly basis, the General Affairs Council and the Ecofin Council should hold public debates on the Council's work programme.

This decision has now been incorporated into the Council's Rules of Procedure.

Other Council constellations are also holding public debates.

One of the first priorities of the Swedish Presidency was therefore to draw up a list of public debates which were to cover as large an area as possible of the Council's work.

Therefore, we have now presented a list of the public debates which are to be held during our presidency.

Nine such debates will be held in what could be regarded as the important and central Council constellations beginning this Friday when Ecofin is to hold a debate on its work programme.

Following this, the debates continue during the first half of the year up to the last public debate in the Council (culture) which, in June, shall discuss the protection of minors against damaging content in the media.

With these measures, we have taken transparency in the work of the Council a step further.

There are undoubtedly further steps to be taken, but, Mr Sjstedt, do not allow the best to become the enemy of the good.

No, I shall not allow the best to become the enemy of the good.

It is just that if we continue at the pace of the Council of Ministers it will be a hundred years before we have public meetings for real.

Nine debates are actually not particularly impressive, if I may say so.

I think that it should be a matter of course in a democratic society for the citizens to have the right of access to their most important legislative body, and in the European Union that is of course largely the EU's Council of Ministers.

It is quite simply a fundamental demand for democracy.

If it is now the case that the Council's Rules of Procedure prevent even the voting and the entire Council meetings where the Council is, so to speak, legislating from being open, we ought to change these antiquated Rules of Procedure immediately.

Will there, therefore, be no such initiative from the Swedish Presidency, which is pursuing the issues relating to openness so intensely - which is something I regard as immensely important and positive?

As Mr Sjstedt is undoubtedly aware, the Swedish Presidency intends to use all the energy imaginable to try to move the situation forward with regard to the question of transparency during Sweden's half-year of holding the presidency.

We think that we are probably doing this with the increased number of debates that are open.

We can draw parallels with most national parliaments.

Take, for example, the Swedish Parliament.

The legislative work in the committees in the Swedish Parliament is not public but closed, and there are reasons for this.

There is a need to be able to agree politically, but there is of course also a need for maximum transparency.

I can assure you, Mr Sjstedt, that we will do all we can to move the situation forward, but Rome was not built in a day.

Even a long march begins with a small step.

Subject: Democracy and human rights in Belarus On a platform of shared values, the EU regards it as its duty to defend democracy, human rights and the rule of law.

Belarus, a neighbour of the applicant countries of Latvia, Lithuania and Poland, is a country in which none of the above three principles can be said to be upheld in an acceptable manner and there is clearly a risk that the effects may spread to the surrounding countries.

On 16 October 2000 in Minsk, the parliamentary troika of the EU, the Council of Europe and the OSCE delivered a sharply critical report on the lack of democracy in Belarus in connection with the elections held there.

The many people who have disappeared include former Interior Minister Yuriy Zakharenko, former Deputy Chairman Victor Gonchar, and the Russian film-maker, Dmitriy Zavadskiy.

What practical initiatives does the Swedish Presidency intend to take to promote an improvement in democracy in Belarus and what measures and steps will be taken to clarify what has happened to those who have disappeared?

Unfortunately, the honourable Member is absolutely right in saying that democracy, human rights and the principle of the rule of law are not respected in an acceptable way in Belarus.

The Council is well aware of the situation that has prevailed for a long time in that country and is following the developments very closely.

The EU has repeatedly appealed to the authorities in Belarus to respect international standards in these extremely important areas.

At the same time, the European Union has made the most of every opportunity to encourage the development of a healthy civil society in Belarus.

The Swedish Presidency will, with great resolve, continue the efforts of the previous presidencies to encourage improvement in democracy in Belarus.

The Council feels that it is only through such improvements that the people of Belarus can fully exercise their power over the future of the country.

By voting in a new president, the people will get the chance this year to take a crucial decision on what their future will hold.

Within the relevant frameworks, the Council will offer the democratic powers every encouragement to guarantee that voters have a real and credible choice of candidates.

The EU' s support of civil society, individual organisations and media is an important element in furthering democracy.

As a neighbour of Latvia, Lithuania and Poland, Belarus will soon border an enlarged EU.

Therefore, the Council is particularly keen that, in the long term, Belarus is established as a partner and it is also keen to ensure stability in the region as a whole.

Naturally, the Council has complete confidence that the new democracies in the applicant countries will more than cope with the challenges they may come up against.

The three countries mentioned have all played an important and active part through their bilateral diplomatic relations with Belarus.

Furthermore, they can serve as valuable examples to Belarus when it comes to success with regard to reforms and democracy.

Like these countries, the EU has maintained that a policy which aims to isolate Belarus would militate against its own objective.

Therefore, the EU has striven to keep the communication channels with the authorities in Belarus open and offer them incentives to improve relations.

At the same time, the Union has continued to exert pressure for the country to honour its commitments and to give the OSCE Assistance and Monitoring Group the freedom to act when it attempts to legitimately fulfil its task.

During the coming weeks, the Union will once more present its point of view directly to the authorities in Minsk.

The Union will, of course, also take this opportunity to raise the issue of people who have recently disappeared.

It is a great pleasure and honour to be able to welcome here Lars Danielsson and the Swedish Presidency.

The Swedish language, the language of honour and heroes, has probably never before flowed in this House as it is doing today.

My warm thanks for your reply.

At this point I would like to take up some attendant issues.

They concern the political union which exists in reality between Belarus and Poland and the extent to which the Swedish Presidency is also putting pressure on Russia, as part of a political union with Belarus, to realise the democratic implications, and the implications for its status in the international community, of being in a union with a country which can hardly be described as a democracy.

You mentioned the presidential election in Belarus in 2001.

But 20 percent of the candidates in the so-called parliamentary election last autumn - I was there myself as an observer - were dismissed.

I would also like to emphasise the value of the EU taking action so as to avoid a proliferation effect.

We are, of course, noticing a disturbing development, Mr Danielsson, in the neighbouring country of Ukraine.

We cannot underestimate the possibility of what is happening in Belarus spreading, for we should never forget that the regime in Minsk in fact has blood on its hands.

I think that it is absolutely right to see the development in Belarus, as Mr Sacrdeus does, in conjunction with the development in Russia and the development in Ukraine.

In the work programme concerning the cooperation between the EU and Russia which the presidency will present in the General Affairs Council on Monday next week, there is much talk of the need for discussions with Russia concerning the situations in the neighbouring countries of Belarus and Ukraine.

We hope that we will encounter rather more understanding on the part of Russia, also with regard to Russia's responsibility when it comes to actually being able to influence the development in Belarus in a positive way.

We will then combine this with the urgent efforts that I described earlier in my initial reply.

We think that it is important to influence Belarus, which is of course closer to the rest of Europe perhaps than many people think if they have not looked properly at the map.

It is absolutely essential that we take every opportunity, on the part of the Union, to bring about a development towards democracy in Belarus.

Subject: Women persecuted without asylum or refuge In some countries women suffer cruel persecution and punishment, basic human rights violations which may involve mutilation and may cost them their lives.

In many cases, this is a consequence of the application of fundamentalist laws or the carrying-out of ancestral practices and traditions.

The European Union says that it intends to protect women from such unacceptable persecution and punishment, but it has not yet found a way of translating its declarations into political actions and decisions offering grounds for hope.

Would the Council be in favour of the adoption of measures whereby such situations afflicting women might be considered grounds for granting asylum and refuge, in political terms, in the European Union?

The Council's bodies are well aware of the type of persecution and mutilation which the honourable Member mentioned in her question.

Within Cirea, i.e. the Centre for Information, Reflection and Exchange on Asylum, the situation in asylum seekers' different countries of origin is monitored continually.

The factors which are discussed here will be taken into account when the Member States deal with asylum applications from those who have been subjected to such acts of cruelty.

It should, however, be pointed out that the experience from the studies which Cirea has carried out shows that women who are subjected to violence, rape or mutilation do not always give these reasons as the main grounds for their asylum application.

As the honourable Member will undoubtedly recall, agreement was reached at the Tampere Summit in 1999 to work towards establishing a common European asylum system based on a complete and absolute application of the Geneva Convention guaranteeing that no-one is sent back to be subjected to persecution, and that this system should include an approximation of the rules for the recognition and content of refugee status.

The Council has also agreed that this system should be supplemented by measures for other forms of protection which provide a suitable status for those in need of such protection.

In December of last year, the Council was united in reaching a number of conclusions concerning how asylum seekers should be received.

These conclusions, which will form the basis for the proposal for a Council directive which the Commission will table in the spring, contain, among other things, provisions stating that host Member States shall provide specialist health care to asylum seekers who have been subjected to torture, rape or other serious acts of cruelty.

The Council is now awaiting the Commission's proposal and, when it arrives, the Swedish Presidency intends to treat it as a priority issue.

The Commission has also expressed its intention to table a proposal later this year for rules for the recognition and content of refugee status and supplementary forms of protection.

The question of how gender-based persecution will be considered in this connection within the Union will undoubtedly be the subject of thorough analysis.

I would like to ask the President-in-Office of the Council whether he is in favour of women being treated as individuals, for the purposes of visas and asylum requests in the European Union, without having to be dependent on a husband or guardian.

Mr President-in-Office of the Council, are you in favour of our treating women asking for a visa or for asylum as people in their own right?

I would appreciate an answer, one I hope will be yes.

Naturally, I am in favour of such a scheme.

Each individual will of course be treated precisely as an individual.

We must also remember that in many asylum cases we are dealing with family reunions of different kinds.

In that case it may mean that if part of a family has been granted asylum, that will affect the consideration of asylum for other members of the same family.

Then we are, of course, deviating slightly from the principle of individual treatment, but the basic answer to the MEP' s question is: yes.

Subject: Iraq and the lifting of sanctions Will the Council, under the Swedish Presidency, indicate what level of priority it attaches to the situation in Iraq and, in particular, will it make a clear commitment to press for the lifting of sanctions affecting the health and welfare of men, women and children?

The living conditions of the Iraqi people, together with the endeavour to achieve lasting security and stability in the area, are the most important issues for the Council with regard to its policy towards Iraq.

The Council is at present examining the possibilities open to the Union for making a contribution in the humanitarian and cultural sphere within the framework of existing resolutions concerning Iraq from the UN Security Council.

This concerns in particular the resolution on the oil for food programme.

But it is also important for the Iraqi Government to cooperate in order for such a programme to be implemented.

Of course, the European Union will also in the future fully apply the resolutions drawn up by the UN Security Council against Iraq.

Resolution 1284 from 1999 provides the opportunity to lift the sanctions, provided the Iraqi Government cooperates fully with the UN inspectors responsible for disarmament in Iraq.

In this connection the Council also notes and welcomes the establishment of a working party within the UN which will draw up general recommendations on improving UN sanctions, on how they are to be better directed and on how to avoid unnecessary human suffering.

I should like to thank the President-in-Office for his answer and also to wish him well for the Swedish Presidency.

However, as a follow-up to what he has already stated, does the presidency feel that the operation of the Compensation Commission on Iraq, which is based in Geneva, should continue?

As you know, this commission also deals with the question of reparations in the aftermath of the Gulf War.

We have already seen the negative effects in publicity terms of the sanctions and how they are being used by Saddam Hussein to beat Western Europe, as well as the Americans and the UN, and to rally his people back.

The statement last night was that this was a victory of good over evil and that Saddam Hussein was good and the rest of the world was evil.

We are playing into his hands by ensuring that people are denied access to medicines, food and the other necessities of life.

I think it is important to remember that the fundamental prerequisites for being able to lift the sanctions against Iraq are that the Iraqi regime cooperates fully, in particular with the UN's inspectors, with regard to the control of whether Iraq still has access to weapons of mass destruction.

This is also the decisive point for the Union when it comes to discussing possible changes to the sanctions.

As regards the UN Compensation Committee based in Geneva, which, as you know, has been working since the Gulf War to settle claims resulting from the war, I think it is sensible to wait for an assessment from the UN of how this work is continuing before we in the Union take a stand on whether or not this activity will continue.

Allow me to stress that I believe it to be necessary for us in the Union, from a general point of view, to contribute to this discussion of principle on the sanctions instrument itself and its effects.

We have many examples today of good political grounds for introducing sanctions against a particular country, but we have difficulty in ensuring that these sanctions actually affect those we want them to affect, i.e. the governments in these countries.

I think that, on the part of the Council, there is every reason, both as regards Iraq and in general, to continue the discussion on the form the sanctions instrument should take.

As the author is not present, Question No 10 lapses.

Mrs Ferrer asked me to take over her question and said she would inform the relevant service accordingly.

Mr Van Hecke, according to the Rules of Procedure, a written note should have been sent to indicate that you were taking over the question, as has been done in the case of Mr Crowley.

I must apply the Rules of Procedure.

My hands are tied in this matter.

Since they deal with the same subject, Questions Nos 11 and 12 will be taken together.

Question No 11 by Glenys Kinnock (H-0983/00):

Could the Council give an assessment of the progress, or otherwise, being made through their policy of 'constructive engagement' with the military regime in Rangoon?

Question No 12 by Richard Corbett (H-1004/00):

What is the Council' s reaction to the ASEAN meeting of 24 November 2000 at which the ASEAN leaders reportedly insisted that EU meetings with ASEAN must involve all ten ASEAN member states, including Burma?

Does the Council agree that repression in Burma has actually worsened since the strengthening of the EU common position in April 2000 and that it remains inappropriate to engage in cooperative ministerial discussions with representatives of that regime?

The Council shares the honourable Members' concerns regarding the situation in Burma/Myanmar, including the new restrictions which have been introduced against the National League for Democracy during recent months.

The Council also notes the recent relatively positive development thanks to the endeavours made by the United Nations Secretary-General's Special Envoy for Burma, Tan Sri Razali Ismail, and the opening of a channel for dialogue between Aung San Sui Kyi and the military junta.

The Council has on a number of occasions expressed its concern in statements and initiatives and in the EU's Common Position of 1996.

The Council has also repeatedly demanded that human rights be respected and specific measures taken towards democracy and national reconciliation.

The Council would hardly describe its policy as constructive engagement, but rather as an attempt to achieve change by applying pressure by means of sanctions and through dialogues.

As the honourable Member, Richard Corbett, reminded us, the EU's Common Position was tightened significantly in April of last year in the light of the Council's concern over the worsening situation in Burma/Myanmar.

At the same time, the Council agreed to send another troika mission to Rangoon.

It seems now as if the mission will be undertaken later this month.

The Union has made it clear, including at the last ministerial meeting between the EU and Asean in Vientiane in December of last year, that they are expecting the EU troika to be given the same opportunities to meet all the parties involved, whether they are from the Government, the National League for Democracy or ethnic minorities.

The ministerial meeting in Vientiane, which Burma/Myanmar participated in, presented an appropriate opportunity not only to strengthen the bonds which unite the EU and Asean but also to express the Union's concern regarding the situation in Burma/Myanmar directly to the Burmese foreign minister.

The Council also welcomes the fact that, in the Common Position which was agreed on in Vientiane, both the EU and Asean undertake to support the United Nations Secretary-General's Special Envoy for Burma, Tan Sri Razali Ismail, in his efforts to bring about positive change in Burma.

Mr President, may I also welcome the Presidency-in-Office.

I appreciate the answer but I do have to ask, with the knowledge that of course Aung San Suu Kyi has been under virtual house arrest now for about 120 days: how can you suggest that a prisoner is able to carry out a meaningful dialogue or negotiation with her jailer?

Secondly, should not she and the NLD actually be offered basic freedoms before we are prepared to embrace the SPDC in this way?

You say that the troika will have access to areas and to as many individuals as it wants.

Are you imposing conditions on this troika visit, which would mean that they are absolutely obligated to give that kind of access?

Finally, just one last sceptical comment: in 1994 Aung San Suu Kyi did have some negotiation with the SLORC, as they were called then, and they said all the time that she was being far too inflexible, this woman is impossible to deal with because she keeps asking us to respect the results of the 1990 election.

I wonder whether you are concerned that they might be still playing games with the European Union and the international community and they will again say: "look, this woman is impossible."

Firstly, allow me say that I naturally fully share the concern expressed by Mrs Kinnock regarding the situation in Burma/Myanmar.

The Council has the same basic opinion as that expressed by Mrs Kinnock in her question, namely that it is obvious that we must impose stringent conditions on Burma/Myanmar with regard to human rights.

I would like to remind you that the European Union is active in several areas with regard to the fight for human rights in that country.

The Union is active within the ILO, in the UN Human Rights Commission and in the UN General Assembly.

A condition for the contacts I have described and those which we hope to be able to make at the planned visit with the troika is of course that we receive full access to all so-called parties in Burma/Myanmar.

This goes without saying, but unfortunately we can now see that the situation in Burma/Myanmar is also getting more unsettled for other reasons.

There are obviously border conflicts going on now between Bangladesh and Myanmar, which could also affect the situation within Burma/Myanmar.

So, allow me to assure you that the Council fully shares Mrs Kinnock's concern with regard to the situation.

This does not in any way mean that we should dance to the tune of the Burmese Government.

We are making strong demands for complete accessibility, with regard to both the NLD and ethnic minorities.

The latter must not, of course, be forgotten in this connection.

Thank you for that very comprehensive answer.

As you know, the next ministerial meeting between the EU and the ASEAN countries is due to take place in Europe.

At the moment we have a ban against travel into any of the EU Member States by any member of the military regime in Burma and their families.

They will, therefore, not be able to take part in that meeting.

ASEAN countries are pressuring the Union to lift that ban.

Can I have your assurance that you will not give in to such pressure?

The Council does not give in to pressure.

The Council has still not made a decision regarding Burmese participation in the forthcoming ministerial meeting between the EU and Asean which Mr Corbett referred to.

The Council will eventually make a decision on the basis of the Common Position approved by the Union concerning relations with Burma/Myanmar.

I can assure Mr Corbett that we probably have exactly the same opinion regarding what is necessary for the Council to be able to accept Burmese participation in this ministerial meeting.

Subject: Fisheries and Swedish Presidency Will the Council, under the Swedish Presidency, outline what level of importance it attaches to the fisheries sector having regard, in this connection, to the extremely difficult situation being experienced at present by fishermen in Ireland and other EU countries and will it outline its priorities with regard to the next development programme for the fishing fleet for the period 2002 - 2006?

It is not clear from the honourable Member' s question whether it is directed at the Council or the Swedish Presidency.

Nevertheless, I am pleased to be able to take the opportunity, as also requested by the honourable Member, briefly to mention a few priorities with regard to the future policy for the Community's fishing fleet.

Firstly, allow me to say that the presidency attaches great importance to the common fisheries policy and that we are fully aware of the difficult situation faced by the fishing industry after the drastic cuts in quotas etc. at the Council's meeting in December of last year.

However, the cuts were necessary in the light of the situation regarding fish stocks, particularly with regard to cod and hake, and which also affected a number of other species.

As the Council sees it, the obvious remedy for this situation in the long term is to establish a lasting balance between the fishing capacity and the available resources in order to enable a lasting and sustainable utilisation of living marine resources and to safeguard the future livelihood of the fishermen.

The presidency therefore intends to arrange a general debate in the Council on the follow-up to the development programmes which have been taking place over several years once the fourth of these development programmes has been completed on 31 December 2001.

The Commission will table its proposals in the near future.

We are well aware that a balance has not been achieved by the present programmes and that they have been controversial in certain quarters.

In addition to the structural problems which were specifically mentioned in the question, the presidency's priorities also include starting work on the Commission's green paper on the future of the common fisheries policy and drawing up a proposal from the presidency on fishing and the environment, i.e. the integration of environmental issues and the principle of sustainable development in the common fisheries policy.

This is part of the Cardiff process, and the Council is obliged to present such a document at the meeting of the European Council in Gothenburg.

The presidency does not consider there to be much scope for taking support measures to the advantage of an individual Member State. Rather, the common fisheries policy ought to be developed for the benefit of the fishing sector throughout the Union.

It has surely not escaped the attention of the honourable Member that the drastic cuts in fishing opportunities will be followed by plans for the restoration of the threatened stocks.

In this connection we have invited the European Parliament to cooperate by submitting its opinion in January on the proposal for a recovery plan for cod in the Irish Sea, and these measures can come into effect as early as 14 February 2001.

We appreciate the work the European Parliament has done in this regard but we are still not convinced that this will actually become reality.

I hope, therefore, that Parliament is willing to cooperate with the Council on this point.

Thank you for your response and also for giving us a few more moments.

I am delighted that you have been so realistic as to describe the cuts as drastic, because that is all they can be described as.

However, I also realise that it is necessary to have cuts in order to ensure that we have sufficient resources for this generation and, indeed, future generations.

I refer to your comments on recovery plans.

I would ask you to assure us that you will make every effort to ensure that when the recovery plans are being discussed it is not only the scientists but also the stakeholders and the fishermen who will be involved in these discussions.

All the fishermen I know are realists and they realise that it is necessary to have closed areas to protect the breeding grounds.

In short, can you give us an assurance that you will make an effort to have the fishermen involved in any recovery plans?

I fully agree with the honourable Member' s view.

When we discuss such important issues, it is important that all parties concerned are able to take part in the discussion in an appropriate way.

I think that it is quite obvious that this type of discussion should have a scientific basis, but all those involved, including representatives of the fishermen, should of course have the opportunity to participate in it.

I can therefore assure you that, as far as the presidency is concerned, we will do all we can to ensure that there is a thorough discussion with as many of those involved with these important issues as possible.

I should just like to ask the President-in-Office if there will be compensation available because of the cuts and what effect this will have on the livelihoods of fishermen?

Are there any proposals for compensation to fishermen?

The question raised by the honourable Member is, of course, very important, particularly for the fishermen who are affected.

However, I am afraid that the question has been directed to the wrong person, i.e. the President-in-Office of the Council.

This is, as we see it, a question which should preferably be directed to the Commission, which is responsible for this area.

Thank you very much, Mr Danielsson, for having done more than your duty in this first Question Time.

Since the time allotted to Questions to the Council has elapsed, Questions Nos 14 to 22 will be answered in writing.

Questions Nos 23 and 24 will not be taken since their subject is included in the agenda for the current part-session.

That concludes Questions to the Council.

(The sitting was suspended at 7.43 p.m. and resumed at 9.00 p.m.)

The next item is the report (A5-0393/2000) by Mr Simpson, on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism, on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation amending Council Regulation (EEC) No 3922/91 on the harmonisation of technical requirements and administrative procedures in the field of civil aviation.

Mr President, I have been given a very generous eight minutes on my report here in front of this packed Chamber this evening - I suspect that is because many people find this report quite technical and detailed.

Whilst drawing up the second liberalisation package in 1989, the Council and the Commission agreed that Community air transport policy had to address the harmonisation of the regulatory framework applicable to civil aviation.

Subsequently, Council Regulation 3922/91 was established in which the technical requirements, known as Joint Aviation Requirements, formulated by the JAA, were given the force of law within the Community.

It is against this background that the Joint Aviation Requirements, known as JAR-OPS, agreed by the JAA in 1995, are now being transposed into European Union law.

This in itself has proved to be a difficult exercise.

But the Community has committed itself to adopting harmonised safety requirements for the operation of aircraft.

In this regard, the JAR-OPS 1 Regulation constitutes a good basis from which we can work, with minimum changes, in order to amend the appropriate regulations.

However, there are areas in which Parliament needs to act.

Firstly, in regard to cabin crew.

Operators should have the responsibility for training, but this should be done on a harmonised basis, with a distinct, uniform, European-wide certification system which would be accepted by all Member States.

There is no doubt in my mind that in most cases the operators are best qualified to organise training.

But this should not preclude other qualified organisations from having the possibility to do training, providing, of course, that all training is approved by the National Civil Aviation Authorities.

In addition, the cabin crew directive should now be incorporated into this regulation.

Secondly, the difficult issue of flight time limitation was not addressed by the Commission.

The relevant part, known as Subpart Q, is missing. This is nonsensical, because you cannot have a directive which purports to have safety as a major part of it leaving out the issue of duty time for cockpit crews.

In this area, the social partners have been trying to reach an agreement for ten years.

Ten years and no agreement must be a failure by any measurement you wish to adopt.

However, the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism recognise that the best people to deal with this problem are indeed the trade unions and the airline operators and, in a spirit of compromise, have agreed to give all sides until 1 May 2001 to reach an agreement that will form the text of a new Subpart Q.

However, should they fail in their endeavours then, at the second reading stage, Parliament, through the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism, will act and legislate in this area.

I am hopeful that the relevant social partners will reach an agreement. I am grateful to them for their current efforts.

Amendments have been proposed that also look at the problem of cabin baggage.

Sadly, airlines at present do not strictly enforce cabin baggage regulations, which has led to passengers bringing more and more bags into airline cabins.

Amendment No 16 addresses this problem, which was highlighted to me by the cabin crew themselves and even some airlines.

I find it totally amazing that groups in Parliament will vote against this amendment.

This is a safety issue, and as their rapporteur I would ask them to seriously reconsider their opinion.

This amendment is totally acceptable to all airlines and cabin crew and it in no way stops passengers having cabin baggage.

What it does is stop the excessive cabin baggage which has led to passengers being injured from luggage falling out of overhead bins; to passengers having restricted access in case of emergency evacuation procedures and, which I know from my own experience, to aircraft toilets being used to carry bags.

Whilst I appreciate that MEPs are amongst the worst culprits for excessive cabin baggage, I would hope their sense of responsibility would enable them to recognise that a problem exists, that this problem compromises safety and that Amendment No 16 should be supported.

I believe that the report before us is worth supporting.

However, in conclusion, I feel I must reiterate the warning I made earlier that we need an agreement on flight time limitation before 1 May from our social partners.

If they can deliver that agreement for us, then I believe we will have a document that we can rightly be proud of.

I have to say that if they fail in their endeavours, I am sure Parliament will feel obliged to act on their behalf.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, Mr Simpson, we have to agree with much of what you said.

It is true that it became clear in 1989 with the liberalisation package that the European Community must not only ensure fair competition but must also ensure safety in aviation.

The present amendment of the regulation aims to do that and I think it is right for the European institutions to clearly assume their responsibility.

That means that if we are responsible for regulating aviation safety in Europe, we must also take the appropriate action.

But at the same time we must also make it clear that Parliament and political bodies such as the Commission and the Council should not disregard the vote of experts.

So I very much welcome the fact that we held a very pragmatic debate in committee and nobody really tried to enter into the details of the technical rules or, so to speak, to put political knowledge above the knowledge of the experts.

You quite rightly also pointed out, and I think that is quite clear, that we need rules on duty time, and I myself am surprised that in spite of this long process the social partners have still not managed to put rules together.

That is why I also think it is right for us as Parliament to make it clear once again that we expect the social partners airlines and employees' representatives to fulfil their obligation.

We are prepared to introduce this into the regulation too, at second reading.

On the other hand, we are equally prepared to put our own rules in place if the social partners do not fulfil their obligation. For one thing is quite clear: safety in aviation must take priority.

Yet safety in aviation cannot be ensured just by having rules, especially not overarching rules.

That is why I also say quite plainly: however much we can agree with large sections of the report, we do not consider it appropriate for Parliament to introduce its own detailed provisions into this regulation in certain areas under the heading, for instance, of "one cabin crew member operations" or length of experience, i.e. how long someone has already served as a cabin crew member.

So unfortunately we will not be able to vote for your Amendments Nos 9 and 10, which concern such proposals.

I was somewhat surprised to see how intently the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism considered and discussed the question of hand baggage.

In my view that is not an issue for a parliament to discuss and I can only say to Mr Simpson and my other colleagues: let the airlines regulate that; it is not the job of Members.

Mr President, Mr Simpson, Commissioner, I hoped for a moment, just after seeing the news - and in fact things were looking a bit that way - that we would start with a debate on fox hunting, which will doubtless prove to be an extremely lively debate in Britain' s House of Commons this evening.

We are also going to be discussing dangerous matters here.

We highlighted one particular aspect recently at any rate, that of the flight time of pilots, and we also put questions to the Commissioner on the subject at an earlier stage.

I am delighted that a situation has arisen in the meantime in which the partners have had it pointed out to them once again that they still have the chance to enter into consultation or reach agreements.

If they do not do so then, as others have already said, this will automatically mean asking the Commission to draw up legislation in this area which will at least prevent accidents from occurring as a result of pilots spending too long at the controls.

Research from which we once obtained answers now takes too long, and these negotiations could speed this up, and perhaps in time we will gain an even better understanding of what all the important factors might be.

One aspect that we did not raise during the discussions, because it only came into play later on, is the one that we have also tabled an amendment on, namely that of long haul flights.

It is becoming increasingly apparent - and claims to this effect are now being made not only in Australia, but also in England, concerning British Airways - that long haul flights can cause people to develop thromboses.

We cannot yet be completely certain of this, nor do we have all the relevant facts in our possession yet, but we recognise the seriousness of the situation all the same, and wonder if it would not be sensible to request the Commission - via an amendment in this case, otherwise we will do so using other means - to come up with some initiatives on this front.

Finally, and this is something we have given no thought to hitherto, there is the fact that some aviation companies with large aircraft are starting to fly at a higher altitude, which also produces symptoms of illness.

We will revisit this issue at a later stage.

Mr President, Mr Simpson's report is truly excellent, and I am qualified to say so for I consider myself to be one of the few people who are familiar with the technical as well as the political side of the sector, having recorded almost 10 000 flight hours precisely as a member of a flight crew before devoting myself to politics.

I would point out that safety is the priority in air transport.

Safety can be considered to be based on two elements: the technical element, such as the resources, aircraft, airports, radio aid, air traffic control and so on and so forth, and then the human element, which is extremely important and, although not the principal cause, has been found to be a contributing factor in an extremely high percentage of aircraft accidents. The human element is, of course, extremely complex and, for simplicity's sake, can be divided into two main categories.

One of these is training, and in this area all the appropriate controls and checks must be carried out. I can say from my own experience that flight crews are properly trained for, apart from anything else, there are no substandard pilots.

As a general rule, substandard pilots do not fly: they are all resting in peace underground.

The problems here are enormous: on the one hand, there is the need to make both aircraft and staff fly as much as possible, and on the other, there is the need to avoid pushing human beings, especially, beyond their physical and mental limits.

Sleep, the disruption of circadian rhythms and so on clearly influence flight safety as well as the personal health of the members of the flight and cabin crews.

Here, then, is the gap in the regulation, for it considers primarily the technical aspect of the resources - aircraft load factors, loading operations, length of runways, screen heights etc. but it is effectively lacking in any provisions on the workloads of the staff.

I am not talking as a trade unionist here but precisely as a user of air transport who would dearly like to have a guarantee - although I regret that a 100% guarantee is impossible - which is as high as possible and avoids excessive exploitation of the human element which is liable to have serious or even fatal consequences.

Another factor to be taken into consideration is competition.

If there are no standard rules, some of the airlines who exploit their staff will be able to reduce their costs and therefore offer more competitive prices, distorting what ought to be fair competition in a sector which is now almost completely liberalised.

However, we could even go so far as to talk of unfair or irregular competition if this factor were not taken into account, and I wonder at the fact that neither the Union as a whole nor Parliament, specifically, has succeeded in regulating the matter satisfactorily.

Parliament should feel truly ashamed at not having managed to express a clear opinion or produce an effective definition of all aspects of the issue.

Mr President, Vice-President of the Commission, I consider this regulation extremely important and after all the European Parliament has been calling for an improvement in aviation safety since 1987.

That means we must also regulate the flight and rest times of the cockpit crew as of the cabin crew.

I agree with the previous speakers that we should give the unions and the airlines a last chance to settle this issue between themselves, working jointly and pragmatically.

Of course we have agreed that they must reach an agreement by May next year.

Madam Vice-President, please tell your services that if they have not done so by the end of May we will no longer play the game that has been played for six years, namely with the Commission waiting for the parties to reach agreement.

But they have not reached agreement. The Commission behaved very politely and did not make any proposals of its own.

Either the parties agree by May, or we expect the Commission to put forward a proposal that we can incorporate in the second reading. For it is unacceptable not to regulate a question that is crucial to passenger safety, namely whether the captains, the crews, have had enough rest to be able to carry out their duties.

Let me address a second point that caught my attention at the December Council meeting.

If we adopt a position at first reading, in fact at Parliament's final vote tomorrow, then I insist as I am sure my colleagues will also do on the Council deciding a common position.

It can wait till May, till the two parties have reached agreement.

But in the interests of passenger safety in Europe we cannot accept no decisions being taken on aviation until the supposed settlement of the Gibraltar conflict.

The Commission and Parliament should jointly see to that.

Mr President, as mentioned in 1989, the Council and the Commission agreed that they had to address the harmonisation of the regulatory framework applicable to civil aviation in order to maintain a high level of safety and to ensure fair competition in the internal market.

Hence, the Community adopted Council Regulation 3922/91.

This regulation listed a number of technical requirements - JARs - produced by the Joint Aviation Authority.

It was not the purpose of this regulation to re-open a debate on the substance of JAR: the purpose was to ensure harmonisation.

In addition, it should be recognised that JAR-OPS has been implemented on a national basis and is applicable to European countries outside the EU.

Therefore changes must be kept to a minimum as there cannot be two different sets of operational regulations in force across Europe.

The Commission's original proposal highlighted four areas which were found to be incompatible in EU law: exemptions, leasing, registration and cabin crew training.

Unfortunately, the debate so far has centred on cabin baggage and flight time limitations for flight crew.

On the first point - cabin baggage - the amendments are anti-competitive and cannot apply to third-country carriers.

Sufficient regulation is already in place, which does not allow on board hand baggage which cannot be safely stowed - I can vouch for that as a cabin crew member for 26 years.

On my second point - flight time limitations, which are already highly regulated and agreed through national governments - civil aviation is now included in working time regulation.

Irrespective of the decision taken on 1 May, this issue would have to be referred back to national governments for further discussion.

It is not for Parliament to legislate on flight time limitations.

Finally, I believe that in future safety and highly technical reports such as this should be subject to a simplified procedure in order to process necessary changes more speedily.

Mr President, Commissioner, there are some things that are not quite as we would wish them to be in European aviation.

Last year, in particular, showed us repeatedly that it is high time to find more common European solutions to ensure that flying in European airspace follows orderly lines again, not to speak of the great dream of limitless freedom above the clouds conjured up by Reinhard Mey.

But first and foremost, flying must be safe.

We all want flying to remain safe, to see further improvements here in the forefront the rapporteur, Mr Simpson, to whom we owe thanks for an excellent report.

There are, however, different views on how to achieve greater safety.

I and luckily I am not alone in my view would hope that we leave the practical task of regulating the safety provisions, especially in regard to cabin crew and the accompanying provisions on crew training, to the European Aviation Safety Authority.

Surely it should be enough for the European legislator to set out the objectives, rather than getting bogged down in too much detail.

Unfortunately, this position did not gain consistent majority support in committee.

As a result the text we will be voting on tomorrow includes some rather too detailed provisions, for instance on the kind of training course required and so forth.

Perhaps less would be more in this case.

Be that as it may, Europe still has a great deal to do on the question of aviation.

As we saw in Nice on a very general basis, here too on a more specific basis we could plead for fewer national solutions and a more European approach.

The Simpson report is a good step along this road.

Let us take that step tomorrow and then pursue it further in a politically convincing manner.

Mr President, Vice-President of the Commission, in the past, Parliament has continually demonstrated its commitment to the harmonisation of safety standards at the highest possible level for the Union.

Now it must continue to do so, and to ensure, as a matter of urgency, that this is clearly visible to the European citizens, who every year continue to suffer the problems of the European area.

We all agree that the objective is to successfully do away with national discrepancies in order to arrive at a set of common safety standards at the highest possible level.

Air safety cannot be confined to European Union territory, and it is important for European citizens who travel or live near airports to be confident that aircraft from third countries fulfil all the necessary safety criteria.

The Union must therefore have control methods to ensure that, in accordance with international regulations, third country aircraft arriving at our airports comply with international safety regulations.

This means common control methods and technical and administrative organisation and support.

It is therefore inevitable that safety in this sector should become a matter for international cooperation within the framework of the different instruments for technical assistance and support for investment in third countries.

Mr President, I will end by pointing out the need to assist the Commission in its work in this very complicated field and the priority which must be given to creating the European Air Safety Agency, as well as the need for independent regulations, which we are currently considering, on issues relating to rest periods for aircrew.

Mr President, I would firstly like to thank Mr Simpson for his magnificent work as rapporteur on this proposal.

I believe that his work has contributed a considerable amount to this Parliament' s understanding of a very technical and complex proposal and it is of course no easy task to translate it into a language which is accessible to the average citizen.

In this respect I believe that he has been very successful.

Having said that, the amendment we are proposing to the Regulation currently in force has twin objectives: firstly, it intends to move forward with the harmonisation of the regulatory system in the field of safety in civil aviation by extending it to the harmonisation of the operational requirements for aircraft; secondly, it intends to establish procedures which will allow the Community to manage the variables and exceptions which the Member States are obliged to adopt from time to time as a result of operational needs.

With regard to technical requirements, the report mainly deals with two aspects.

In accordance with JAA regulations, which lay down the requirements, the Commission' s proposal does not contain any provisions on flight and duty times or on rest periods.

This is a very controversial issue and the reality is that no agreement has been reached in this regard within the JAA.

Of course, the Commission hopes that the negotiators representing the operators and the crews will be successful, and Mr Simpson has urged them to reach a voluntary agreement on safety systems relating to flight and duty times and rest periods.

If they are not capable of reaching agreements by May, we will then have to consider whether or not we should act.

In any event, of the relevant amendments, the Commission accepts the spirit of Amendments Nos 12, 13 and 17, but with a different wording.

With regard to Amendment No 1, the Commission shares Parliament' s desire to regulate the safety of flight and duty times and rest periods, but prefers that compliance with this objective not only be pursued by means of the specific proposal that we are debating today.

There are other possibilities, such as amending the Regulation after the adoption of the present proposal.

I would like to add that any proposal presented by the Commission in the future will have to guarantee the high level of safety that we all wish to see.

Therefore, if the Commission makes use of the voluntary agreement between the negotiators, to which I have just referred, to produce a proposal, it would amend the agreement where necessary in order to achieve the necessary high level of safety.

With this reservation, I repeat, the Commission accepts the spirit of Amendment No 1.

Various amendments have also been adopted on the requirements applicable to cabin crews.

While this proposal deals with the operational requirements of cabin crews, the training and professional qualification requirements are the subject of a separate and supplementary Commission proposal.

We must take care to ensure that the two texts are in agreement and compatible with one another.

Amendments Nos 9 and 10 can be accepted without changes, but the wording of Amendments Nos 6, 7, 8 and 11 will have to be modified, as well as Amendments Nos 12, 13 and 17, which we now accept only in principle, and their wording will also have to be modified.

Finally, the amendments on technical requirements, specifically Amendments Nos 4, 5 and 16, are acceptable, although the final text of Amendment No 4 will reflect the solution to the problem in question as found by the Council.

In relation to the procedures for the approval of temporary variables and exceptions, the Commission does not accept Amendments Nos 2, 14 and 15.

The Commission is already under institutional obligation to carry out the consultations laid down in the amendments.

Likewise, Amendment No 3 must be rejected, since derogation of the Regulation is envisaged once the European Air Safety Agency has been created.

Lastly, with regard to Amendment No 18, the two issues it addresses are concerned more with the health of passengers than the operational safety of flights.

As was mentioned in the Communication on the protection of air passengers, the Commission intends to establish groups of experts to examine the risks to passengers' health, including those resulting from cosmic radiation, with the aim of determining what these risks are and proposing the necessary measures.

With regard to the specific issue of arterial thrombosis - which has been raised by some of you - the Commission has written to the airlines to request that they provide passengers with information on the risks, on factors for predisposition and on what they can do to minimise those risks, specifically in relation to the problem of thrombosis and in relation to health problems in general.

The Commission considers that such information would be a very valid precaution and that it would be appropriate in terms of improving passengers' rights.

The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon.

The next item is the report (A5-0381/2000) by Mrs Hedkvist Petersen, on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism, on the proposal for a European Parliament resolution on the Communication from the Commission to the Council, the European Parliament, the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions: Priorities in EU Road Safety - Progress Report and Ranking of Actions.

Mr President, 40,000 fatalities on Europe' s roads is 40,000 too many.

This Chamber reacts with sensitivity to all the events taking place around the world, but we do not give sufficient attention to the Grim Reaper at work on the roads of Europe.

Without in any way underrating the significance of mad cow disease I am nevertheless asking for a sense of proportion.

Thousands more of our fellow creatures die in traffic accidents than from BSE.

This should be a cause for panic.

I would like to thank the Commission for its outstanding analysis of the situation.

EU cooperation is needed more than ever, as there are dramatic differences in the levels of road safety within our Community.

Four times as many people die in road accidents in Portugal than in Britain.

However, there is plenty more scope for improvement in every country.

The traffic environment must be made to become as safe as possible, but drivers are always responsible for their own safety and that of others on the road.

A car in a garage is completely harmless, but when it is being used wrongly it is like a deadly weapon.

Traffic regulations are not cookery book recipes that everyone can adapt to their own taste.

The time for individuality on our roads is past: we need just as strict compliance with the regulations on the roads as we do with air travel.

I will mention three important ways of reducing the number of road fatalities.

Firstly, there is compliance with speed restrictions.

I often drive in the Mediterranean countries, and, believe it or not, close to within the speed restriction, and I am constantly being overtaken.

And it is no wonder, because only very rarely do I see any speed controls in operation.

The accident statistics for these areas speak plainly.

This laxness is paid for in human life and the tears of those left behind.

Around two out of every three drivers in Europe go over the speed limit in built-up areas and half break the speed limit on the open road.

If mad cows should be removed from pasture land, mad speed merchants should be removed from the roads.

An effective, if not very popular, remedy is automatic speed controls and heavy penalties.

Certainly in my country, Finland, the EUR 100 000 fines paid by some amount to just routine fare collections.

Secondly, in vino veritas: there is truth in wine.

It is also true that alcohol plays a part in no less than 9 000 cases of death a year.

I think it is important that Member States switch to an alcohol limit of 0.5 per mil, which can also be monitored.

If Member States lack the courage to do this, the matter must be dealt with through decision-making at European level.

People sometimes have to be protected from their own governments.

In repeated cases of drunken driving, or when the driver is well over the limit, there should be a long ban and the car should be confiscated by the state.

The third point has to do with taxation.

High taxes on cars lead to old and unsafe cars on the road.

My country is a sad example of this.

Finland is the Cuba of Europe when it comes to the age of cars.

Cars that fulfil stringent safety standards should also benefit from lower taxation.

In general, taxation should focus on a car' s use and not its purchase price.

Ladies and gentlemen, I wish you a safe trip.

Remember to fasten your safety belt in the back too.

Mr President, first of all I thank the rapporteur for her splendid work on behalf of us all and also thank Mr Vatanen for his contribution, speaking on behalf of the PPE-DE Group.

I fully endorse many of the points he made, not least in respect of blood-alcohol limits.

In fact there are only two points that I wish to make this evening. They relate to safer car fronts and the very important issue of blood alcohol.

On safer car fronts, I think it is worth pointing out how clearly the rapporteur has made the case for the Commissioner to come forward with a directive.

In fact this Commissioner pledged to this House in January last year, a year ago, that we would have a directive on safer car fronts.

A year on there is no directive.

What we have in February is a hearing.

Meanwhile, two thousand people in the last year have needlessly, unnecessarily lost their lives because the Commission would rather talk than act.

I hope tonight and tomorrow the Commission listens to the vote of this House and decides to proceed with its commitment to have a directive on safer car fronts.

And, indeed, the same is true for blood alcohol.

We have had talk on this issue, year in, year out.

We all know that ten thousand people a year in Europe are killed in drink-related crashes.

We must tackle that particular problem.

But I find it highly ironic, and I am sure the timing is not coincidental, that on the very day that we are debating blood alcohol, drink driving, road safety, the day before this Parliament is to vote on drink driving, the Commissioner has already made her mind up.

She has issued a recommendation on drink driving.

It would have been nice, would it not, for the Commissioner to have at least listened to the debate, learned what the outcome of the vote was tomorrow, before she decided to pre-empt the parliamentary procedures and issue this recommendation.

We know a recommendation, alas, is simply not worth the paper it is written on.

Member States need and support clear guidance.

We believe it is time for the Commissioner to get tough on drunk drivers and drink driving, to come forward with a directive to reduce the limit to 50 mg.

In the United Kingdom, which has traditionally had a good record, we have sadly seen over the Christmas period a rise in the numbers of people drinking and driving.

In my own region, in some parts of my region, 17% of drivers tested were above the UK legal limit of 80 mg. It is quite clear that we need action.

Indeed the British government is asking for a solution at European level, in a European context.

So all I make is a very simple request to the Commissioner tonight to listen to the debate and to heed the vote tomorrow.

Mr President, Commissioner, first of all, I would like to thank the rapporteur for her outstanding report on a subject which touches the daily lives of every citizen, wherever he or she happens to be in Europe, namely our own safety on the roads and that of our children.

I would like to address three particular points.

Firstly, I would advocate drawing up European legislation with regard to a European pedestrian test and the four associated crash tests.

After 22 years of EU subsidised research, it is clear beyond all doubt that these tests are of value and that hundreds of lives can be spared every year as a result.

This is absolutely paramount for many pedestrians and cyclists, particularly in a densely populated country such as the Netherlands, but also elsewhere of course.

Of course it is very nice of Commissioner Liikanen to allow the car industry more time to make their own arrangements, the bottom-up approach, again giving them time until June, but now in 2001, but it is all taking too long for my liking.

Managing also means making choices, and the time is ripe for this.

A second point I would like to raise relates to alcohol limits in the blood.

Some members of my group will support the rapporteur' s proposal to produce an EU regulation setting an alcohol limit of 0.5 per cent.

We do not wish to extend this limit but we do think that harmonisation of this limit will enhance people' s legal certainty in a Union where many citizens cross the internal borders daily, and where the mobility of employees is precisely what we want to promote.

I am not in favour of setting lower limits for certain categories of young road-users though.

The signal we send out must be clear.

Either a standard is safe or it is not.

And 0.5% is a socially responsible, easily measurable and enforceable quantity to my mind.

Now, Commissioner, I would just like to unburden myself of the fact that I think it is extremely discourteous towards Parliament that the Commissioner evidently already decided, in advance of this evening' s debate - in which, when all is said and done, people are calling for a regulation on the alcohol limit - that a recommendation to the Member States will suffice.

This will encourage a non-committal attitude and will certainly do nothing to increase transparency from the citizens' perspective.

My final point relates to the long-term 'Vision Zero' objective.

I have a problem with this.

An objective must be realistic and achievable, that is what motivates and stimulates.

Naturally we can reduce the number of victims, but it would be wishful thinking to believe we could eliminate road accidents altogether.

Mr President, Commissioner, firstly I would like to express my thanks for the magnificent work done by Mrs Hedkvist Petersen.

There are many reasons for the accidents and the extremely high number of victims on European roads.

The causes are many and varied, and the report has been able to mention and summarise the most important ones.

Furthermore, the Commission communication on priorities in road safety contains six points detailing the aspects on which we can have the greatest impact in order to achieve better results.

I am going to focus on the aspects which refer to the management of the black spots on the roads and the reduction of the effects of impacts on road infrastructures.

A high number of accident victims are users of two-wheeled vehicles, motorcyclists and cyclists, for which roads are also intended.

For cultural and climatic reasons, there are an extraordinary number of these accidents in certain Member States.

Serious studies have concluded that the majority of serious accidents or deaths amongst these groups result from impacts with crash barriers, that is to say, against roadside protective barriers or against vertical road signs, both of which are designed and created for four-wheeled vehicles.

The majority of these accidents happen at the black spots which some Member States are indicating and identifying.

My amendment of the legislative proposal on the design and placing of these soft protective barriers at these black spots is not therefore gratuitous.

We must not be satisfied with a mere recommendation to the Member States or leave this simply to be dealt with through subsidiarity, which would greatly affect its implementation.

Let us legislate, let us seek a greater degree of harmonisation, let us promote measures for the rational and safe use of roads by pedestrians and cyclists, and let us seek formulas to reduce heavy traffic, at least in populated areas; let us harmonise the speed limits by means of an ambitious legal framework, as the Commission recommended in 1986, thereby removing the Member States' inertia.

Let us be vigilant of the environmental impact of traffic, such as noise and environmental pollution.

I would also like to reiterate the importance of legislating on the maximum permitted levels of alcohol.

Finally, I would like to thank the Commissioner for being so very open to our proposals.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, the appalling figure of 42,000 deaths a year on the roads of the European Union, the estimated 1.7 million injuries, are a constant reminder that we must give top priority to the issue of road safety.

These figures do not only represent immense personal suffering, they also mean enormous economic losses and costs.

These are estimated at EUR 100 billion, accounting for some 2% of the gross domestic product of all the European Member States.

That is more than all the European Union Member States put together spend on culture.

I want to give warm thanks to the rapporteur and I especially welcome the fact that she has concentrated on three priority areas: accident prevention, injury prevention and post-impact care and rehabilitation.

In my view that makes it clear that road safety cannot be improved to the required level by individual, selective measures but only by a whole raft of measures, which include road user education, speed limits, alcohol limits, better road infrastructure, traffic control systems, improved vehicle safety standards, stricter checks on observance of road traffic rules and also constant assessment of vehicles on the roads.

That is why I find it extremely regrettable that the amendment on harmonising the re-registration of cars that have been involved in accidents in the European Union was not adopted, although independent reports clearly demonstrate that there is a substantial link between vehicles that have been in an accident once and their renewed involvement in accidents with an ensuing higher death toll.

I just want to address the previous speaker for a moment.

You know I tabled an amendment concerned in particular with the question of motorcyclists and safety barriers, and I would be glad if you and your group could endorse it tomorrow, since I myself am a motorcyclist and am therefore obviously very familiar with this problem.

Mr President, I can only support the Commission in not presenting a Community regulation on blood alcohol content.

My colleagues are holding a sham debate, a totally sham debate.

The socialists and our group decided jointly a year ago, when the proposals from the previous period were taken up again, that we do not want Community legislation here.

The point we make is this: we want checks.

That is the crucial question, not what the law says.

It is crucial to have on-the-spot checks.

Here I can only reply to my UK colleague: if your police carried out checks over Christmas, it would take these people off the roads and prevent the accidents.

So I can only repeat that the crucial factor is to check the blood alcohol level rather than to issue a Community regulation.

That is why we will reject the first part of Amendment No 4.

If it is nevertheless carried, my group will reject Mrs Petersen's entire resolution, because it is hypocritical to call for Community legislation when there is no need whatsoever for it.

Most countries agree with the common view of this House that 0.5 parts per thousand is quite adequate, as the Commission rightly said.

That is what we recommended to all these countries.

The people you should talk to, Mr Watts, are those who do not apply that.

So it is not a question of a sham debate or of what the law says; the police must carry out-on-the spot checks and pick out all the drunken drivers.

That will give us the greatest road safety.

Secondly, we will not accept Amendment No 6 either, with which the Greens are once again trying to start another sham debate, namely on a general speed limit of 120 km/h.

We already have speed limits on most European roads.

In my country we have speed limits on 95% of all roads.

On the 95% of roads, because there are not enough speed checks there either.

So, fewer laws and more checks will do more for road safety.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, it is a known fact that, if death from radioactive weapons is due to human insensitivity, then deaths from road traffic accidents are due mainly to human stupidity.

And it not only behoves an organised state not to be stupid in its own acts and omissions; it must also protect its citizens from the consequences of their own stupidity.

It is as part of this endeavour that the excellent report by our fellow member, Mrs Hedkvist Petersen, on the Commission communication on the priorities in road safety defines the way forward.

Action is needed on three fronts: first, by taking legislative, regulatory action, secondly, by promoting new technologies in vehicles and in the road infrastructure and, thirdly, by taking administrative action and running an information campaign.

Of course, if we take care to ensure that any measures taken receive widespread support, then they will be even more effective and if, at the same time, we draw on the experiences of the Member States in these areas, then we shall be sure to strike a happy medium.

For example, everyone could agree to a drastic reduction in alcohol levels for certain categories of drivers, such as those carrying dangerous loads.

In addition, modern technology can and should be used in order to put the measures decided into practice and to control the application of current provisions.

And, of course, we should mobilise local society and regional bodies and ensure that they are more closely involved in road safety issues by addressing the people directly. At the same time, the information campaign must, of course, continue to run, using cleverer ways of getting through to the public, especially young people.

Likewise, it might be worth examining the possibility of rewarding the safest vehicles through the road tax system and demanding minimum safety specifications depending on the type of road, so that road design and construction can be integrated into programmes subsidised by the European Union.

Finally, we call on the Commission not to "race" through cases such as today's.

That is what road safety needs.

Mr President, the frequency of road accidents is so tragic and so underestimated as to justify the adoption of all possible initiatives as soon as possible at all levels of government and on all aspects of the matter, including human behaviour, the infrastructure and vehicles.

The only selection criteria we need - although I fear this will be difficult, given the nature of the debate thus far - is to identify the operations which would be most effective precisely because they are simple to implement.

I believe that the areas of human behaviour and infrastructures are those in which we can expect the quickest results: for example, the results of making it mandatory to wear a helmet and seat belts were remarkable in Italy.

Motorcyclist deaths have fallen by 45% across all the age groups since it was made mandatory to wear a helmet last year.

I am aware that measures such as making it compulsory to wear seat belts and helmets can be difficult to enforce, to implement, and that if they are not implemented then they are meaningless, merely words on paper.

However, this does not mean that we should disregard the drink-driving issue, and I would therefore not be against slightly higher common blood alcohol limits, even though Italy might lose out slightly.

Mr President, we shall be voting in favour of the report on priorities in EU road safety, as it includes a number of practical measures which may reduce, at least slightly, the number of deaths in road accidents.

It is deplorable that road accidents represent the most common cause of death amongst children and adults under 45 years.

However, although most of the measures are positive, they target motorists alone, thus absolving car manufacturers as well as the government, and society in general, of any responsibility.

What is the point of measures, binding or otherwise, to encourage motorists to keep their speed down, when car manufacturers not only produce cars that greatly exceed speed limits but even make this a selling point?

What is the point of calling upon motorists to be careful and to reduce the time they spend at the wheel, when, in the quest for profit, the road haulage industry and large retail and industrial companies force lorry drivers to drive until they are extremely tired?

What is the point of lamenting the fact that road traffic accounts for 95% of accidents involving all forms of transport - there is hence no possible comparison with trains or aircraft - if every government' s policy is to encourage road transport, openly or implicitly, over all other types of transport, for both the public and freight.

Even in Europe' s richest countries, public transport is underdeveloped and many people use their cars not through choice but out of necessity, due to a lack of adequate public transport.

In the race for profit and zero stock, large companies are forced to see road transport as part of their production line and this transforms some motorways into a long, almost endless chain of lorries.

Even on the limited question of truck-on-train technology, what happens in actual practice is the opposite of the official line.

On a more general note, a sensible approach to transport would require a sensible approach to manufacturing, an approach, in other words, that does not place profit above all else.

This, however, is a far cry from the laughable measures proposed by the Commission and by this report.

Mr President, Vice-President of the Commission, I checked the statistics while preparing this short intervention and I was shocked to discover that, statistically at least, more than 55 people have been killed on the roads of the European Union since we convened this morning.

The European Union loses 4 people an hour.

Road traffic accidents are the most common cause of death among children and young people.

Every year, we lose a university or large school full of young people no less, because 15,000 young people die on our roads every year.

Add to that the fact that I personally have the unhappy privilege of coming from the Member State with the second highest number of fatal accidents in Europe.

And what is more, Greece is the only country in Europe in which, unfortunately, there has been no downward trend over the last ten years.

Entire families are being sacrificed on the asphalt alter.

Road safety can, and must, be a top priority both for the whole of Europe and for each individual country, which is why I shall support the proposal made by Mrs Hedkvist Petersen, whom I should like to congratulate on her report, that we need strategic planning for road safety and we need to set a series of strict but realistic numerical targets.

This will attract citizens' attention and provide an effective focal point.

We, ladies and gentlemen, have a huge responsibility both here and in Brussels.

It is, for example, unfortunate that no legislative proposal has been submitted on the compulsory adoption of the four types of test designed to make car fronts safer for pedestrians, a research programme which, it should be noted, the European Union has been funding for the past 22 years.

In addition, further support for the European programme to evaluate novice drivers, support for strategies to promote the use of seat belts, the development of telematics systems, the mandatory fitting of daytime running lights to motorbikes and cars and other proposals in the report could benefit road safety and public health enormously at relatively little cost.

Mrs De Palacio, I am sure that you are familiar with part of your communication which highlights a disturbing disparity between the different Member States in the quality and safety of roads and number of victims claimed.

Unfortunately, this disparity closely mirrors the difference in the quality and speed of economic growth of the Member States of the European Union: the safest country is Sweden and the least safe countries are Greece and Portugal.

I will attempt to answer this question as positively as possible: it means we cannot invest in safety without investing in Community action.

I feel that Parliament, with a few legitimate exceptions, is calling for greater courage from the Commission, and I would therefore like to thank the honourable Member for her report, which makes the Commission's communication totally clear and more effective.

More courage - to get straight to the point - means two things: firstly an undertaking to specify limits and rules in our prevention policy, or - without wishing to offend Mr Jarzembowski - any control will be useless.

If we are going to control the speed at which people drive, it does make quite a difference whether the limit we set is 100 or 200 kilometres per hour.

We feel that the Commission should present a directive setting the maximum blood alcohol limit at 0.5 parts per thousand for all the Member States.

I say this as a citizen of a country which has established a higher limit precisely in order to forestall any accusation of self-interest in our argument.

The principle of subsidiarity is all very well - although I feel that it would be grossly inappropriate to take away the licences of all drunk drivers - but the problem is working out at what point a driver is to be considered drunk according to our highway code.

Commissioner, I feel that employing this sort of courage is the simplest and most effective, but also the only way of achieving the ambitious objective we have set ourselves of reducing the number of victims claimed by the roads of the European Union by 40% over the next few years.

Mr President, let me thank the rapporteur for the great commitment she has shown in this matter.

Last year, nearly 43,000 people were killed on the road networks of the EU.

One of the main reasons for this was the use of alcohol.

There is no getting away from this fact.

Six years in the European Parliament have given me great respect for the fact that we have tremendously differing views on many issues, but we should all agree that alcohol and driving never go together.

Despite this, people are killed every day on the road networks of the EU because of this precise combination.

We can also entertain very different opinions as to whether we should have common rules within the EU or whether each country should solve this problem on its own.

Allow me to point out two things for those who are in two minds about this issue.

My first point is that no EU country would find it acceptable if another Member State tolerated a situation in which a train driver, an airline pilot flying an aeroplane with 300 passengers on board or a sea captain responsible for the safety of 1000 people or were to drink alcohol before he or she assumed responsibility for his or her passengers.

Why is it, then, that we do not impose the same requirement on those who drive on our roads?

The other point I want to make is that 95% of fatal traffic accidents actually take place on the roads.

All I want is that we should take the problem of these 95% as seriously as we do the problem of the 5% of accidents which occur in connection with the other types of transport.

That is precisely why I consider the report to be an ideal basis for our future work on this issue, which is also why I am going to vote in favour of it tomorrow.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, safety on Europe's roads is a vital matter and the figures speak for themselves: 42 000 deaths a year and 1.7 million people injured. Something has to be done about this.

We must seek to make our roads safer.

There is very great suffering among those who lose a family member as a result of a car accident.

Our society is becoming increasingly mobile, and I am in favour of it.

But that is precisely why it is our duty to tackle the risks.

Here, we as politicians must assume our responsibility towards society at European, as also at national and regional level, and call for better and more adequate road traffic measures.

The analysis of road accidents is decisive.

The way to compile accident statistics therefore includes recording, processing and interpreting accident data.

A systematic examination of what happens on the roads can provide important data to help ensure greater safety and prevent accidents.

The construction method of transport modes, as also road design and people themselves, are weak points.

We must identify and seek where possible to remedy them.

I see this as a most important aspect. And here I think road user education is essential.

We must raise people's awareness of the dangers and risks involved in road use, as the precondition for their acceptance of measures.

Even children, a specially high-risk group of road users, must be taught through play how to behave on the roads.

Young people must be informed of the risks they and other road users face once they have obtained their driving licence.

One point is especially close to my heart: measures against drink driving but also against the use of medicines and drugs when driving.

Many measures have already been taken to combat drink driving, including many awareness-raising measures.

Yet people often do not realise that taking drugs and medicines can cloud their minds and affect their driving just as much.

The EU road safety programme aims to define the main priorities clearly.

Above all, we need to take a systematic approach to these problems.

It is vital to call for cooperation between the Commission and the Member States.

Mr President, Commissioner, road accidents are the most frequent cause of death and serious injury among children and young people, in fact generally among EU citizens under the age of 45.

We must no longer accept this as a stroke of fate but must do something about it.

The condition, however, is that we stop believing that road safety depends primarily on how well road users behave or remain in control of themselves.

Apart from setting out a clear obligation, Articles 41 and 94 of the EC Treaty also provide us with the legal basis which some Members of this House doubt for a great number of effective measures to improve road user safety.

It is up to us finally to attach adequate political priority to this issue.

In fact, there is perhaps hardly any policy area in which the common responsibility of the EU, the Member States, regional and local authorities and the appropriate organisations is recognised so clearly.

Subsidiarity is, therefore, particularly applicable here.

That is precisely why we should not underestimate the added value of EU measures versus Member State efforts.

Calculations of the economic costs of traffic accidents show that they are considerably higher than the costs of preventing traffic accidents.

So that justifies the call for increased financial resources even in times of economic austerity.

But beware, let us make no mistake.

It is not always the case that the more money we put in, the higher the level of safety we can achieve.

This can be demonstrated by information campaigns on best practice in the EU states and binding measures to reduce the causes of accidents, such as alcohol, drug-taking and the use of medicines, as also a directive on expanding safety tests which will make the car industry take a more creative approach and promoting the European New Car Assessment Programme (EuroNCAP).

I congratulate the rapporteur, Mrs Hedkvist Petersen, on her excellent report and urge you to endorse it.

Mr President, Commissioner, it is interesting to listen to this discussion and it will be interesting to continue working on the issue of road traffic safety in Parliament after this discussion and after our decision tomorrow.

I am told that the majority of the political groups consider a regulation at European level on alcoholic content to be preferable, since this is an exclusive competence which we can utilise by virtue of the Treaty.

I agree with Mr Stenmarck when he says - and this is made plain by the previous discussion - that we should never accept safety levels that are lower than those which it is possible to bring about.

However, this is something we do accept when it comes to roads but which, of course, we do not where aviation is concerned.

In my opinion, it is important to have such a regulation at European level where alcohol is concerned.

Mr Jarzembowski presented some interesting views but, unlike Mr Jarzembowski, I think that we should utilise the opportunity of issuing a directive as well as introducing police controls and other alternatives.

We need to utilise all opportunities, and that is what we shall do.

We have not said no to a directive before.

Now, we have the chance of taking a political initiative, so let us do so.

Turning now, Mr Bautista, to the issue of black spots, which was raised by the Greens, I believe that it is important for us to keep an eye on what happens.

It would be interesting to see a report on the situation out there in the Union.

I am well aware of the fact that this is an important issue for cyclists and motorcyclists.

Finally, there is the matter of education and the situation of children.

Just as Mrs Schierhuber said, we need to have road safety education.

We must utilise this opportunity, together with all the other measures at national, local, regional, and European level.

We must make vigorous joint efforts to this end.

Mr President, I would firstly like to congratulate Mrs Hedkvist Petersen wholeheartedly on the very thorough motion for a resolution which she has prepared on road safety. This demonstrates the European Parliament' s interest - which we have seen today in your speeches - in creating an ambitious policy for combating the scourge of traffic accidents.

I would also like to express my gratitude to all of you who have spoken, who have given voice to your opinions and who have enriched this debate.

In response to the European Parliament' s request, I would remind you that last March the Commission presented a communication on road safety which listed a series of concrete measures to be implemented over the next few years, specifically the last two years of implementation of the second action programme on road safety.

I would like to stress that, in general, I am in complete agreement with the contents of the report and also with what the resolution itself says, both with regard to the action programme under way, whose implementation will soon be completed, and with regard to the future road safety programme which the Commission intends to present in the next few months.

I also wish the European Union to have an effective and lasting policy for reducing the number of accidents, which is currently completely unacceptable.

In the first stage we will have to implement the final priority measures established within the framework of the road safety programme, which is currently under way and, in particular, propose that the obligation to install speed-limiting devices be applicable to a greater number of lorries, specifically by lowering the tonnage above which such a measure is required.

Furthermore, we will have to promote the exchange of information on black spots and the techniques for reducing them and, in general, to increase the safety of road infrastructures and adopt measures to improve the car fronts in the event of collision with vulnerable users of the road network.

These road improvements must include a different design for current crash barriers, which are enormously unfriendly to cyclists and motorcyclists.

The second stage must include the adoption of a more systematic approach with regard to the future action programme, for which we must establish quantifiable objectives on a European scale, which will be drawn up with the cooperation of the Member States, in order to achieve greater efficiency and complementarity between the measures adopted in Brussels and those established on a national level.

Because it is clear that the establishment of specific objectives - as we have seen in those countries which have adopted them - provides a stimulus and has the effect of a psychological incentive on the authorities, which leads to them exercising better control and therefore to a reduction in accidents.

Nevertheless, I do not intend today to deal with the aspects on which we agree - you know these from the communication - but I would like to expand a little more on the reasons for the two points of disagreement.

Ladies and gentlemen, you are absolutely right.

Yesterday or the day before, the written procedure on the recommendation for 0.5 to be the maximum limit for alcohol in the blood was finally adopted by the Commission.

It was in the communication in March.

You must not believe that there has been any manoeuvring by anyone.

I thought that this was at a more advanced stage.

Please do not imagine that the date has been in any way chosen to coincide with this debate.

But I would like to explain why no proposal for a directive is being presented.

This is not being done for two fundamental reasons.

Firstly, I must say that the United Kingdom, one of the countries where the alcohol limit is greater than the 0.5 which we recommend -as Mr Watts mentioned a moment ago - is the country with the second lowest number of accidents in the European Union after Sweden.

If Great Britain had a limit of 0.2 instead of 0.8 it would probably be the country with the lowest number rather than the second lowest and would have far fewer accidents.

What I mean to point out is that it is a fact, an objective fact, that Great Britain, with a limit of 0.8, is the country with the second lowest number of accidents in the Union.

I am not recommending 0.8 but 0.5.

It is not enough to recommend or to lay down that an alcohol limit be respected if the national authorities then fail to adequately control the reality of that alcohol content in drivers' blood.

I would like to say to you that if some Member States do not currently control the alcohol content in blood, I doubt that we will have better results just because we have reduced it to 0.5.

What we need is better control on the part of the authorities.

Secondly, there are customs, habits and reasons why I feel that this is the classic type of issue which should be left to subsidiarity, and that is why we are only recommending the level of 0.5.

I know that you have a different opinion - I have seen it - and, of course, the truth is that, furthermore, there has not so far been a sufficient majority in the Council to move forward with an initiative of this type.

If, suddenly, all the Member States agree, it will be very easy for them, amongst other things, to implement a level of 0.5 in their countries.

Do not tell me that the United Kingdom wants a European directive to resolve a problem in Great Britain because I would not believe it.

Then let them implement 0.5 in the United Kingdom.

Why do we have to force them to do so?

If the United Kingdom wants to do it and we already have a recommendation, let them comply with it.

With regard to car fronts, I clearly heard Mr Watts' s criticism that the Commission prefers to speak and not to act.

The Commission wishes to act in the most effective way and, sometimes, delaying an initiative for a few months can, in reality, be a much quicker way to ensure that it is implemented.

And we have given the automobile industries six months to reach an agreement.

They do not have until 2002, Mr Watts, but until June 2001.

In this respect, I would like to tell you that this initiative is not only my responsibility but it is also the responsibility of the Commissioner for Industry, Mr Liikanen, and that is what we agreed.

In saying this I wish to point out that we have by no means rejected the idea of creating a regulation in relation to front sections of cars which are more respectful when it comes to accidents involving people - unprotected bodies - but that we simply wish to be even more effective by gaining the support of the automobile sector.

With regard to the future action programme for 2002-2010, we are a priori open to all the ideas included in the motion for a resolution.

I am even prepared to reconsider the issue of the level of 0.5.

I am not going to maintain rigid positions on this issue.

I do not believe that that is the main problem.

The problem of control is much more important.

In any event, I am counting on your cooperation, your help and your support, and I congratulate the rapporteur once again.

Mr President, my name was mentioned.

It is important for the record to clarify the situation in the UK relating to the UK Government's view on blood alcohol.

I am sure that the DG on Transport and Energy has a copy of the UK's road safety strategy that was published in March 2000.

It makes it very clear that the new government in the United Kingdom is committed to a solution within a European context.

I believe you would now find a much more positive response to a proposal for a directive than perhaps was the case with the previous administration.

Mr President, on a point of order.

If I have understood my colleague correctly, then it is enough to have a recommendation that the UK Government will lower the blood-alcohol level.

The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon.

The next item is the report (A5-0358/2000) by Mrs Poli Bortone, on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism, on the communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council and the Economic and Social Committee on the progress of the implementation of the action programme of the communication on intermodality and intermodal freight transport in the European Union.

Mr President, Commissioner, I will refrain from defining intermodality, adopting the definition which the Commission itself has used in the past instead.

However, the operations supporting intermodality are becoming ever more urgent for a number of reasons: the need to rationalise traffic and optimise transportation times, and economic and environmental requirements, for intermodality is a key element in sustainable mobility.

As matters stand, intermodality poses a series of drawbacks stemming from the lack of integration between the various modes of transport, together with deficiencies peculiar to some of these modes.

The development of intermodality hinges primarily upon the level of efficiency provided by the rail services on offer, which unfortunately, in many Member States, rate poorly in terms of quality, efficiency and cost-effectiveness.

Moreover, as the Commission has pointed out on several occasions, the development of infrastructure continues to focus on unimodal systems, whereas intermodal transport requires a network-based approach focusing on complementarity and connections between the various modes.

Lastly, open intermodal information systems able to manage intermodal transport and network services efficiently and to guarantee a rational and constant real-time information and message flow have yet to be put in place.

A specific analysis of the friction costs allied to intermodal freight transport reveals that the main drawbacks compared to traditional unimodal transport can be identified as high costs, longer time frames, inferior quality, higher risks of damage to goods, restrictions as to the types of goods that can be transported, and more complex administrative procedures.

These friction costs can be attributed first and foremost to the absence of coherent system networks and connections linking the latter, leading to a loss of efficiency and an increase in transfer costs.

Furthermore, the differing profitability and service quality levels amongst the various modes of transport do not sit easily alongside notions of customer satisfaction and real-time goods transfers.

The culprit is the absence of broad electronic message systems linking different partners in the intermodal chain and the lack of an identification and information system for goods organised on an intermodal basis.

Lastly, the entire system is dogged by a series of bottlenecks stemming from the absence of harmonised time frames and timetables amongst the various modes of transport, as a result of which the needs of the freight transport chain do not correspond to the operational demands of the resources employed in the process. By way of illustration, the working hours of drivers and crews do not tally with intermodal operations, and terminals are not always able to accommodate round-the-clock train and shipping timetables.

Clearly, the intermodal transport framework in Europe varies somewhat, with totally contrasting circumstances apparent in the various Member States.

Hence the need to accord priority to the monitoring of the different circumstances, with the support of the Transport Intermodality Task Force, with a view to singling out specific lines of action designed to address emerging priorities in individual Member States.

The aims which the EU intends to pursue through the development of intermodality relate to the need to establish an integrated system comprising the various transport modes which offers seamless, customer-tailored door-to-door services, makes for efficient and cost-effective use of the transport system and promotes competition between operators.

In its communication on intermodality and intermodal freight transport in the European Union, the Commission highlighted the objectives to be pursued in the intermodal transport sector and divided them into priority areas for action, known as "key actions": infrastructure and integrated means of transport, interoperable and interconnected traffic operations, and services and regulations common to all transport modes.

The objective is to establish an information system providing for real-time transport management, as well as the use of electronic transactions in transport, by means of the development of real-time electronic information and transaction systems, the harmonisation of transport message, procedure and document standards using Electronic Data Interchange (EDI) systems, a uniform liability regime designed to offer the end user a clear set of transparent conditions and procedures with regard to liability for cargos which may be damaged or lost during transportation, the development of information society technologies of benefit to intermodal transport, through the creation of an open structure which makes it possible to follow the movement of goods along the entire intermodal chain, and paperless transport, involving the harmonisation of document regulations and the creation of a single electronic window.

The Commission has also planned a series of horizontal measures, using research and technological development projects to introduce innovation aimed at utilising new technologies to develop innovative services and increase productivity.

Clearly, a discussion on intermodality requires, at the same time, a sharp cultural change in the culture of enterprise.

The globalisation and liberalisation of the markets are already producing a substantial increase in the demand for the transportation of goods and commodities.

The high growth rates are inducing competition which will increasingly affect the volumes transported and, therefore, mergers and other forms of association between operators in the sector will be absolutely inevitable.

Finally, I would like to thank the Members who contributed actively to the preparation of a resolution acceptable to the majority of the committee.

I should also like to inform you that, as far as the few amendments tabled are concerned, I essentially endorse all of them, with the exception of Amendment No 3, with regard to which I am somewhat perplexed by the reference to State aid.

Mr President, intermodality is still in its infancy.

Not even 8% of our freight is transported by several different modes of transport.

Yet the distances travelled on average have been increasing since as early as 1970, a trend which favours the use of more than one mode of transport.

Freight is growing out of all proportion too, and is expected to increase by 70% over the next ten years.

It is surprising that there is no breakthrough in intermodal transport in the offing.

Perhaps the pressure on the transporters and the shippers is not yet so great as to bring about this breakthrough.

But that being the case, a few warnings are in order for the relevant sectors.

Firstly, the road network will not be able to cope with the 70% increase, not in the urban or regional distribution, and not in terms of long distance transport either.

To depend exclusively on road transport must therefore be deemed a sin of reckless faith, which used to be a mortal sin.

Secondly, environmental considerations will play an increasingly important part over the next ten years.

Driving a lorry through certain parts of Europe will meet with increasing opposition.

The people will put up increasingly stubborn resistance to transport violations of their environment.

We have already seen this in the failure of the directive that sought to harmonise bans on weekend driving.

So there is no question of our being able to opt for intermodality.

We are being forced into it.

Now if you take that as your point of departure, none of this is really going to make any headway.

Of course the sectors must apply themselves more effectively, and come up with some more innovative ideas, but then the government must get down to work too, and simplify and streamline procedures, for example.

The trans-European water networks must be brought to fruition quickly and as a matter of priority.

Everyone talks about rail transport, but water transport - where there really is still room for growth - no longer seems to feature at all in the European or national lists of priorities.

No one coordinates the efforts undertaken by each individual State, when that is surely one of the essential tasks of the European Commission.

It is a pity because road transport, in combination with inland navigation could make a substantial difference in north and northeast Europe.

But before we reach that point, numerous obstacles still have to be cleared away in terms of legislation, matters of a technical and practical nature.

Incidentally, the same applies to the ancient practice of coastal navigation, which has long allowed itself to be elbowed out, but is now making a powerful comeback under the modern name of short sea shipping, providing everyone pulls together at any rate.

If we look at the advances that have been made since the excellent action programme of 1997, then we see a number of positive aspects, for example the task force transport intermodality.

The extension of the PACT programme, pilot actions in combined transport, will also spur matters on.

In view of the fact that the Union is to undergo enlargement and acquire some new members before long, we must take account of the new situation during the accession negotiations even now.

But unfortunately, intermodal transport is still too expensive anyway. This is down to shortcomings in the field of infrastructure, inefficiency in the field of management and information, and innovations that do not make the grade.

All the same, we must develop a trans-European transport network in the form of a multi-modal infrastructure network, and the business community and government must join forces at all levels in the process.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, in transport policy we still do not pay intermodal transport the attention it deserves.

Hitherto, in fact, only 8% of European freight transport is intermodal, as my colleague just said.

That is why this kind of transport is often not taken seriously enough yet.

But intermodal goods transport is both the expression and the measure of the European integration strategy, which seeks to integrate not only the individual, national transport markets but also the various transport modes.

Following the liberalisation strategy that is not quite completed yet and the harmonisation that has begun, the single market needs this integration strategy if it is to have a viable future.

That is why the reports on the progress in implementing the action programme for intermodal transport also reflects the progress made in European transport policy.

The communication from the Commission and the report have raised many, indeed all the important issues: the reviews of the trans-European networks aimed at establishing a genuinely intermodal network, measures to create value-added logistical systems, the measures that are still needed to harmonise load units and so forth, genuinely intermodal information, standardised transport messages and documents, the development of a uniform intermodal liability regime and many others.

Here, as we all know, we need a whole range of regulatory, political measures to ensure that intermodal transport really has a viable future.

Because the framework conditions are so complex and because the development of intermodal transport is still far from being a self-sustaining process, we need a great number of successful pilot projects.

So I hope we will get a well-funded new PACT programme, that will be usable by the candidate countries even at this stage, for it is there that many of the decisions are taken that concern our future.

The signals are not all set wrong there yet.

I also hope that we will give intermodal transport due importance in the Sixth Framework Research Programme.

In our view, in future pilot projects should look more at strategic aspects, i.e. at linking up the existing intermodal part-networks.

Another aspect that has not really been addressed is this: perhaps we could look into the conditions for creating new European, intermodal operators.

For we do not yet have any real operators in this area.

Perhaps, theoretically at least, and as a kind of precedent, an international company could manage Alpine transit transport on an intermodal basis.

Of course we are also in favour of the European Reference Centre for Intermodalism that keeps being announced and hope it will soon become a reality.

Mr President, Commissioner, I would like to thank the rapporteur for her excellent work.

Our group is in favour of adopting the report with its amendments.

At present intermodality is expensive owing to friction costs, inefficiency, frameworks of infrastructure, and partly also because road transport tends to be favoured.

The report and the Commission communication propose many actions worthy of support that would increase the volume of intermodal transport.

New technology must be utilised effectively, for example in increasing ebusiness, so that the most suitable route and services can be obtained for various situations.

I would also like to point out that this form of transport is the most efficient system for long journeys.

In the development of transport facilities, priority must be given to remote regions and areas which are seriously deprived in terms of the trans-European networks.

The improvement of collection and distribution systems in congested areas is crucial.

Mr President, Commissioner, first of all I would like to thank both the Commission and our rapporteur for their work on this issue.

We have already said a great deal on this subject, and so I shall keep this very brief.

We have been able to ascertain that a modal shift has taken place in recent years, although the manner in which, and the extent to which, this has taken place has been very low-key to date.

We want to give this trend a huge boost.

That being the case, it is important that the modalities themselves, specifically rail, internal and coastal navigation, are booming and that political freedoms have been granted too, in the form of liberalisation, interoperability and a number of other things which the sector can use to seize its opportunities.

Yet we would also like to increase the number of opportunities available to SMEs, in particular, although this sometimes entails financial assistance.

That is precisely why we have tabled an amendment for forms of state aid to SMEs, also for environmental purposes.

Incidentally, I am not in agreement with the advantage enjoyed by the Galileo project in these matters, but that is something we should discuss on another occasion.

I would point out that the alarming increase in transport, also as a result of e-commerce, means that unfortunately, intermodal transport is just a drop in the ocean at the moment, but will have to make headway in the future.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, road safety, intermodality, the costs of transport infrastructure: my perspective on these issues, placed one after the other on today's agenda, is that of one who is concerned with the problems of mountainous areas, particularly the Alps.

The subject of road safety brings to mind the Mont Blanc tunnel tragedy, which is an example of the need for European coordination guaranteeing safety in both operative tunnels and those under construction.

Then there is the matter of intermodality across the Alps, where, apart from the Swiss decision to invest heavily in rail transport, there are serious delays in the construction of the other links and the other new rail tunnels already provided for by Community documents, such as those along the Turin-Lyons-Brenner link, or under discussion, such as the Aosta-Martigny tunnel.

Clearly, if the wise sayings "Whoever breaks it pays for it" or "Polluter pays" crop up in a discussion on the cost of the roads, then, apart from anything else, there needs to be fewer heavy goods vehicles and more rail transport in the Alpine region in future.

In the short-term, there needs to be severe restriction of the number of goods vehicles passing through the region, including the Mont Blanc Tunnel when it reopens at the end of this year.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I would firstly like to thank Mrs Poli Bortone for this ambitious and constructive report, and for her speech, which offer great support for the activities of the Commission in this field.

I would also like to thank all the Members who have spoken in the debate today.

The Commission agrees that an efficient intermodal transport system for goods is crucial to the Union and the candidate countries and, of course, it is essential if we want to guarantee mobility in the coming years.

I believe that the efficiency of an enlarged single market, the competitiveness of our industries and the sustainable development of the Union depend on this.

The Commission will evaluate the intermodal transport infrastructures in the countries of Central and Eastern Europe in order thereby to facilitate the revision of the guidelines for the Trans-European Transport Network.

The European Reference Centre for intermodal transport, with its headquarters in Strasbourg, will be operational this year and will be soliciting the information which the intermodal industry needs and which may help in the creation of new policies.

The Commission intends to continue supporting intermodal transport, through research in the framework programmes for technological research and development and also by extending and enlarging the pilot actions for combined transport (the PACTs).

As the report indicates, we will have to invest in the necessary infrastructure and its management.

In this respect, there are various speakers - Mr Caveri, for example - who call for the great transport axes which are already in the TENs to be developed.

We wish to study the use of current budgetary resources, reconsidering their use, in order to promote the large-scale assimilation of intermodal transport by industry.

I must tell you, ladies and gentlemen, that I hope, given the degree of adjustment and development, that we are now on the finishing touches.

With regard to the White Paper on the common transport policy, as well as the delivery of the revised Trans-European Networks, which I have promised you, I hope that the Commission will be able to definitively approve a text on that issue over the next few weeks.

Intermodal transport is one of the key elements in it.

We are at an important stage in the development of intermodal transport, since we have to move on from promoting pilot actions and projects to ensuring that industry incorporates them in a generalised sense.

The work that we have undertaken has confirmed that the knowledge, systems and technologies exist in Europe to carry out this type of activity, which facilitates the safe and durable transport of goods.

The charging policies that we are going to present will support the competitiveness of intermodal transport.

Finally, I would like to say that I am in complete agreement with the proposals to develop compatible electronic systems, made by different speakers, amongst others the rapporteur, Mr Stockmann and Mr Pohjamo.

These compatible electronic systems must specifically support intermodal transport: these support instruments are a prerequisite for achieving efficient European transport, which has a good cost-efficiency ratio and which respects the environment.

I am also very happy with the agreement between Parliament and the Commission on this issue and I can assure you that the services of the TREN Directorate-General will continue to play an active role in the promotion of intermodal transport.

I would like to end by thanking the rapporteur and all the speakers and I hope I will continue being able to count on your work and cooperation on this subject, when it comes to discussing the White Paper on transport.

The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon.

Charging for the use of transport infrastructure

The next item is the report (A5-0345/2000) by Mr Costa Paolo, on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism, on transport infrastructure charging.

Mr President, Commissioner, I am pleased to present this own-initiative report, drawn up by the Parliamentary Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism with the aim of bringing about progress in an area which I hope our work will help you to understand better.

As you know, it derived from a 1995 Commission Green Paper, which called for measures to internalise the external costs incurred by environmental, safety and congestion considerations, in order to bring about a fairer and more efficient system of charging users for access to transport infrastructure.

Basically, the report calls upon the Commission to intervene by harmonising the definitions of internal and external costs, harmonising or identifying charge calculation methodologies, and then, of course, leaving the implementation of these measures to subsidiarity and the decisions to be taken by the Member States.

In my opinion, in essence, the report ensures that the recommendation to apply the "polluter pays" principle is included in the wider principle of "user pays".

This is its contribution, and it has two consequences which I wish to emphasise now. The first is that if the methodology which we hope the Commission will decide upon and we will be able to endorse enables us to produce a clearer definition of the internal and external costs and a clearer system for charging users, we will create the conditions to be able to transfer the financing of infrastructure from purely public resources and general taxation to the users as such.

We can therefore now picture the enormous effort before Europe - the Europe of today and the Europe of tomorrow - in the process of constructing new infrastructure, the effort of involving private capital in this operation as well, which would not be possible if we do not succeed in identifying this situation.

The next step is to consider that, where the attribution of some of these costs is meaningless, as, for example, in the case of the Italian motorways, which have already fully achieved their payback - the revenue from these charges which exist today could constitute funds to be used in cross-subsidies, in order to ensure that certain costs charged to road users serve to improve infrastructure in other modes of transport which are certainly more environmentally friendly.

I would stress that this whole system, which transfers the financial burden from the State to the user, must have a safeguard, and that is the last principle, according to which those who have the most difficult circumstances because they are disabled or because they live in rural or remote areas where access is difficult, can in some way be exempted, and a series of subsidies, including State subsidies, can therefore be developed to compensate for this.

Our objective in producing this report is to draw together certain fundamental principles which I have already mentioned: the "user pays" principle, the "polluter pays" principle and the principle of cross-subsidisation etc. together.

The methodological suggestion given here is that a series of good practices exist now in Europe, which we have attempted to explore and put together in a seminary whose papers we will make available to anyone one who wishes to study the issue in more depth and which we have financed with the help of the Commission.

Well then, these practices can now, in my opinion, be generalised and made available to everyone.

This would make it possible - and I feel that the time is now ripe - to obtain operative indications for advancing European policy in this direction in practical terms.

. (DE) Mr President, Vice-President of the Commission, Mr Costa, ladies and gentlemen, I want to give high praise to the rapporteur for his success in achieving a broad consensus with his report, after we have spent years in this House hotly debating the right way to charge for transport infrastructure costs.

Commissioner, Vice-President, I hope that after the vote tomorrow you will peruse all the drafts for the White Paper on transport policy again and check whether they follow the same lines as proposed by this House.

After all, normally the Commission's proposals always take account of the Member States' views, and perhaps in future they will also take more account of Parliament's views.

I believe that the Costa report offers an opportunity to re-think some of the habits the various departments have grown so fond of.

I also hope that we do not mix up the subject matter of the White Paper with the subject of the trans-European networks.

We are about to review the trans-European networks; these are both important subjects.

To present them to Parliament as a single package would, in my view, be extremely unwise since they are in fact separate subjects.

Allow me to make just a few comments on the Costa report.

Amendment No 1 makes it quite clear that we want use-based transport charging, which can be verified on the basis of the construction, expansion and improvement costs.

So there are two aims of which we must not lose sight when we harmonise these transport infrastructure charges.

Firstly, we must finally achieve a single market in this area.

For when you think that we still have enormous distortions of competition because of divergent fiscal and other charges between the Member States, a whole 8-9 years after the completion of the single market on 31 December 1992, then the question of equal competition is bound to arise.

Secondly, we really all think that after the meteoric rises in oil prices over the past year, in whatever way we want to convert and achieve a more fair and environmentally compatible system, the total charge for undertakings must not rise.

We do not want any forcing up of prices.

Last point: in relation to external costs I have two requests.

Firstly, about three years ago, Parliament decided in toto to work out on a scientific basis what the external costs actually are.

How can they be calculated and how can they be charged?

Secondly, we must differentiate when we calculate these external costs.

To give just one example: congestion costs.

It would be absurd to charge an undertaking for the fact that the drivers are stuck in a tail-back because the Member States have not expanded the roads, so that the undertaking not only has higher petrol and working costs but also has to pay additional charges to the Member State responsible for the congestion.

Mr President, I should like to thank the rapporteur, Mr Costa, for his excellent work on what is a very difficult, detailed but important dossier.

Congestion, pollution, gridlock, global warming, floods, freak weather.

Is it the end of the world?

No, it is just rush-hour in my region.

The same problems are occurring in regions and Member States across the European Union.

We all have the same transport crisis and there may be common solutions to these common problems.

We must all accept the fact, for example, that the fastest growing source of global warming gases is the transport sector.

Something surely, colleagues, must be done.

However, as we all know, everyone wants someone else to do it.

I hope Mr Costa's work, his report and the conclusions we will reach tomorrow will provide a framework within which we can begin to tackle these problems.

We must promote better understanding of our common problems and, indeed, find common solutions to them across the European Union, but on the basis of consensus and mutual understanding.

Secondly, we must promote an exchange of ideas.

Many localities and regions have excellent ideas, and that knowledge and information must be disseminated throughout the European Union.

Indeed, that is my third point: Europe has a key role to play here in disseminating best practice as to how best we tackle the transport challenge.

Fourthly and finally, in terms of what Europe's contribution can be within the framework of this particular initiative, I hope that governments, local authorities and those implementing taxes and charges can do so within a framework that is developed and integrated at a European level, and do it together.

However, I want to say that there is great concern and anxiety about this particular Commission initiative and, indeed, about Mr Costa's report, although I personally feel that many of those concerns were fully addressed in committee where, I know, there was widespread cross-party support for Mr Costa's work.

There were concerns, for example, about subsidiarity.

But that was more than adequately addressed when we said to the Commission: you have a key role to play in trying to pull this research together.

But, clearly, Member States and their role will be fully respected in terms of their rights to determine their own taxation levels.

Indeed, the work we have done has already gained and secured widespread support.

I can refer to a letter from the organisation that represents the motoring clubs across Europe, including, for example, the AA and RAC, who are broadly sympathetic and supportive of our work, because they know that unless Europe takes a lead on this issue, unless we begin pulling together the best of the ideas from across the European Union, then the cities, towns and rural areas, will continue to suffer from unacceptable levels of congestion and pollution.

I commend Mr Costa's report, his work and, above all, his ability to bring us all together in a single common objective of trying to tackle the transport crisis.

Mr President, Commissioner, I would like to thank the rapporteur, Mr Costa, for his most excellent work.

I would also like to say thank you for the interesting debate on the subject with some illuminating examples.

I think it is important that the issue is now being dealt with by Parliament.

The main principle of the report is quite right, that users should pay for the transport infrastructure and its maintenance costs.

Charges for the use of the transport infrastructure must take account of the costs to society, but also the ability-to-pay principle and the need to support remote areas.

The importance of charging for the use of the transport infrastructure will increase as a means of controlling the situation in the future.

The system of charges must be flexible and dynamic, so that it would offer incentives for the introduction of new technical services.

As there are plans, however, for a combination of fares and taxes, we have to take care that we are not simply left with a system of taxation.

There are still a lot of problems attached to a system of charges.

Covering overall costs with fares will work in areas where there is a lot of transport.

Conditions vary regionally, however, to a significant extent, so the same bases for charges cannot apply everywhere.

Long distances, scattered populations and difficult natural conditions must be taken account of when the instruments in respect of charges are determined, just as the report states.

In my opinion, it is important that we look into the possible impact of the scheme before charging becomes a reality.

Mr President, Commissioner, first of all I would like to thank Mr Costa, who did, when all is said and done, put in a huge amount of work, having started by following the activities of the high-level working group on this subject, because it is an own-initiative report.

Ultimately, we were left with a report that we would have preferred, at the very least, to send out a different signal to the Commission, in particular.

In fact we expect more from the Commission than the signal sent out by what, in a sense, remains of the Costa report.

Allow me to explain as follows - it will also speak of a certain amount of exasperation.

Every so often, I cherish the hope that we will be sufficiently clever to gain insight into a certain period and do what we have to with it.

I have already anticipated for quite some time that fair pricing would be a rational, intelligent debate and would deliver measures.

When I see how long it all takes, that is when I start losing patience.

If I can draw something of a comparison between the way in which the discussion on the changes in the agricultural policy is now taking place against the backdrop of the problems surrounding food safety - in Germany, among a number of other countries, my own included - then I predict than something similar will happen where the transport policy is concerned, and the environmental problems we are now experiencing, irrespective of the failed climate conferences, etc.

I am also exasperated at the fact that almost everyone still hides behind all kinds of issues to do with our supposed inability to establish the cost scientifically. We can do it for accidents all right, but not for other things.

I have a problem with this.

Again, there is more than enough data for us to make headway with this whole affair.

I therefore hope concrete measures - of the kind, incidentally, that first featured in Mr Costa' s report and a number of which we quite deliberately re-submitted - will be included in the actual White Paper.

Not that we expect everyone to go along with them, but the primary intention is to send out a signal to the Commission to attempt, in the meantime, to coordinate, if not harmonise, these measures - which will include a kilometre levy and so on - at European level, so as to avoid a situation where one country does take action and another does not.

One country will say that none of this is scientifically feasible, while another will simply get on with implementation, which is a most curious state of affairs of course.

That is why we have put a number of subjects back on the table and we hope that some of them make it through.

Apart from that, I wish everyone luck at the drafting stage.

Mr President, I would also like to join Members in recognising the considerable work that has been carried out by the rapporteur and the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism, who have incorporated many amendments.

I would, however, like to come back to some points I think worth emphasising to make the report as effective as possible.

First of all, I feel it is imperative to point out that the main thing is to promote the sustainability of transport, which is a fundamental, long-term measure needed to protect our environment and avoid congestion.

On this issue, I do not believe that it is possible to consider freight transport on the same level as private transport.

The former is currently widely favoured as an economic activity, whereas the latter allows freedom of movement, a fundamental freedom.

We must extend the quality choice range in the variety of transport available.

That should then drive us to consider the need to improve services of general interest in these sectors that are so important to the people and to the economy.

Secondly, I also believe that we need to pinpoint priority issues.

We cannot consider rail users and road users on the same level either.

This means that the cost of road use is added to the total of costs borne by society such as environmental costs and the costs of accidents.

All studies have clearly shown this.

We must give this factor priority in terms of Community action.

To sum up, with regard to changes in charging, I believe that this type of charging should not further increase costs, particularly those paid by users.

Any infrastructure charging system, like the one proposed in my group' s amendment, should improve the services of general interest, which some transport services provide, in order to offer all citizens equal access to high-quality, safe and affordable services.

Mr President, Commissioner, it may be common knowledge that our group is not convinced of the need for all the current competences.

However, these go unchallenged in the sphere of the European transport policy. Yet this cross-border problem demands a cross-border solution.

That is something we are all agreed on in this House.

That is why I am surprised that opinion is so divided on this.

After all, we have agreed that we must strive for a sustainable transport policy, which allows for mobility both now and in the future.

Seen from this perspective, it is necessary for users of different forms of transport to foot the bill for the costs they incur, in order, in this way, to be able to repair the damage caused or prevent it from happening.

This concerns both the internal costs of the infrastructure and the external costs, which are less easy to convert and allocate.

In the present resolution, the emphasis is very much on the internal costs, which can be quantified very precisely at this stage.

Although these costs form a substantial part of the total costs incurred, it is wrong to suppose that this means the total costs are known.

The lack of complete knowledge concerning the magnitude of a particular cost item is not a legitimate reason for excluding this item from the methodology to be devised.

I can fully identify with Mr Bouwman' s amendments on this point, as I could with his contribution.

I would agree with those of you who have doubts, that passing on all costs incurred must not leave transport operators with such narrow margins as will put their livelihoods at risk.

In order to avoid this, however, we must not attempt to keep transport prices as low as possible, thereby keeping the costs to be passed on as low as possible, but what we must do instead is offer the transport operators legal support with a view to passing the costs incurred onto the group that should by rights foot the bill, namely the end-users.

Finally, I would point out that the optimum situation from the competition viewpoint is when there is a level playing field for all transport modes.

However, that must not be our sole point of departure.

In our efforts to secure sustainable mobility, we must concentrate specifically on those forms of transport which do society and the environment the least damage.

Supporting the development of such modes of transport may not be ideal from the competition perspective but is completely justifiable, also politically, given the goal to be achieved.

You will appreciate that I am unable to vote in favour of the present resolution as it stands.

Mr President, Commissioner, I too would like to start by thanking the rapporteur both for the enormous amount of work he has done and also, in particular, for his willingness to accept the suggestions, amendments and proposals of all the rest of the committee, to the point that I feel this report can be said to be a highly collegial report produced by the committee as a whole.

Moreover, the current situation is clear - the White Paper and the Green Paper illustrated it perfectly: there is a great problem because of the environmental and social costs we have to bear and because of the attack on free trade that the difference in taxes and taxation systems in our countries imposes upon their economic systems.

With this report, therefore, we have identified a possible situation, a road to take, and it is now up to the Commission to take it.

I recall the benchmarks that we all share: greater proportionality with regard to use in the distribution of costs, attentiveness to social costs, but also protection of disadvantaged geographical areas and sectors of the population, "yes" to environmental sustainability but, at the same time, reconfirmation of the right to mobility as a universal right.

The only recommendation I would venture to make, Commissioner, is that all this is good, particularly the shift to the "user pays" principle, but with the reservation that we cannot allow this principle to penalise the citizens or businesses.

Shifting to the "user pays" principle means entering into the rationale of providing a service for which a price is set, and we must therefore guarantee the citizens and businesses what they want and what they are willing to pay for: namely quality.

Quality in the context of transport, in my opinion, means above all safety, accessibility and coordination of infrastructures.

If we can provide this, then, at the same time, we will have overcome our present difficulties and set the wheels in motion for a new perspective for the future.

Mr President, I would like to add to the praise for Mr Costa, the rapporteur, because this is an extremely difficult subject and there are very conflicting opinions.

Furthermore, he has had many amendments to work through.

When all is said and done, I believe that the text presented is clear and consistent - no mean feat.

I think that this contribution by the European Parliament will enable the Commission to make good progress in its subsequent work.

The issue of infrastructure charging is perhaps one of the most difficult for the general public to understand, but it is perhaps also the key to achieving our objective of a sustainable freedom of movement, given that the number of people travelling and the amount of freight transported within the Union is expected to increase considerably.

Today, we know that road travel produces the most pollution but that it is also cheaper in terms of both infrastructure financing, which is often funded by the community, and in terms of its use.

Therefore, if we really wish to travel without causing so much damage to the environment, we will certainly need to establish charging; that is, how the various types of transport pay the real price of costs.

All the same, I believe that we must be very aware that the rail system is not and will not for many years be in a position to compete to a great extent with road transport, in particular in terms of freight transport or combined transport links, which are urgent priorities.

There are still considerable infrastructure costs and infrastructure and investment needs, and rail companies' profits do not provide enough to cover them.

Compared to road tolls, those on the railways are still too high with a concomitant strain on operating costs.

The issue of charging is therefore absolutely central to this matter and if we really wish to improve transport we need to be in a position to absorb efficiently the external costs of transport; as mentioned; in other words, so that road transport actually pays for all the costs it entails, as does rail transport, and so that the prices charged accurately reflect this transparency regarding costs.

We should not, however, close our eyes to one political stumbling block in all this.

The political stumbling block is that our fellow citizens want to travel.

They believe that they have the right to freedom of movement, something I think we should bear in mind, and very often they do not differentiate freight transport and the private car.

Therefore, on a political level, we must take a cautious approach, which should be both gradual and selective.

A gradual approach means that we cannot impose extra costs on road travel until the railway is in a position to take over from it, and for the time being the railway is not in any such position.

A selective approach is needed, because I believe that we have to distinguish between private transport and goods transport and that we may also have to gradually introduce taxes on heavy goods vehicles, if we really wish to improve pollution in regions like ours, that act as crossroads.

Mr President, we must make it very clear that this is not about the EU raising taxes or imposing a new tax over and above the existing national taxes.

It is an attempt to find a common set of criteria, of cost components for the transport infrastructure, and minimising substantial discrepancies across the EU.

However, it is up to the Member States to set and levy charges, albeit in a common framework.

At present, revenue is not earmarked for transport infrastructure.

Quite often, I know in the UK, it is used for bolstering government coffers.

I am sure it is the same in other EU Member States.

Transport costs should be paid by the user, but governments should not charge rural users if there is no public transport, and this report makes that very clear.

This report is about a level playing field: not to charge more but to charge more efficiently.

Hauliers in the UK complain that they are at a competitive disadvantage, and that is true.

Non-UK truck drivers do not pay UK road tax.

Other EU countries' average is ten times lower HTV taxes.

The same applies to diesel fuel: it is three times more expensive in the UK.

That leads to distortion of competition across the EU.

Instead of the UK Eurosceptics criticising this report, they should welcome it because it will do a lot to help our hard-pressed hauliers.

Mr President, I have not yet reached the point that a number of people whom I have heard speak this evening have reached.

As matters stand, infrastructure investments are made in waterways and other transport modes, for example.

Nobody knows exactly how much is invested.

On the other hand, the state receives revenue from transport, such as road tax.

Nobody knows precisely how much this amounts to, but one thing we do know is that it is not directly re-invested in roads and other forms of infrastructure.

This report addresses the balance between revenue and expenditure; intangible costs such as environmental and noise-related costs are also taken into account.

Some people also want to recoup the cost of traffic jams from those who get stuck in them, according to the 'polluter pays' principle.

I think this is an excellent principle and I would like to see it applied in full, but not to traffic jams.

Traffic jams are indicative of failed government policy on the infrastructure front, which is why the government itself, certainly in the Netherlands, must be regarded as the polluter.

This report talks about balancing the payment of social costs between the different modes of transport.

Let us take a moment to consider the train in this light.

Road transport always seemed to cause far more pollution than rail transport. Following research, this seems not to be the case.

Now the question is: what are we actually seeking to achieve by making social costs visible in this way?

Do we really want an objective, rational assessment of the costs of the transport modes, or, if certain results do not meet with our approval, for example if rail transport becomes prohibitively expensive as a result, will we end up making a political assessment?

We want people to travel by train and so it must be made more affordable.

That is fine by me, but not by using this method.

We are not going to tax water and road transport heavily first on the basis of the theoretical model, and then spare the train.

Road and passenger traffic already pay far more than their share in terms of social costs.

So either we stop beating about the bush, so that everyone knows what they can be for or against, or we operate a well-balanced and proportional system with guarantees for the disabled, people who live in rural areas and have no choices, and the competition position of the Union.

Commissioner, I must say, this is a hornet' s nest you have got yourself into. Why should a system of this kind only be applied to the transport sector?

Why should it not be applied to aluminium factories, hospitals, ski runs, hypermarkets, parliament buildings and high-voltage networks too?

Mr President, I would also like to congratulate the rapporteur, Mr Costa, but I would like to point out that he deserves congratulations not for his psychological capacity to unite wills, but for having included certain factors in the report which allow us all to be united.

I would like to highlight two of these factors, the ones which lead me to support the rest of his proposals.

The first is that the report, "stresses that such methodology needs a gradual and step-wise implementation based on transparency and sufficient information."

The second factor which leads me to approve this report is the subsidiarity issue, because, undoubtedly, Mr Costa' s report makes it absolutely clear - he has said this with complete transparency - that there is going to be an increase in the cost for users, as the cost of funding by the States is going to be passed on to users.

We therefore need this gradual implementation, which seems to me to be absolutely essential because, when we speak of tariffs in relation to internal and external costs, in the fullest sense of the word, which is currently difficult to define, we are talking about an increase in cost for the user.

Therefore, in fact, we are talking about favouring rail transport.

I believe that this is one of the bases which justify the imposition of tariffs.

The fact is that road transport - automobiles - have a clear and very serious environmental impact, so much so that they alone are replacing, and therefore increasing, what all the other industrial sectors are saving in terms of greenhouse gases.

The time has therefore come to tame the automobile.

Nobody wants to be deprived of an automobile, but we must tame it.

On the one hand, by means of research, aimed at reducing consumption.

On the other hand, however, we must also influence drivers.

It is clear that these tariffs are going to produce an increase in the cost to users so that they might consider the possibility of using public transport and the possibility of making more rational use of the railways - both for goods and for passenger transport.

I believe that this is the key factor, which truly justifies the Commission and Mr Costa' s proposed imposition of tariffs.

That is why we are going to support him but, of course, this gradual implementation seems to me to be fundamental to the consumer being able to accept and take this process on board.

Mr President, Commissioner, first of all I would like to congratulate Mr Costa on his handling of this difficult dossier.

It is an intractable subject and the fact that there are 126 amendments shows how divided opinion is, but at least it has led to a more realistic position.

Broadly speaking, I would, in theory, agree with the report that we need to have a more accurate idea of the marginal social costs of transport.

However, in practice, it would appear that such measures would be attended by unexpected and unintended effects.

That is why a great deal more research will need to be done before the prices can be calculated correctly.

I do not see eye to eye with Mr Bouwman on that score.

One of the undesirable effects is that the cost to roads will rise by a relatively small amount, around 10 to 15%.

This contrasts with the 100% rise in the cost to rail, and the 50% rise in the cost to internal navigation.

The desired modal shift will come under review again then.

My second concern is that the cost to transport will rise by a substantial amount. That would be to the detriment of Europe' s economic position.

Finally, I do not go along with the rapporteur' s proposal to depart from the 'user pays' principle, in that he wants to grant extra assistance to remote regions, for example.

Firstly we must consider in real terms whether this would lead to distortion of competition and an increase in the total costs.

I am against cross-subsidies for the same reason.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, thanks to the Costa report the discussion about a common framework for levying transport infrastructure charges has got going again.

If we want a single market that works, we need a transport system that works, in which the conditions of competition are equal or at least comparable for all those involved in transport.

The gradual harmonisation of transport infrastructure charges is the most important step towards that.

The way we agree to calculate costs is certainly important to the maintenance, operation and new development of infrastructure whether full costs or marginal costs, social marginal costs or social net costs.

But almost more important in terms of equal opportunities in competition is that we reach agreement, and do so as fast as possible.

Yet we must remember one thing. If we want to see fair competition between the various transport modes too then we need to go on discussing the implementation of the external costs.

To prevent that discussion also means preventing the integration of the various modes of transport and is therefore no more than lobbying, or a policy of lobbying for the status quo.

I will fight out the question of who is holding sham debates in this House with Mr Jarzembowski elsewhere; at present I only have two minutes' speaking time.

For heavy goods transport we urgently need a Europe-wide, kilometre-based heavy goods charge; here we could also envisage reducing the motor vehicle taxes.

Many transport associations are themselves seeing it that way now.

Only if we charge transport costs on the "user pays" principle can we obtain a market-compatible instrument to tackle the emerging crisis in goods transport, for we all know about the next leaps in goods transport costs: rising costs as a result of enlargement eastward, of e-commerce, and that is on top of the rates of increase we have seen up to now.

Mr President, I would firstly like to thank Mr Costa for his magnificent report and all the speakers for participating in this debate.

I am happy to be able to say that the Commission has received the report and its conclusions with great satisfaction.

I am aware of the great amount of work and the enormous effort that the rapporteur, Mr Costa, has put in to trying to achieve the greatest possible consensus, and for which he has been praised by Mr Jarzembowski and other speakers.

I would like to say that, with regard to such a sensitive and thorny issue as charging for infrastructures, it is a great achievement - and I stress this - to have almost squared the circle, because it is really difficult to reach a consensus on a proposal such as this.

This report is based on a series of seminars with the members of the Commission' s own high level group on charging for infrastructures and on an information conference on best practice in charging for infrastructures.

By this I mean that this is a well-worked, well-informed and studied document and we owe that firstly to Mr Costa and to the other speakers who have shown their great interest in such a thorny and difficult issue.

The report is therefore well-worked and makes a solid contribution to the understanding of the policy of charging for infrastructures as well as its application, a key issue in the orientation of transport policy and in making progress with a policy which guarantees lasting transport and mobility for the future and in dealing in a rational way with the extraordinary demand to which we are going to have to find a solution in the years to come.

The report also coincides with the Commission' s policy on charging for transport infrastructures.

The Commission believes that the lack of coordination in fiscal policies, the lack of coordination in Member States' charging, hinders the efficiency of transport operations and restricts the development of the single market and economic integration.

Whatever the treatment of the different means of transport, it imposes real costs on European companies and on society in general.

Consequently, the Commission has proposed the gradual implementation - and I am sorry that Mr Izquierdo has left, because he has not seen that not only has Mr Costa accepted that amendment, but that the Commission is happy that he has - of a harmonised framework for charging for infrastructures in the European Union which is applicable to all means of transport.

The Commission' s policy of charging for infrastructures provides a framework for the reform of charges and taxes on transport, with a view to reflecting environmental costs, infrastructure costs and the cost of managing demand for transport.

Progress has been made, as in the case of the approval in December of the measures on railway infrastructures through the conciliation procedure.

A great deal, however, remains to be done.

I am therefore pleased to be able to assure Parliament that the concerns highlighted in the report in relation to charging for infrastructures will be taken fully into account in the next Commission White Paper on the common transport policy, which I referred to previously and which, although somewhat later than the dates initially envisaged, will enable us to make progress in solving one the most complex problems of that transport policy: charging for infrastructures.

All of that will be possible thanks to the magnificent work of the Members of this Parliament and Mr Costa in particular.

Thank you very much, Mrs de Palacio.

The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon.

(The sitting was closed at 11.40 p.m.)

Approval of the Minutes of the previous sitting

Yesterday' s Minutes have been distributed.

Mr President, I must apologise, because this is not a comment on yesterday 's Minutes, but on the Minutes from the day before yesterday.

Unfortunately, I noticed too late that my name was not on the attendance register.

However, I was here the entire day and took part in all the roll-call votes and other votes.

I would be grateful if this could therefore be corrected.

Mr Posselt, of course the Minutes will be corrected to reflect the true situation.

Mr President, Mrs Maes is not present in the Chamber.

She is attending a Bureau meeting of our group.

But I noticed that she is not listed on yesterday' s attendance register. She was quite definitely there.

She spoke in the debate on the Swedish Presidency.

I would ask you to amend the attendance register accordingly.

That will certainly be done, Mr Staes.

Mr President, on Monday afternoon, Parliament proposed that the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs should look into the situation of the workers of the European corporation, Danone, threatened with the loss of 3000 jobs in the biscuit sector, 1700 of which are in France.

We do not know when the committee is going to meet to discuss this matter and it is very urgent as the European Board of Danone is going to meet tomorrow.

Today, the workers of this company, in France at least, are on strike.

I would like to hear your reply on the subject of this inquiry and, in the meantime, on behalf of myself and my fellow party members, I would like to express solidarity with these workers. It is appalling that a corporation worth millions should be able to drive thousands of workers throughout Europe into unemployment and poverty.

Mrs Laguiller, I would suggest that, given the importance and the nature of the matter, you speak to the chairman of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs, Mr Rocard.

Mr President, I wonder if you have seen the exclusive report in today's edition of Le Figaro.

It contains an interview with a Corsican terrorist under the headline 'Armata corsa: menace terroriste sur Paris et Strasbourg.'

The terrorist belongs to the Armata Corsa organisation.

The interview appears on the front page of today's Le Figaro and says that the Armata Corsa is threatening direct strikes on Paris and Strasbourg if its demands, which include the release of prisoners, are not met.

The newspaper says that it has published the article in order to alert French public opinion to the immediate danger threatening it and it also states, by way of information, that emergency measures have been taken in Paris in order to deal with this immediate threat.

I should like to draw the bureau's attention to this major issue and ask if it knows anything about this and if it has made representations to the authorities in Strasbourg for additional measures to be taken to protect Parliament because it seems to me that anyone who so wishes can enter the Parliament building and I fear that we may have to deal with highly dangerous and unforeseen circumstances.

Mr Marinos, I wish to say, first of all, that I am grateful for your information, or at least for the fact that you have shared it with us.

There is a feeling in Parliament, which I think is shared by all Members, that the authorities governing this institution take account of and give great priority to the issue of security.

I therefore feel that everything necessary is either being done or being considered in order to guarantee the smooth functioning of this Chamber in Strasbourg or in Brussels in the most secure conditions possible.

In any event, thank you for your information.

Mr President, as rapporteur in the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy on preparations for the accession of the Czech Republic, I have a request to make of you.

It has come to our attention that a member of the Czech Parliament, Mr Ivan Pilip, has been arrested in Cuba.

He has evidently been accused of spying.

The truth is that he met civil rights campaigners and that his actions were quite normal for a member of a freely elected parliament.

Mr President, I urge you to arrange for a request to be made to the Cuban authorities for Mr Pilip and those accompanying him to be released immediately, because the Cuban regime does not have any moral grounds for giving lessons in democracy to members of a freely elected parliament.

I have all the more reason for asking you this given that in April this year a meeting of the Inter-Parliamentary Union is due to take place in Cuba.

How can one possibly justify holding a meeting of this kind in a country where members of parliament are arrested if they talk to civil rights campaigners?

Thank you very much, Mr Schrder, I shall convey your information and your concern - which, I think we all share - to Mrs Fontaine, the President of this Parliament, who will certainly state Parliament' s position on this issue.

Mr President, I rise to request that the threats of terrorism against this House be taken seriously and that the Secretary-General draw up a plan to actually guarantee the safety of this House.

I shall repeat what I said a few moments ago: I believe that Parliament takes security issues extremely seriously, and we all feel that the circumstances in which we work and the fame of Parliament itself make it a target.

The competent authorities are therefore very attentive to this issue and to looking at measures to improve the situation so that we can work safely and in peace.

Mr President, also on the question of the security of the House, you will recall that on 28 November 2000, the Turkish Foreign Minister addressed the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy of this House and he was interrupted by demonstrators.

This was a cause for great concern.

At the time, we drew the attention of the President to this matter and she promised she would look into it and find out what the circumstances were, how the demonstrators had got into Parliament, and take appropriate steps to ensure that such things did not happen again.

In the context of what we have been discussing, the security of this House, I wonder if you would follow this up and see what steps have been taken to improve security and report on that particular incident last November.

Mr Van Orden, the President of Parliament and the Bureau fully note your comment and you will soon have a response to the important issue that you have raised.

Balanced participation of women and men in the decision-making process

The next item is the report (A50373/2000) by Mrs Karamanou, on behalf of the Committee on Women' s Rights and Equal Opportunities, on a report from the Commission to the Council, the European Parliament and the Economic and Social Committee on the implementation of Council Recommendation 96/694 of 2 December 1996 on the balanced participation of women and men in the decision-making process [COM(2000) 120 - C5-0210/2000 - 2000/2117(COS)].

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, as you all know, respect for the human rights and fundamental freedoms of women is a very recent affair.

It was not until the twentieth century that women acquired the right to access education, the sciences, the arts and paid employment and that they were finally recognised as beings with political rights.

The 20th century began with women fighting for the right to vote.

At the start of the twenty-first century, the demands of half the population on the planet centre around achieving a fair division of responsibilities and obligations between the sexes in all sectors of economic, social, family and political life.

The need for women to be promoted in the decision-making process and for a balanced participation of women and men in the democratic institutions, reflecting the balance of the sexes in nature, is a sine qua non of democracy and peace and of the cohesion and competitiveness of the European Union.

In response to this need and on the basis of documented proposals by the European network of experts which made up the Commission in 1992, the Council adopted an important recommendation to the Member States on the balanced participation of men and women in the decision-making process in December 1996.

We can see from the details provided by the Member States that little progress has been made over the last three years and that there are huge discrepancies between the Member States.

The most satisfactory results are in countries which have a long tradition of promoting equality of the sexes, such as Sweden and Finland, where the proportion of women in parliament and government is over 40%.

Sweden, as you all know, has a cabinet of 10 male and 10 female ministers.

And of course, at the other end of the spectrum, there are countries such as Greece and Italy, where the proportion of women is below or around 10%.

The problem obviously relates to the upper rather than the lower echelons of administration, where the real decisions are taken, where the real power is exercised, where the future of the European Union is planned and organised.

Clearly, courageous measures are needed if the problems and contradictions inherited from past covenants between the sexes are to be resolved.

We need a new institutional and social framework which reflects all the changes that have taken place since, which guarantees equal opportunities and divides responsibilities fairly and evenly between the two sexes, so that any decisions taken reflect the wishes, values, priorities, interests and abilities of both sexes of the human race.

Now that women are fully involved in the production process and outnumber men at European universities, there is no excuse to exclude them from policy- and decision-making processes, nor is it right that women should bear the burden of family obligations and home-making alone.

According to studies and research, men and women working and taking decisions together, a balance between the male and female, could result in a more balanced and fairer world.

This balance must not, of course, drop below 40% for each sex, which is considered an acceptable percentage, especially in Scandinavia, where it has been applied for years now.

What is certain is that, once there is a critical mass of women in the decision-making process, priority issues relating to the quality of life, such as environmental protection, social policy and welfare, medical care, education, the fight against drugs and trafficking in human beings and the peaceful resolution of conflicts will emerge on the political agenda.

If we are to move in this direction, i.e. if we are to achieve a balanced participation of the sexes, we need to adopt specific initiatives and measures, such as revising the party political structure and the procedure for selecting candidates.

The legislation on public funding for political parties should make provision for greater funding for parties which guarantee a gender balance within the party and for sanctions for parties which have too few women, as was recently decided in France.

Governments, especially in countries in which the proportion of women is below 30%, should consider how to adapt and reform their electoral systems.

Similarly, if quotas introduced are to be effective, they must be linked with other measures relating to political parties and the reform of the electoral system.

We also need to tackle stereotypes by teaching the role of the sexes from an early age and to cultivate women's ability to hold high office.

We need to strengthen the social infrastructure in order to care for and support senior citizens and, finally, the Member States need to take part in the next Intergovernmental Conference to reform the Treaty so that there is a strong legal basis which will guarantee a balanced participation of the two sexes in the institutions of the European Union, so that we can finally do the obvious and ensure that the natural balance of the sexes is also expressed in the centres of power and that any decisions taken on the future of Europe are not taken in the absence of women.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, how can we strive to create a balance between men and women in their working life, both in the private sector and in public institutions, and both at European and national level?

We need an effective strategy leading to positive measures.

We need to combat ignorance and outmoded clichs about gender roles.

Our role model should be those confident women who very effectively occupy senior positions and who actively participate in the community.

However, they, and this applies equally to men, have to be able to manage their domestic commitments just as well as they cope with the professional demands placed on them.

On behalf of the Group of the European People's Party (Christian Democrats) and European Democrats, I would like to congratulate Mrs Karamanou on her report, which includes many important sections, such as the demand for the role of women to be enhanced or for action to be taken to counter women's inadequate representation in management and decision-making bodies within companies and also, I have to say, in trade unions.

The lack of equal opportunities in the labour market needs to be tackled by developing talent early on.

We also support the call for gender-specific statistics in order to produce meaningful comparisons of objectives and outcomes.

We are in favour of cooperation between the two sexes and therefore want to see women's concerns, outlook and experience making a contribution.

They really do enhance a man' s world.

However, on some points there is not a majority amongst the Members of the PPE Group in the Committee on Women's Rights and Equal Opportunities.

That is why one half voted for the report and the other half against - now that is equality.

The main concerns are covered in the four amendments which I have tabled jointly with Astrid Lulling.

Mrs Karamanou has already agreed to one of them: career and family are no longer to be described as a double disadvantage which women have to face, but rather as a twofold burden which they have to cope with and which they can indeed cope with in practice.

Another amendment opposes the idea that women need to be trained in areas like public speaking and assertiveness if they are to get on in the world.

For one thing, men also have shortcomings in these areas and, what is more, these days many women do not wait to be given financial support to do this.

They are doing it themselves and have been doing so for a long time.

However, the two most important amendments are about rejecting the establishment of quotas.

We know that there are various systems in the Member States.

Some have quota arrangements of one kind or another.

Some want a kind of exchange system, alternating men and women, and others stipulate that the parties have to pay fines if an adequate proportion of women is not guaranteed in their lists.

The principle of subsidiarity should come into play here.

Surely it is not right for individual measures in Member States to be eroded by Europe through the back door.

Elsewhere, governments are called upon to review the differential impact of varying electoral systems.

That is not a job for governments - it is a job for the parties.

They should look at this and draw up their voting lists carefully with this in mind.

It is their job and not one for governments.

We regard these amendments as so important that we have requested a roll-call vote.

If you could give us your support on this, Mrs Karamanou, your report could well secure an overwhelming majority.

Anyone deeply concerned about equal opportunities needs to make sure not only that the overall objectives are right, but that the detail is right too.

The more precisely we word this, the greater its credibility will be, especially among those who do not have sufficient experience in this field, and that will make it all the more likely that we will secure a broad consensus today.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the policy of the Group of the Party of European Socialists is for every female citizen of the EU to have access to decision-making processes at local, regional, national and European level.

Equal participation for women in political and social decision making is not only our legitimate right, but a social necessity.

We do not just enrich a man' s world; we are participating in all areas of this supposedly male world.

As the new millennium dawns, we are continuing to fight alongside our colleague Mrs Karamanou, who I would like to thank sincerely for her persistence and hard work, in order to move closer to the objective of equality in the distribution of power between men and women.

It has been a long haul from the first women's suffrage, in Finland in 1904, to gender-balanced political lists in France, and we still have a long way to go before we can take women presidents, mayors, ministers and party chairs for granted as a part of everyday life.

The European Union has made considerable progress in this regard.

We have now been able to increase the proportion of women in the European Parliament to 30%, and it is, incidentally, markedly higher in the left-wing groups than in the Conservative and more right-wing groups.

25% of the Commission is made up of women, and the figure is 24.8% in the governments of the Member States and 22.5% in national parliaments.

I am pleased to bear glad tidings from my own country.

Since the last government reshuffle in Germany, women now make up 37.5% of the Federal German Government, and this has been achieved by my party, by my political family.

We are therefore confident about our own role and can act as a driving force for equal rights and the demands arising from the Karamanou report.

I must call upon the House to support the rapporteur, Mrs Karamanou, as regards the three issues just raised by Mr Mann, and stick to the original text presented by the committee.

It would be a mistake to reject quotas, as the parties are being urged to do.

Furthermore, we also supported quotas as advocated in the report to the World Conference on Women in Beijing.

The right thing is to keep all mechanisms open.

Mr President, I should first of all like to thank Mrs Karamanou for a really outstanding report.

I think it is exemplary in the way it is written.

The report clearly emphasises the big differences between the Member States, but there is one thing all the countries have in common: there is no equality, including in those countries which are furthest along the road, and here I am thinking, for example, of the Scandinavian countries.

In Scandinavia, we have made a lot of progress at parliamentary level, both on the back and the front benches.

Only Sweden and Finland are mentioned, and Denmark is included in an aside.

I should therefore like to say a couple of things about Denmark.

I want to stress that 9 of the 21 ministers in the Danish government are women and that both the Minister of Economic Affairs and the Minister of Finance are women.

My own party has 4 female ministers at the moment and one male minister, plus a female leader of the parliamentary party and a female party chairman, and I am the only woman elected to the European Parliament.

We have fortunately never gone in for quota systems for, if that were the case, I believe that men would have begun to take advantage of the fact.

In the Scandinavian countries too, however, there are very few women in management posts, particularly at the highest level.

Denmark has nothing to boast about, and nor has Sweden, as far as I can see.

As was pointed out yesterday, the Swedish Prime Minister' s delegation consisted only of men.

We clearly have a problem, therefore.

I personally believe that this has to do with the demands made of women in the hierarchical system.

But that is, of course, something we can discuss.

Globalisation and ICT will pull in two different directions.

Clearly, ICT has a flat structure, and that is to women' s advantage.

Globalisation has a concentrated structure, which is to the disadvantage of women who thoroughly lose out in the hierarchical system.

In conclusion, I want to say that my most important message is that cooperation at European level can be extremely useful to us, but we must recognise that the different countries face very different problems, and quite different initiatives are therefore required.

We must distinguish between those things from which we can all benefit in the Community, for example statistics that can be compared, and those areas in which we can clearly only offer each other inspiration.

That attitude will be of no less immediate importance in connection with enlargement.

Here, we are concerned with countries which may well have the legislation in place, but not the tangible arrangements, and joint aid on our part is really needed in this area.

Mr President, I wish to congratulate Mrs Karamanou on a very good and comprehensive report.

One of its main themes is the need for an integrated strategy.

If we are to tackle the very serious imbalance of representation of men and women, not only in the political sphere but also in decision-making at all levels in society, this is essential.

We should remember that just last year the Finnish presidency looked at nine sectors in the Member States, including national, regional and local parliaments, the civil service and the supreme courts.

Wherever it looked it found women were under-represented.

The problems have been recognised for a long time, but progress on solving them has been slow.

We repeat ourselves constantly in these reports, calling for better statistics and training, awareness campaigns to encourage more women into politics in the same way as they have already very often become key players in their own communities and local groups, and for measures to make it easier for men and to women to balance work and family life.

We have to keep on saying these things because they are needed.

But, in addition, we need positive action, such as quotas, to make a real difference.

This report does not dictate what should be done in individual Member States, but calls upon the governments to look at their own situation and take action to improve the balance of women and men, using legislative means, if necessary, as some have already done.

Where these measures have been used, they have been successful, not only in getting more women elected to Parliament but also in raising awareness, providing good role models for other women - girls in particular - and improving debate and decision-making all around.

So the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance will support all the conclusions of the report because it will contribute towards achieving equality and real democracy.

Mr President, in the Swedish Encyclopaedia of Women' s History, the entry under the heading Patriarchy reads as follows:

'A social system based on hierarchical relations between men, structured so that the decision-making processes are controlled from the top down and so that women as a sex are placed in a subordinate position.

The ideological justification is provided by a system of values designed by male thinkers and founded on men' s perception of reality.

The material basis of this system consists of a division of labour according to gender which, at all levels of the hierarchies, assigns to women the tasks which are either unpaid or more poorly paid.

One of the prerequisites of this is control of women' s sexuality and fertility.

This control in turn requires structural violence against women, on the one hand, and that women practise self-repression, on the other.'

I would like to come back briefly to the question of how we practise self-repression.

After all, it is not just in this Chamber - it also happens throughout the various sectors of society - that representatives of the Group of the European People' s Party discuss the allocation of quotas and, for some reason I cannot fathom, have a terrible dread of allocating quotas according to gender.

It is said that women must be appointed on merit, but I should like to ask the question which, more often than not, employers and leading male politicians apparently fail to ask: What merits are we actually looking for?

After all, we know that, to a large extent, women and men are at present unequally represented in society as a whole.

We in the Confederal Group of the European United Left/Nordic Green Left have no problem whatsoever with backing Mrs Karamanou' s report one hundred per cent - on the contrary.

We are waiting for what is called the 'ketchup effect' .

We have now been waiting for 150 years, so we do not want to wait even another two years for something to happen.

Mrs Karamanou, I think that the low level of representation of women and, indeed, young people in our parliaments is the result of a democratic deficit, not a surplus. Closed electoral lists drawn up directly by the parties - as recommended in your report - where it is not even possible to express a preference vote, represent the best system for achieving proportional representation of parties, or rather party officials and candidates selected by parties, be they women or men, in our parliaments.

On the contrary, I think the slow progress in representation of women and young people in our parliaments is actually due to electoral systems which prevent candidates standing against each other and being chosen, if only in primary elections, by the people rather than by party secretaries.

I doubt if the statistics are particularly telling either way - I wonder what Margaret Thatcher or Hilary Clinton would think of your position on the majority system - but a great deal of data and evidence exists to demonstrate the opposite of your theses.

Another recommendation, made in the explanatory statement to your report, is to go so far as to grant public financing incentives to the parties which get the most women into parliament.

Although done with the best of intentions, that could be the road to bureaucracy and subsidised representation and representativeness in our parliaments, and it is a road I do not feel we should take.

Women' s representation requires more democracy, not less.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, our central concern must be to establish equal opportunities between men and women.

By equal opportunities I do not mean levelling down, I mean equal opportunities for equally qualified women to join and progress in the decision-making process and in professional life, for example by eliminating differences in salaries between men and women doing equivalent work.

We know from the statistics that in nearly all countries at least half the electorate is made up of women, yet the number of women in decision-making positions in companies and in public bodies is remarkably low.

I regard the prime political task as being to eliminate all barriers to equal opportunities.

I have in mind framework conditions that allow women to take responsibility for shaping their own individual lifestyle.

A policy that shifts this task to economic players lets policy makers off the hook at the expense of those affected.

Because the issues involved are social protection, the value of family work, qualifications and skills, working conditions, working hours and much more besides.

It is not a matter of quotas and positive discrimination.

If you will forgive me, I consider that notion in itself to be absurd.

I do not want to have my job because I am a woman, but because I am qualified for it, and I believe that many women feel the same way.

Mr President, Commissioner, this report deals with the balanced participation of men and women in the decision-making process by analysing the different situations and the lack of participation of women.

We always point out that we women make up half of the population and therefore we need greater participation so that women can feel duly represented.

However, it is important to point out that the incorporation of women into public life and the labour market in prominent positions is very recent.

And we should also point out that it has happened thanks to the efforts of women themselves, who have had to overcome enormous difficulties.

It is a long road along which we must continue to make progress, until such time as it is so normal to find women in the positions which have always been occupied by men that reports such as this are no longer necessary.

Women need support, they need more training, more convenient hours of work and sufficient help so that they can reconcile their professional lives with their family lives.

Greater participation by women means improvements in democracy and the full recognition of their rights on equal terms with men.

We agree with the majority of the report - and we would like to support it totally - with the exception of the specific reference to establishing fixed obligatory quotas, because that could create added problems for women themselves.

We argue for more balanced and higher-level participation by women than there is at present, particularly in certain countries of the European Union.

The European network of equality committees of the national parliaments, which already exists, should be strengthened, because it is a very appropriate forum for the exchange of experiences and of good practice.

Women must be involved in all areas - not just in the defence of their own rights - by participating in the resolution of everyday problems, in the institutions and on company management boards, in unions and in social and cultural organisations.

Mr President, a successful man once said that half of heaven is borne up by women.

But the voices of women are absent when it comes to taking key decisions and setting priorities.

In other words, women, who make up more than half of the world' s population, are seriously under-represented in political, economic and social areas.

This is unacceptable in a democracy.

Nowhere is the rift between de jure and de facto equality greater than within the decision-making process.

In order to achieve a balance, a concrete plan of action with a set timetable is needed.

An important part of such a plan is a benchmarking system.

I am therefore very pleased that Mrs Karamanou would like to see such a system.

I propose that the EU' s objectives regarding women in the decision-making process be based on the average of the three most successful Member States within each field, with annual reports from the Member States.

It is mainly women who are victims of violations of human rights, such as rape, sexual offences, abuse in the home and trafficking.

Women are under-represented on the legal and legislative bodies that judge these crimes.

This leads to the latter being given low priority.

Often, the perpetrators are not prosecuted. The equal participation of women in decision-making processes is not only a matter of demanding social justice and democracy, but is also essential if women' s experience and knowledge is to be made the most of.

Failure to utilise women' s decision-making abilities is an unacceptable waste.

In Sweden, the Social Democratic Party has opted for the allocation of quotas. This comes after many years' struggle to increase the number of women involved in the party, which is to say qualified women.

Women represent 50 per cent of our Government and 44 per cent of the Swedish Parliament.

The only party to have openly opposed this is the Conservative Party. All these women, however, are qualified.

Women should not only bear up half of heaven, they should also accept responsibility for decisions concerning our whole world.

Mr President, I want to express my thanks for a good report.

It should be obvious to everyone that men and women should have the same opportunities to participate in decision-making at all levels, but unfortunately this is not the case.

We need greater equality in the home, access to good child care, shared parental responsibility, more encouragement within educational systems to break with traditional gender-linked roles, and flexible working hours in order to accommodate individual requirements.

In addition to this, we also need working methods in politics, industry and trade unions which are not based on men' s priorities.

Despite the fact that politics continues, to a far too great extent, to be a male domain - in some countries more than in others - the problems are greater still in industry and trade union organisations.

This is unacceptable and needs to be the focus of more attention.

Equality is not a women' s issue and can only be achieved through cooperation between both sexes.

Therefore, men must be involved - in a totally different way than at present - in working towards equality.

For instance, more men should be actively involved in working towards equality within this Parliament.

We need more women in decision-making positions, but - and this is where I agree with Mrs Theorin - not because they are women but because it is unacceptable for so much skill and experience to go to waste.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, Mrs Karamanou' s report places emphasis on a very important issue: equality between men and women is extremely precarious.

All the figures consistently demonstrate this and we are making slow progress.

That is why, in my view, we have to keep emphasising the issue of decision making and what Europe can do.

Europe has played a leading role in the struggle for equality of treatment, on the one hand, and equality in decision making, on the other.

This has been largely inadequate, however, bearing in mind the contents of the Charter of Fundamental Rights, where decision making on policy is taken into account only with regard to European Parliament or local elections.

I would just like to tell you about the French situation, where we have a law which is currently being implemented for local elections.

In the battles we are waging we discover that every day in the French press there are truly fascinating articles and debates about the way that the real situation is being transformed, for, Mrs Karamanou, alongside Greece, France is the most backward country in Europe in this regard.

Today, with the game of musical chairs that is being played by the government, women make up 8% of the national parliament.

That is less than 10%, and that means that the French situation is significant.

The debate we are having today in this Chamber is one that has been going on continuously for two or three years in France.

I have just one argument in defence of equality, not just political equality but equality in general.

This argument, which is both political and philosophical, is this: there is no equality without restrictions, and I challenge the Group of the European People' s Party to prove otherwise.

Let us not talk of positive discrimination quotas or anything else.

There can be no production in our society without restrictions in order to ensure equality.

This is the only comment I wanted to make.

It was our final argument in the battle for equality.

That is why I want to add very quickly, by way of conclusion, that there is nevertheless something important which must be clarified in today' s debate about decision making, which does not cover the whole problem regarding sexual equality, and that is the difference between political and economic matters.

We now know what we have to do in the political arena, and I believe we are making progress.

Certainly, I am gaining a great deal from the current experience in France.

As regards economic equality in general, and decision making in particular, however, the problem is much more serious and much more extensive.

As my fellow member in the Group of the Europe Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party has just mentioned, what happens within trades unions and in professional elections has as yet hardly been formulated.

We have to work on this.

It is a much more complex issue.

I believe that in future we must no longer talk about political equality without finding the appropriate mechanisms. These will not be the same mechanisms in terms of constraints as those used in the political arena.

The means of guaranteeing better representation of women both in industry and at a professional level must be found.

Mr President, when I started out in politics some thirty years ago, and I went along to the preliminary meeting of the Mexico World Conference on Women, which took place in New York, I accompanied the only female diplomat our country had at the time.

All the discussions in New York on how we could help women penetrate the world of decision making, the world of employment, etc., were wasted on her.

She had reached her goal under her own steam, but she had made so many sacrifices along the way that she had become a woman whom I do not wish other women to take as a role model. For women who made their way into politics, diplomacy, etc. many years ago, are women who had to make huge sacrifices.

What we want is to give women the opportunity to find their niche in decision making, politics and the world of employment in a normal way, with some help from society.

We might well question how this should be done. How can we help women?

For years, we have been looking for strategies for a society which pays lip service to the idea that women must be given all opportunities, but which has so little input when it comes to setting up binding, effective strategies in order to achieve this.

The few strategies which were set up have always been strategies with target figures or quotas - call them what you will.

The target figure system or the quota system is not a system which only applies to women.

In my country, where the two language regions, Dutch and French, should coexist in harmony, we also apply quotas for language proportions.

The quota system, therefore, is not a system specifically designed for women.

People now act as if it were a system which only applies to women, but it is a system that is used in many areas of society.

It is likely that it will also be applied to other areas in future.

I cannot understand, therefore, those who are so anxious about this system.

Each time, I wonder whether the reason why they are against the quota system is because, ultimately, their aim is to prevent women from joining at all, or whether it is genuinely because they have fundamental objections.

I am in favour of a quota system.

This view is not shared by the majority of my group, but is by a number of others.

I am an advocate of the system.

I successfully introduced it in Belgium as the only country in Europe, and it was soon copied in France.

I believe it is one of the few practical options which exist at the moment.

Mr President, Commissioner, despite the fact that the number of women in education, employment and politics has increased and continues to increase, it is clear that there are still great problems and inequalities in the social sectors under discussion.

Those who trust in the idea that, thanks to official equality and the passage of time, self-regulatory mechanisms will work in favour of social balance, are mistaken, because they do not appreciate the fact that, although equality before the law and equality of opportunity are necessary conditions, they are not sufficient in themselves.

Women with the necessary abilities often do not make it, but we know many cases of men who attain positions of power without having sufficient merit and they are never called 'quota men' .

Parity democracy, which we have been talking about for many years, is an instrument which is intended, through balanced representation, to put an end to the model of structural power which has kept women out of the decision-making process.

It is essential to create administrative structures which promote and monitor gender equality, and it would also be very helpful to resume the work of the European network of experts in the promotion of women in the field of decision-making, which had considerable success in the past.

On the other hand - as Mrs Karamanou' s excellent report points out - it is especially important to promote the participation of men and women in all policies at a proportion of a minimum of 40% and a maximum of 60%.

In this respect, the systems of alternating men and women on party lists, promoted in certain political parties, have had unquestionable success.

So the aim must be the adoption of national electoral regulations which provide for the creation of parity lists.

The next Intergovernmental Conference must include amendments to the Treaty in this respect, so that this objective may be fulfilled in all the institutions and policies of the Union.

Mr President, Commissioner, fellow women MEPs, if we want to improve our democracy - and that should be our objective here - it is essential that we share responsibilities and power.

Mr President, the participation of women in decision making is not only a necessary condition for the rights and interests of women to be respected, but also an essential basis for consolidating justice and developing democracy.

The reality of the situation shows that, despite various recommendations and resolutions, this is an area in which major imbalances still remain, with a huge under-representation of women in decision-making bodies, both in economic and social spheres of activity and in politics, and this contributes to maintaining existing imbalances and discriminations.

As the rapporteur, whom I congratulate on her work, emphasises, it is therefore crucial to adopt bold measures to promote the participation of women in decision-making, which will also require men and women to take on an equal share of responsibilities in public and private life. We must also encourage new anti-discriminatory practices, and that includes within political parties and public and private administrations too, with the aim of eliminating the psychological and practical obstacles to the participation of women in decision-making structures and in political life, thereby preventing retrograde action such as the recent case in Portugal, where the government abolished the Ministry for Equality.

Mr President, Madam Commissioner, I am in favour of a much more balanced participation of women and men in the decision-making process than is currently the case.

But, unlike our rapporteur, I am not conceited enough to claim that everything would be different and better if women participated equally in the decision-making process.

Nevertheless, we must not accuse all men across the board of having the wrong intentions, for example in relation to defending the rights of children or to the environment, to name just a few of the areas mentioned in this context by our rapporteur.

Fortunately, there are men who are talented and fervent supporters of the rights and interests that are close to our hearts.

Unfortunately, there are also female politicians who just cannot be relied upon, even when it comes to putting more female candidates on the electoral lists.

In my long political career I can tell you that it has mostly been women who, afraid of competition from me, have tried to put spokes in my wheels.

It must, of course, be said that, despite the good policies of equal treatment and equal opportunities which have been developed since 1975 by the Community and, above all, despite the well-intentioned recommendation of the Council in 1996 on the balanced participation of women and men in the decision-making process, progress towards these objectives is slow. It is moving at a snail' s or a tortoise' s pace rather than at the speed of a racehorse.

The reason why I voted against this draft resolution on the Commission report in the Committee on Women' s Rights and Equal Opportunities was because it makes a number of exaggerated claims and demands, which are counter-productive for women who want to participate fully in the decision-making process.

I am therefore against the reference to a 40% quota, below which measures would be called for to achieve a balanced representation of both genders.

I am of the opinion that such measures are essential now and in the future, irrespective of the percentage of participation that is achieved.

I am against the demand addressed to political parties that they adopt quota systems and, in particular, the zipper system to set up the electoral lists.

This zipper system would be incompatible with the electoral law of my country where, fortunately for me, it is not the political party which decides the place of a candidate on the electoral list, but the people, by means of preference votes.

What we need to do is to call on political parties to reform their structures and procedures with a view to getting rid of the direct and indirect obstacles to the participation of women, given that Member States could encourage political parties to put a larger number of female candidates on their electoral lists, by means of financial incentives if necessary.

Finally, I find it absurd to demand that only women be trained to take on leading roles and to take decisions when many men, who already have such roles and jobs, would greatly benefit from such training.

My Group has tabled amendments to get rid of the counter-productive demands I have just described and I hope that these amendments will be adopted.

I would just like to make one more comment, which I should not really do before the vote, on the French translation of our amendments.

It is defective to the extent that these amendments are not only incomprehensible but, as co-author, I am bound to say that, when I read these amendments in French, I feel like a mother hen who can no longer find her chicks.

So, Mr President, it is the German text which takes precedence.

I ask Members to be aware of this and to bear it in mind when we vote.

Mr President, Commissioner, as the rapporteur has told us, the number of declarations, resolutions and undertakings on equal opportunities for men and women is pretty respectable.

The Treaty of Amsterdam is ultimately the legal basis and it defines equal opportunities between men and women as one of the main priorities of European policy.

However, although there has been some modest progress, there are still some conspicuous shortcomings.

There is a marked imbalance in the involvement of men and women in the decision-making process, and there are alarming differences between individual Member States.

Throughout Europe, there are especially few women in leading positions in administration and in political decision making.

This means that everyone involved in the economic and social world has to play a part if responsibility is to be distributed evenly across the public and private sectors, in business, politics and family life.

Above all, we need to recognise that the equal opportunities deficit in the labour market is partly attributable to the low proportion of women in Europe's businesses, in its trade unions and in its public sector, and partly attributable to an inadequate social infrastructure, distorted stereotypes and low pay.

One important area we need to tackle is education and training.

Amongst other things, women have to learn to lay claim to a role in leadership and decision making.

You cannot talk about balance when women account for just 40% of all those involved in politics at European or national level.

Quotas are therefore an important instrument if we are to approach this target.

But it is not just a question of increasing the number of women, but also about enhancing their role in society and recognising the quality of their work.

Party and government structures need to be examined and where they are found to be lacking we need to jointly create binding requirements, such as ministries for equal opportunities.

Greater involvement of women in public life needs to be regularly monitored using up-to-date statistics. This would also clearly demonstrate that not only have we reached targets but that we have also regressed in certain areas.

This means that we have to promote equal opportunities while, at the same time, defending what has already been achieved.

Mr President, I would like to express the point of view of working women not only because it is on them, of all women, that the burden of social organisation weighs most heavily, but also because the workers' movement can take pride in having been the first to fight for the recognition of equality between men and women.

Long before the ruling class gave women the right to vote, the workers' movement had already, within its own organisation, given leading women the place they deserved.

The fate of working women is linked to the status of the working class as a whole.

It is women who are the main victims of insecure employment, enforced part-time work and the low salaries that are paid for such work.

What is unacceptable is that insecure employment, enforced part-time work and low salaries are allowed to exist.

Speeches about equality between men and women will continue to be just so much hot air as long as countless working families are deprived of adequate housing and as long as there are not enough public amenities, child care centres and nursery schools.

In all areas, European institution policy is no more favourable to the interests of working women than Member State policy.

Although I will vote in favour of the report because of the good intentions that are stated in it, they are still nothing more than good intentions.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, even today we cannot assume that men and women can work alongside each other with equal rights in all areas.

That much we all agree upon.

But we also know very well that participation in decision making, be it by men or women, is not an automatic right.

The situation varies widely, depending on the field, the specialism and the area of responsibility.

This is bound to be a factor when reaching a decision about any man or woman seeking to hold a particular office, applying for a job or wishing to join a particular committee.

However, we can legitimately ask if this always applies.

Is it not true to say that there are still certain prejudices in our society which militate against a person or a sex from the outset?

The male nursery school teacher or woman fire-fighter are still exceptions to the rule - as are women who make it to the very top on management boards, as directors or on political committees.

As a rule, this under-representation is not because of any lack of skill or expertise.

A woman always has to do something extra to prove herself - expertise on its own is not enough, her entire circumstances play a part.

Her children, her family and even the simple idea of the weaker sex are barriers to progress.

For far too long we have been telling women that they have to be better than the men they are competing against.

For that reason alone we need things like the report before us to wake society up from time to time and keep up the momentum.

I believe that the double burden of family duties and a career should not be used as grounds for discrimination, nor are they a double disadvantage as stated in Recital D. Combining a family and a career in fact demonstrates a high degree of organisational skill and life experience that should not be underestimated, and should be regarded as a particularly useful skill for those in leading positions.

It should also be assumed that men have the same family commitments as women, and all we women debating here this morning who have a family would be unable to do all this if our partners were not also committed to their families as fathers.

Unfortunately, we have not quite reached that point yet, and it can still be said that whereas a family provides support for a man, it is a millstone for a woman.

So, right from the outset, when we are educating young people, we need to counteract these entrenched social images.

I doubt whether simply demanding quotas and percentages is the right way to achieve greater representation, and it should surely not be this Parliament' s job to call for 40% representation in all political fields at national and international level.

For awareness to grow we need balanced reports and discussion papers that emphasise equal representation, and I therefore urge you to support the PPE Group' s amendments.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I wish, first of all, to congratulate our fellow Member, Mrs Karamanou, on the excellent report she has presented to us.

I am not offering my congratulations as a mere formality.

I am doing so in order to be fair and because I believe they are deserved.

This report is not only excellent, but its explanatory statement is a study of the greatest interest to anyone concerned about equal rights for men and women and will undoubtedly serve as a seminal reference work for the future.

This proves the eccentricity of the Bureau's decision to reduce the length of explanatory statements to one page.

This Chamber does not produce paper by the metre.

We are engaged in politics and politics must have a sound basis.

Your report, Mrs Karamanou, is a fine example of the importance of the political texts drawn up in this Parliament.

In my speech I shall focus on the electoral system.

This is a crucial problem because it predates our own participation in politics.

Women must be given the opportunity to be elected in order to prove what they are capable of.

Some electoral systems make the participation of women even more difficult.

These are, as we have seen, systems that use single name lists.

This practice has systematically penalised women.

It is not so much the electorate that is to blame, but the structures of the parties themselves, which create enormous difficulties by means which are often less than legal.

Thus, although there is a move towards attempting to change this system of single name electoral lists, with procedures being created, in France for example, to set the balance right and to achieve a quota of 50% for both sexes, the Portuguese government has announced the creation of a new electoral law that will partially replace the proportional system with the single name system.

This is an initiative that gives great cause for concern and we must be aware that, in this case, this will clearly discriminate against women who wish to participate actively in politics.

Mr President, I should like to congratulate Mrs Karamanou on her excellent presentation of the situation in Europe as regards equality of the sexes and on her ordered approach to proposals and solutions.

I am sorry that the spokesman for the PPE who expressed the greatest opposition to the report has left because the debate would have been highly interesting.

Allow me to start by making a political observation.

The title of the report: "The balanced participation of women and men in the decision-making process" has a dual meaning.

The decision-making process takes place in the centres of power; but it also means balanced participation in the most important decision-making process for the future, which takes place in the family.

So it refers to both sexes and the numbers of women in decision-making centres cannot be increased unless the proportion of time which men spend on family matters is also increased.

This automatically means that if we want to achieve the required target, we need to make changes to the family, society, the economy and the cultural identity which we have had for centuries.

The debate revolved largely around whether or not quotas, i.e. a quantitative commitment on participation, was an acceptable solution.

I would say, from a philosophical point of view, that a set of numbers or rules can never change a social fact of life.

However, history shows that rules and targets can bring about change, especially if they are accompanied by a set of policies.

So what we need to do, and this is clearly expressed in Mrs Karamanou's report, is to implement three types of policy simultaneously if we are to achieve this important objective, which concerns democracy in our societies.

The first type of policy is mainstreaming equal opportunities in the economy and employment, in social systems and social protection and in education systems and the cultural identity of our societies.

The second type of policy concerns specific measures and specific positive action to support the policy of participation in the decision-making process.

These measures relate to electoral systems, where it has been proven that there is a close correlation between electoral systems and the participation of women, they relate to the need for continuous statistics which throw the facts into relief, they relate, of course to political parties and their internal political commitments and they relate to laws for positive action.

Excellent examples have been cited in this Chamber, which prove that wherever quotas have been applied in conjunction with all the policies which I have just mentioned, they have had positive results.

And we cannot ignore the fact that the only countries which have made any serious headway with the participation of women are the countries which had applied specific policies.

Not always with legislative undertakings on quotas but with political undertakings by the political parties and always with specific quantitative targets.

Finally, there is a third type of policy which relates to intervention by the European Union and collaboration on the part of the Member States, such as political networks of women, indicators at European level - I refer to the Finnish Presidency and the 9 indicators, the application of which could create national undertakings and national targets - benchmarking, training and, finally, support for women in the national states and on the European political scene with an important international role, because this is what creates the standards for power and the standards for women politicians for later generations.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I shall close by repeating what the Prime Minister of Luxembourg said when the question of whether or not there should be specific targets for employment in the Member States was being debated: 'The expression of political desire, the expression of political intention is not enough.

Policy without specific quantitative targets and means is simply literature.'

The vote will take place at noon.

Competitiveness of EU forest-based and related industries

The next item is the debate on the report (A5-0384/2000) by Mr Seppnen, on behalf of the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy, on the communication from the Commission to the Council, the European Parliament, the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions: The state of the competitiveness of the EU forest-based and related industries [COM(1999) 457 - C5-0306/2000 - 2000/2159(COS)]

Mr President, Commissioner, firstly I would like to thank those who helped to have the debate on this report moved to a time when we can speak about it and vote on it today, in the daytime.

If the report had been discussed in the evening it would have been insulting to the four million employees directly or indirectly connected with the forestry industry cluster.

This sector is responsible for a tenth of the total industrial output for the EU and a third of the world' s forest industry production.

All of us present here know the problems that the Thursday evening sittings will pose from this day on.

During the debate on the Commission communication it became apparent that the Forestry Industry Cluster is extremely heterogeneous.

Publishers and printing works use paper and other forest industry products, but many of them see themselves mainly as content producers.

The content industry' s output is characterised, not just by its use of paper, but also by the new electronic industry: electronic communication.

The report expresses the hope that the Commission will also take account of the special features of competitiveness in these new industries.

The report recommends that the peat industry should be included in this cluster.

Peat has its own part to play in forest-based industries, particularly in the Nordic countries and in Ireland.

The report does not adopt a position on whether peat is a renewable or a fossil fuel.

However, as it is produced industrially, these producers must have their place in EU administration.

In the opinion of the rapporteur, the report contains an unnecessary number of additional conclusions relating to forestry, but it was the wish of the committee, although Parliament has already expressed its view on forestry matters in the recent Thomas report.

Nothing more needs to be added; instead, its conclusions should be put into effect in the Commission in a more proactive way than is the case at present.

The Commission must also carefully study the conclusions of Mr Pesl, speaking on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development.

The forestry cluster represents the open sector of the economy, where the activity is conducted in globally competing markets.

For that reason, I cannot agree with the amendment proposed by my colleagues, Mrs Schierhuber and Mr Rbig, that the Directorate-General on Agriculture should be responsible for forestry.

Agriculture in the EU is not accustomed to working in accordance with the conditions of the open sector.

The same problem also relates to Mrs Ainardi' s proposed amendment.

Mrs Flesch' s amendment, in my opinion, is taken account of in the text adopted by the committee and not least on the basis of her own amendments.

The special needs of the content industry are dealt with thoroughly in my report, and, for that reason, I do not think this amendment is necessary at this stage.

Wood is a renewable natural resource.

It has many uses; for example, it can be used in the energy industry.

The report accepts the principle according to which forestry products should be used for the production of energy only at the end of the production chain, after which there is no longer any other use for it and it cannot be recycled.

Member States are the best experts when it comes to managing their own forests.

The multipurpose utilisation of forests, their importance as sinks of carbon dioxide, and their preservation for future generations will be best realised though the application of the principle of subsidiarity, and there is no justification for increasing the Commission's powers in forestry matters.

Instead, it has an important job to do, safeguarding the competitiveness of forest-based industries.

The needs of the forestry industry must also be taken into account in commercial policy.

The European forestry cluster will succeed amid fierce competition if the rules are the same for all.

If the over-exploitation of nature and people is not allowed in Europe, it should not be allowed elsewhere.

The diverse utilisation of wood can improve employment, especially in rural areas, and, consequently, forests also connect with the EU' s employment strategy.

Science and research must find new uses for wood. For example, using grass to make chemical pulp would mean more wood for other purposes.

Such ideas must be promoted within a new Framework Programme of research.

Wood can be used more in construction, as an environmentally friendly and healthy material.

And finally: if the forests do well, so will people.

Mr President, Commissioner, on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development, I would first like to express my warmest thanks to the rapporteur, Mr Seppnen, and the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy, for an excellent report and some excellent cooperation.

The Commission has drafted a creditable communication on the state of global competitiveness in the forestry industry.

This document has meant that forestry matters have been made the subject of very necessary debate in the EU, which, unfortunately, happens all too rarely.

The Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development is mainly satisfied with the policies set forth by the Commission and Parliament' s draft report.

We would like to stress the importance of the whole forestry chain in our own opinion, and that includes the importance of the profitability of forestry and wood harvesting, which is responsible for the raw material base of the forestry industry. Sustainable agriculture in Europe still depends on the family forest businesses practised by twelve million private forest owners and the activities they are engaged in.

The Hague Convention on World Climate Change failed.

We, the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development, have followed the climate agreement process actively, as, in our opinion, the Kyoto Protocol takes totally insufficient account of the importance of forests.

Forests and all wood products are a considerable carbon sink, and their importance in this respect has to be recognised.

The coordination of matters of forestry in the EU is poor.

There are more Directorates-General to deal with them but there is a lack of uniformity.

Personnel resources have been increased in the area of the environment, but the Directorate-General on Agriculture responsible for forestry has very few resources to work with, as does that for industry.

For that reason, I support Amendment No 1 by Mrs Schierhuber on behalf of the PPE-DE Group.

Likewise I want to show my support for Amendments Nos 3 and 4 in particular, which are from the opinion by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development.

Our committee approved them by general consensus.

Mr President, Commissioner, may I start by declaring an interest, or two interests, in this issue.

I have an interest in a forestry business in New Zealand, inherited from my father, so that gives me a practical interest.

More recently I visited Finland to see the forestry industry at work as the guest of CEPI, the Confederation of European Paper Industries.

So you see the strong Finnish theme in this report continues even with me.

Can I welcome this communication and express my pleasure at its emphasis on the importance of this industry.

Like the rapporteur and other colleagues I recognise that forestry is a very important industry, important for the economy and important for the environment.

I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on his report.

In itself it has made quite a contribution towards the consumption of paper and this is to be welcomed, even if our colleagues on the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy had to make it a little bit longer than he would wish.

Better to say too much about forestry than too little.

I note with interest his reference to telecommunications and the changes in the shape of the communication industry.

I happen to believe that despite all these wonderful aspects of modern technology, we will continue to need paper for our reading, because it is the medium that most people are still comfortable with and I certainly am.

Also, of course, we shall continue to need timber for all the other uses to which it is put, such as in construction and other possible new uses.

The rapporteur and the Committee on Agriculture draw attention to the potential for research into new uses of timber.

Can I sound one note of warning.

It is a little unrealistic to ask the Commission to ensure that paper prices in Europe are competitive.

I think that might be stretching the Commissioner's powers a little bit.

I see he is smiling so perhaps he agrees with me.

Nevertheless, the Commission has to ensure that fair competition takes place.

That is the key issue here, rather than trying to favour our industry.

This is a valuable, sustainable industry, very important to the economy of Europe and to our environment, and this is a very timely report.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I would like to thank the rapporteur for his resolute approach to the work he has done, which is so typical of him, on this report, which is a broad portrayal of human life in growing forest stock country.

One third of our land area is covered in forest, and if you include our neighbours to the east in the picture, there is still more forest.

Forest-based industry actually employs two and a half million people, which is no insignificant matter, and, as we know, accounts for a tenth of industrial output.

When we calculate the amount of carbon that is sequestered in forests I think we also have to take into account the stands of forest stock that were grown and tended prior to 1990.

Otherwise, this work of many decades will not be taken into account when the effect of greenhouse gases is calculated.

And so it is that we are rewarding just those who have destroyed their forests and are now hurriedly trying to do some planting, while they have first and foremost been destroying them for centuries.

They who have tended their forests properly for decades, lived off forestry and know this delicate balance, would be penalised, because there are Member States in which people no longer have anywhere to plant a tree, unless they start planting them on their own roofs.

For this reason, paragraph 17 in this report is very important.

Forests and seas are among the most important carbon sinks and stores, and it has also been seen that the ability of forest soil in the north to absorb carbon is even greater than that of trees.

But, ladies and gentlemen, the situation is such that we cannot grow seas: of the two we can only grow forests.

That is becoming an ever greater factor when it comes to contentment - I think it is fine for Nintendo - and it creates ecological balance.

A dead tree is sympathetic, and you can lean against it, whether it is warm or cold; you can only lean against a rock when it is warm.

The use of wood is thus cause for diversification, and especially now, when we are at the stage where communication is moving further away from paper, which is wood-based.

I would propose that the Commission should annex to some appropriate document a set of ideas for the multipurpose use of wood, as we are now on the crest of a wave with regard to wood-based production.

Now the basis of the activity is changing and the focus is on new approaches.

Mr President, Commissioner, I too would like to congratulate the rapporteur, Mr Seppnen, for his excellent work and the spirit of cooperation that he has sought to promote in his approach to this important issue.

Furthermore, the Commission deserves thanks for a new type of communication, in which a field of industry has been comprehensively examined from the point of view of global competitiveness.

The report is comprehensive in its present form.

During the Portuguese Presidency an additional objective was added to it at the committee stage: that the EU should be the world' s most dynamic and competitive economy in the forestry sector also.

Our group supports the views set forth in the report and most of the amendments to it.

We ourselves are tabling a few amendments, which we ask you to support.

I would in particular like to mention Amendment No 3, which raises the question of the importance of small and medium-sized enterprises.

When it is at its best, the forestry sector can serve as a model for other sectors regarding how renewable natural resources can be exploited, how carbon from the atmosphere binds in products and how the materials supply chain works in an environmentally sustainable, yet, at the same time, economically profitable, way.

In this sense, the importance of construction with wood should be highlighted more obviously.

It is also important to recognise the importance of forestry for less developed areas, and especially for rural areas in difficulties.

This importance is particular evident in the area of employment.

The Union should work more effectively in the future to develop small businesses that use raw timber, for example.

Mr President, I welcome the rapporteur's emphasis on sustainable forest industries which are indeed of primary importance to the European Union.

However, the Commission's communication is rather a hodgepodge which lumps together willy-nilly the publishing industry which is knowledge-based and content-focused with primary forestry industries and also paper production.

The publishing industry is both unhappy and bemused, to say the least, and this is not how we promote the European Union nor how things work in the Member States.

The publishing industry feels that there is a lack of recognition of its particular requirements with regard to the expanding IT sector.

The Commission could be open to the accusation, indeed, that perhaps it prefers an IT sector devoid of content.

I would recommend, Commissioner, that you look seriously at this question and review this whole division of labour.

May I also take issue with the report's paragraph 2: peat is not a wood substitute, it is a fuel/fertiliser in its own right.

I know there are particular Irish and Finnish interests here, but I do not believe that we can accept peat as a forest-based industry.

It is a completely separate fuel sector which has also fertiliser as a component.

Climate change: the rapporteur makes some interesting comments here.

I agree with him that we should urgently implement the Kyoto Agreement.

That is what we all want to do.

Forests are, of course, important storages of C02 but the potential for expansion of forests in the EU is limited, even if welcome.

However, I fail to understand the reference to the oceans.

We have had oceans since time immemorial, and this has nothing to do with our present problems with climate change, so I agree with my other colleagues and cannot see what possible relevance that paragraph has.

Finally, with regard to the paper industry: it should clean up its bad former record on the pollution of the environment, and it is also important to inquire into the difficulties of monopolies in the paper sector, particularly with regard to cartels in the recycling sector.

Mr President, I should like to refer briefly to the importance of forestry from a rural development as well as a family-farm perspective.

European agriculture will always remain critical to the well-being of European rural economies - indeed, it represents the main option for economic activity.

Nevertheless, production controls ensure that many farmers cannot increase their income from farming and, therefore, alternative income-generating opportunities from off-farm activities are vital if rural populations are to benefit from economic growth.

We have seen the success of rural development programmes, including the LEADER scheme and other such activities which have helped create much needed employment in small and medium-sized enterprises in rural areas throughout Europe.

However, the option to engage in forestry activity can also be a very constructive and environmentally friendly mechanism for farmers to increase their existing income.

In the Irish government's national development plan for 2000-2006, a total of IEP 580m is being provided for forestry activities.

This would be cofunded under the common agricultural rural development programme.

This latter investment will support a planting programme in Ireland of over 20 000 ha per year over the period of the plan.

The focus will be for on-farm forestry, with grants, planting and maintenance, as well as income-support premium.

In addition to CAP support and measures, an allocation of IEP 80m has been provided in the regional operational programme for investment in harvesting equipment, forest roads and general woodland improvements.

With regard to the EU operational programme for forestry and the generous funding available for afforestation, it is imperative that the end product of this investment is a quality, sustainable forest product, one capable of yielding over time a return both for the individual farmer and the community.

Because of the relative resilience of trees to survive, the necessary silvacultural practices could be neglected in the early years of establishment of new forests.

This must be avoided if the European sector is to meet the challenge of quality and competitiveness in the future.

On a broader perspective, Parliament should be aware of the serious threat to the world's tropical forests, which are diminishing by 15 million hectares annually. Not sufficient research is being done on the growing of tropical hardwoods.

In this regard, we should be aware of the work of the European Forest Institute and its encouragement and research into the planting of new tropical forests.

If we are to address the need for sustainability, we must tackle these problems very early on.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the Commission communication is highly topical, especially bearing in mind the still very worrying situation of the people working in the forest-based and related industries who were the victims of the December 1999 storms.

We must therefore welcome this broadened approach to industrial policy and the Community forestry strategy.

To talk of competitiveness at a time of keen worldwide competition, the challenges involved in the enlargement and restructuring of the rural world whilst acknowledging the diversity and the multi-functionality of the forest is, of course, a good thing.

However, I feel bound to inform Mr Seppnen that I was rather disappointed by his report, which seems to me to take a somewhat simplistic approach towards the competitiveness of the wood industry.

I get the regrettable impression that he sees forests exclusively as industrial production units based on intensive single-crop farming necessitating a revolution every thirty years.

Returning from Finland, where I witnessed precisely this kind of intensive cultivation, which it is absolutely crucial to the paper industry to promote, I nevertheless think, Mr Seppnen, that the wealth of Europe resides specifically in its diversity.

While I may be convinced of the validity of this approach to cultivating the Nordic forests, I think the report should have taken account of forests where biodiversity subsists, for example in France, as well as industries other than paper industries.

It seems to me that there was a tendency to forget everything to do with timber and other wood-based construction materials made in other parts of Europe.

In conclusion, we will support this report as its approach is quite significant, as well as the excellent amendments tabled by our colleagues, except for Amendment No 5, which seems to us irrelevant.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, a sustainable and profitable forestry and wood industry is highly important for Europe in many ways.

I would like to remind you about both environmental aspects and eco-social and economic aspects.

As a raw material, wood is the most important renewable energy source in Europe, and no one should underestimate the importance in regional policy terms of small and medium-sized businesses in the wood industry and in forestry as providers of jobs in rural areas. This sector is a key factor in a multifunctional agricultural and forestry industry.

Together, the forestry and wood industries provide millions of jobs in Europe.

A sustainable forestry industry can make a substantial contribution to climate protection and to achieving the Kyoto objectives.

Globally speaking, we must protect our forests in order to defend ourselves against disasters.

I am therefore very grateful to the previous speaker for her comments.

I would particularly like to draw attention to protected forests and virgin forests in the Alps.

Appropriate proposals for the construction industry need to be pursued.

The use of wood and wood products in the building industry should be promoted, and wood should increasingly be used instead of other construction materials.

A further advantage of wood is that it involves fixing large quantities of CO2 over long periods.

I therefore support the approach of using targeted marketing and advertising measures for wood products to raise public awareness.

We need to provide information and advice about the advantages of these products throughout Europe.

I am not advocating a Community forestry policy, but rather a common forestry strategy for Europe, with the Commission playing a proper coordinating role.

The various aspects of forest-based and related industries should be coordinated within a single directorate-general, and it would make sense for this to be the directorate-general for agriculture, which would also need to be adequately staffed to cope with the wide variety of tasks involved.

Without forestry there can be no wood industry.

So I hope that the House will accept this logic and vote for Amendments Nos 1 and 2.

Mr President, Commissioner, I would first like to both congratulate and commiserate with the rapporteur, Mr Seppnen.

This report on the forest-based and related industries covers just about every important area imaginable, and very much of what it says is correct.

However, I would still like to comment on a couple of points.

First, I think what is missing here is a reference to the dramatic developments in this sector as regards mergers and acquisitions.

This particularly applies to the paper industry at present, where more and more companies are merging because they believe this is essential if they are to remain competitive.

My fear is that Europe, which I hope will itself be growing together, will increasingly be faced with circumstances comparable with those in Canada and other countries, where the pressure which companies are coming under is simply passed on to their forests, which are being exploited in the most brutal way.

I therefore hope that the Commission will bring forward appropriate and clear proposals, if at all possible in the form of directives.

As regards the environment, we should not fool ourselves.

Nine years after Rio we are still a long way from being able to meaningfully implement what was agreed there in terms of sustainability.

In the long run, we will probably have to prepare for our northern forests to absorb what the tropical forests of the Third World cannot, for whatever reasons.

So in future forests will above all be very greatly involved in environmental protection, which brings me to my third point, that is to say the Internet.

I personally very much hope that the idea of the paperless office and perhaps even of a paperless Parliament, by virtue of the Internet, will not just give rise to quiet smiles but actually become a reality.

Although this would have a corresponding impact on jobs in the industry, it would make sense environmentally speaking.

To sum up, this report creates a negative impression.

It relates too much to existing industries, and it rather gives the impression of trying to protect something that really can no longer be protected.

We only have to remember what happened to the steel industry.

I do not think it makes sense to subsidise this sector.

But the idea of supporting small and medium-sized enterprises which is contained in Amendment No 3 is very positive.

It is also extremely important for us to consider the issue of cartels, given the most recent trends in this sector.

Mr President, unlike Mr Chichester, I have no links with the strong Finnish theme in this report, except for the fact that I worked, with the greatest of pleasure, at the Commission under the authority of Commissioner Liikanen.

Mr President, I would like to thank the Commission for presenting this communication on the 'forest-based industry' . I would also like to thank the rapporteur for accepting some of my amendments in the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy, even though he sees no need for Amendment No 5, which I presented.

I would like to ask just one question, Mr President, which ties in precisely with Amendment No 5 and relates to the position of the publishing industry within the Commission services.

I read in the press that, in November 2000, Commissioner Wallstrm acknowledged the fact that the publishing industry must not be regarded as belonging to the forest-based and related industries, as the place it now occupies within the European Commission might lead one to believe.

Is this also the opinion of the Commission?

If this is the case, what are its plans for the future?

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, wood is a renewable material, a construction material with a future.

Wood regrows, it rots and finds its way back into the natural cycle from which it came.

So we should not forget wood in the Sixth Framework Programme on Research - we should make sure that the priority area for wood is accordingly drawn up with due care, especially in the field of biotechnology.

I believe that wood will be a lot more important for us in the future than it has been in the past.

As wood is also very widely used in the international construction industry, the wood industry faces numerous problems.

It has to deal with a huge number of technical trade barriers, a multiplicity of national standards and authorisation procedures and also, to some extent, bureaucratic testing, monitoring and certification requirements.

This is an area where the European Commission should apply SLIM.

And perhaps the wood sector is an ideal one for introducing model procedures, possibly including BEST.

I would like to thank Hans-Peter Martin, as promoting small and medium-sized enterprises is, of course, a central and essential matter, and one where we have an important partner in the Commission.

However, there is also the matter of making appropriate changes to building laws and regulations, because fire regulations in Europe in particular vary widely.

We believe it is high time that the construction products directive was adopted.

This directive in particular would enable great progress to be made in marketing wood.

As regards world trade, I would like to stress that Japan has very restrictive legislation in this area.

This is something we also need to discuss because wood is, after all, not just a raw material and a construction material, but it will also be highly important in future through biotechnology.

That is why we especially want to promote smaller biomass power stations, which will make an important contribution to Europe's energy self-sufficiency, so that this is also an area where wood has an important role to play.

Mr President, I would like to thank the Commission and Mr Seppnen, who produced the draft report.

As a member of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, I am especially encouraged by how the report has managed to take account of ecological and even partly socio-economic conditions in the industry, active, as it is, in the market.

I myself wish to raise the issue of peat, which is dealt with in the second paragraph of the report.

The report calls for the inclusion of the peat industry in the forest cluster.

It will support many aims of the energy policy which the EU is trying to drive through, and which it has just mentioned in the Green Paper on energy.

Peat will reinforce the situation regarding our self-sufficiency in energy and its guaranteed supply, which, alarmingly, are in decline; and it will promote the combined production of electricity and heat, and bring with it the synergic benefit of the use of wood and peat for energy.

Given that peat growth is on a year-to-year basis, it is clearly also a renewable energy source.

Moreover, peat has many regionally positive effects that favour employment.

On the whole, peat should be compared to wood rather than carbon, for example, which is now how it is classed by the EU, going against what is factually correct.

The renewability of peat is an incontestable biological fact.

Peat grows continually through the assimilation of bog plants and the production of forest litter.

Its origin is in principle exactly the same as that of other biomasses that derive from plants, for example wood.

The time necessary for the process is longer, however.

According to a new, impartial scientific report, peat should be distinguished from fossil fuels, which take millions of years to form.

Owing to its origin and essentially renewable nature, peat must be classified as a biomass fuel, but because it regrows substantially more slowly than other plants, a new, third category should be established and placed between fossil fuels and energy sources whose renewability rate is fast.

Peat is a biomass fuel with a slow renewability rate.

It is undeniable that burning peat, as with wood fuel, produces greenhouse gas emissions in the atmosphere.

The Kyoto agreement does not include emissions from burning wood in the overall emissions burden, as the carbon that is sequestered in wood would be released in any case when the wood decays.

Furthermore, studies on carbon levels and gas circulation in peatlands have come out in recent years and their results show it would be desirable to have a re-evaluation of peat fuel emissions which took account of gas levels in bogs as a whole.

When we speak of peat it is worth reminding ourselves of scale.

The area devoted to energy use is very small compared to the areas of marshland used in forestry and agriculture.

The peat harvest accounts for less than one per mil of the total area of northern peatlands.

Nevertheless, the economic exploitation of peat is important in those areas where there is a lot of marshland.

For example, in Finland we use less than half the annual growth of peat each year.

We therefore do not touch the capital, because the interest is enough to get by on.

The report urges the Commission to strengthen the coordination and coherence of Community sectorial action having an impact on forest clusters, in order to improve competitiveness.

This need for coordination and coherence would in particular appear to apply to peat, and one important step on the road would be to change the way it is classified and its status, to correspond with its true nature.

Mr President, first I wish to thank all the members of Parliament and, in particular, the rapporteur Esko Seppnen, for his excellent report.

The Commission is happy to adopt the report and the draft resolution.

They are in line with the Commission' s views.

The report is exhaustive and explores in detail those numerous factors that affect competitiveness in the forestry industry, both the tangible and the intangible.

We particularly agree with you that intangible factors, such as professional skills, innovations and research and development work, are cornerstones of the position regarding competition in European industry.

Among the most important priorities is ensuring there is this high level of professional skill.

First of all I would like to shed a little light in just a few words on how important this sector of industry is.

It accounts for 10% of all industrial output in the EU, whether measured in terms of value added or number of jobs.

It is worth remembering that a total of 12 million private forest owners supply wood to industry, and the sector is represented everywhere in the EU.

The industry is often located in remote regions, where it helps to maintain economic activity, levels of employment and the infrastructure.

Five main areas of the industry form one of the biggest industrial sectors in the European Union.

The value of its output stands at more than EUR 300 billion, its value added at EUR 110 billion.

It gives direct employment to 2.5 million people, and indirectly the figure is much larger than that.

In the Commission communication the state of competitiveness in the forest industry and industries related to it was examined by viewing the sector in a new way, as a cluster, in which each sector' s performance affects the competitiveness of the other sectors.

In such an examination by groups any analysis of individual areas may be overlooked, but questions can be examined from a broader viewpoint.

The communication offers a basis for the future evaluation of factors having an impact on competitiveness in this industry.

That is why the Commission has made a series of sectorial studies of the forest industry and industries related to it.

Studies on the printing and mechanised industries have already been published.

In addition, the Commission has established, as an extension to the communication in hand, two channels for debate.

One is an advisory committee on forestry and forest-based industries, whose work got under way again in 1997, and the other is a forum for forest and related industries.

This forum plays a major role, as it makes it possible to systematically analyse essential questions and interact effectively with companies, industrial organisations and other interested parties.

Representatives from the Community' s institutions, such as Parliament and the Commission, as well as the Member States also participate in the forum.

The first forum was held here in Strasbourg at the beginning of September, it was made up of people of authority, and I might mention that the rapporteur, Mr Seppnen, was also present.

There were also discussions about publishing, which Mrs Flesch mentioned: ecommerce and industrial and intellectual property rights were discussed.

The next forum is to be held in Stockholm in June.

That will focus on a closer look at how forest-based and related industries can, for their part, promote sustainable development and optimise their contribution to the protection of the environment at all stages of the production chain from forestry itself right up to the end products.

It is becoming ever more important to take account of sustainable development.

In June we shall be holding the meeting of the European Council in Gothenburg, at which important decisions will be taken in this area.

Forest-based industries are those in which all the economic, social and environmental aspects of sustainable development are closely dependent on one another.

Forest-based industries use renewable raw material and the most up-to-date recycling and energy-saving methods, so its contribution may well be especially important for sustainable development.

In reply to Mrs Flesch' s question I would say this: we understand very well that publishing today differs from the forestry industry proper, and involves production based on paper just as much as many other industries.

The problem for the Commission has been that the resources of the Directorate-General for Enterprise have fallen by 20% over the last year.

We have lost 210 staff in all.

We have had to combine departments and offices.

I am nevertheless prepared to take this matter up now as a subject for discussion again, mainly with a mind to looking at in which sector or in connection with which sector publishing would best be placed.

I will be in contact with representatives of the industry after this debate.

Once again I wish to thank Mr Seppnen for an excellent report and the other members for their contribution to this work.

We shall now proceed to the vote.

Madam President, I wish to put a request to you and the House.

My report was to have been debated this morning, but has been put back to this afternoon, along with the vote.

Unfortunately I cannot stay, so I would be grateful if it could be deferred until the next part-session.

Madam President, this is exactly what we feared when the Friday sitting was done away with - that we would no longer be able to do our work on Thursday afternoon either.

Mrs Pack, you will understand that it is not for the President to comment on these observations.

Let me say only that, in the precise case referred to me, Mr Ferri' s report was timetabled for this morning, but we did not have time to deal with it.

Mr Ferri is absent this afternoon and cannot stay behind to present his report.

I think it appropriate, unless there are any objections, to agree to his request to postpone the report due to his absence this afternoon and in view of the fact that the report could not be discussed at the appointed time.

Madam President, we are quite happy for you to temper justice with mercy, as it were.

However, I would like to support Mrs Pack and make the fundamental point that if we are having shorter part-sessions it is not acceptable for reports not to be voted on because rapporteurs are no longer present on Thursday evening.

We agree with the procedure adopted today, but we would like you to make it clear once again, including to committee chairs, that Members should ensure that they stay until Thursday evening.

Mr Swoboda, I agree entirely with you.

It Mr Ferri' s report had not been timetabled for this morning, I should not have had this opportunity.

Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, I can only endorse the comments made by Mrs Pack and Mr Swoboda, but I feel that the problems involving amendments to the schedule are also due to what I would call poor timetabling, as we never seem able to keep to the set agenda.

We are continually having to postpone the discussion of reports.

I think this is related to the fact that we are not managing our time well enough and that we should perhaps also change and reassess a number of ways in which the House operates. I believe, however, that cutting the part-session to four days is the main reason for all these departures from the agenda.

If we cut the plenary part-session working time to three and a half days, the next thing we shall be down to two days.

What is the point of the European Parliament?

It is up to all the Members of the House to show how serious they are in their work, in line with the commitments they have made as Members of Parliament.

This is the issue being raised again.

Madam President, I want to make two brief points in this context.

The first is that all week we have been hearing people talking about the decision to abolish the Friday sitting.

Now whatever decision was taken and however we voted in that decision, a democratic decision was taken by the House and the next opportunity to change that will arise when we discuss the calendar for 2002.

I think it is undemocratic to keep raising it.

Secondly, if we look at the agenda for this week, we see that the agenda for Monday evening was free.

So perhaps we could also look at ways of making better use of our time and using the Monday evening for debates.

Then we would all be finished by Thursday afternoon and could go home and do our jobs on Friday.

Madam President, I am one of those who were most opposed to doing away with the Friday sitting.

I am therefore entitled to state that I think that, when a request is made to postpone the vote on a report which is timetabled for the end of Thursday' s sitting, and which must be presented by a Member who has to travel 2000 km to get home and who, if he cannot take the only flight available, on Thursday afternoon, is then forced to go home on Friday evening, we ought also to show some flexibility with regard to his situation in future.

Unfortunately, this is a vote I consider irresponsible, and it places us in this situation, which we must manage in as responsible a manner as possible in the coming months.

We do not need to start a debate on the issue.

Madam President, in the context of these issues, a teething problem has arisen with the four-day week in relation to transport.

It is impossible until next December to get on the Strasbourg-Brussels flight at 4.30 p.m. on a Thursday.

That has resulted in many of our staff and press officers having to leave on the 12.30 p.m. flight on Thursday.

Could you please talk to the powers-that-be and put extra flights back to Brussels on Thursday evening to accommodate our staff, so that they can stay here all Thursday.

Mrs Doyle, since you raise the subject, I can inform you that Strasbourg Town Hall has appointed Mr Ries as the official representative to deal with all these problems, and any others, which may emerge.

I had a lengthy meeting with Mr Ries this week and, on my initiative, we discussed these specific problems, because they are problems that I am well aware of, and not just for one nationality but for all the Members of the House.

Madam President, Parliament voted to reduce the Strasbourg part-session to four days, with a consequent reduction in the number of working days for ancillary staff.

We are asking that they should not be penalised financially.

Mrs Bordes, this is not a procedural motion.

Madam President, last Monday I took the floor to give evidence to the honourable Members of this House on the recent decision of the Spanish government granting clemency to fourteen torturers.

In no motion for a resolution on human rights do we find the slightest reference to the Kingdom of Spain though many countries are specifically mentioned.

This is most regrettable as the pardon from the Spanish government has been granted in order to guarantee impunity to torturers and to maintain torture as a fundamental practice in its strategy of repression.

On human rights, once again, hypocrisy has been voted through in this Parliament.

United Nations Human Rights Commission in Geneva

The liberalisation of the air transport sector and the stiff competition between airlines has caused serious problems by eroding safety standards for passenger aircraft.

It is therefore imperative that we introduce harmonised requirements in order to maintain a high standard of safety which is not undermined by competition.

Both the Committee on Transport and the rapporteur have improved on the Commission's proposals.

It is also imperative, where no proposals for agreed rules are made by interested parties, that the European Parliament itself take the initiative on flight times and on working times and other requirements for the flight and cabin crew by 1 May 2001, taking account of the needs of workers and safety requirements.

This matter is even more urgent given that the Commission, unfortunately under pressure from the airline companies, has failed in the text to propose any measures limiting flight times.

The only reason we voted in favour of this joint motion for a resolution is the stance adopted in favour of abolishing the death penalty and the affirmation of a few basic principles regarding the equality of women, the treatment of children and opposition to racial discrimination.

Although the resolution explicitly mentions a number of countries, such as Tibet, Chine, Afghanistan, Papua-New Guinea and Chechnya, where human rights are effectively violated in many, if not all areas, not a word is said regarding the major powers, the European Union in particular, which, while they do not necessarily violate human rights at home, violate them in their former colonies, either directly or by giving protection to dictators that ride roughshod over human rights.

When human rights appeals come from those suffering from the lack of human rights or from associations working genuinely to relieve the burden of oppression, at least in the areas they are responsible for, we show our solidarity.

Yet, as far as the major powers which are responsible for the exploitation and oppression of the greater part of the world, and their political representatives, are concerned, references to human rights are, generally speaking, nothing more than hypocritical declarations contradicted by their diplomatic and military action and by those 'reasons of state' generally used as a front to conceal the sordid interests of major financial groups that do not care one bit about human beings or their rights.

Madam President, still in the pilot' s cabin on the plane from Milan to Strasbourg and still chatting to the pilot - I even remember his name, Antoine - I told him how worried I was about air travel, because we can never be sure whether flying is safe and sometimes there are accidents.

'What do you mean, Mr Fatuzzo?' replied the pilot.

'Flying is the safest form of transport there is.

It is on the roads that most accidents happen.

Of all forms of transport, the car causes by far the most deaths and injuries.'

So I am really delighted to welcome this document - and I have voted for it - through which Europe is taking specific action to reduce the very serious damage caused by road accidents.

Madam President, I wish to speak on this report because it is necessary for the European Union to find a more effective way to ensure that Member States who make commitments in relation to matters of life and death actually comply with those commitments.

The report points out that during the 1990s the number of road deaths fell in the European Union by 26%.

In Ireland, however, the fall has only been by 13%.

We have the third highest accident rate in the European Union and we have the highest fatality rate in the European Union.

The National Safety Council just last August indicated that as far as they were concerned they did not see any political commitment to actually dealing effectively with road safety.

It estimated that of the 62 000 young people who sat the leaving certificate examination in June 2000 within eight years 1000 would be dead in unnecessary car accidents.

This seems to me to be a grotesque situation and quite simply should not be tolerated by the European Union.

If Member States make commitments to implement the matters which affect life and death than we have to find ways of ensuring that they comply with those commitments.

Congratulations are due Mrs Hedkvist Petersen on her conscientious, thorough and innovative work.

Road safety is indeed a serious area in which we cannot afford to indulge in hypocrisy and hyperbole, which the rapporteur avoids absolutely.

There are some Members in this House who will take advantage of this issue to demand that the principle of subsidiarity be strengthened, leaving Member States to manage road safety decisions as they wish.

I, however, share the rapporteur' s opinion as, while acknowledging the key position of the states in this area, she nonetheless recognises that this is an area where responsibility is shared between Community, national, regional and local authorities.

The great disparities between Member States, particularly with regard to speed limits and 'authorised' blood alcohol levels, do nothing to reduce the number of accidents on the roads of Europe.

Within the European Union, road accidents are the number one cause of death in children and adults under 45.

I, therefore, like the rapporteur, consider it essential that the Commission does not confine itself to a recommendation on alcohol levels, but sets a clear limit at 0.5 mg/l.

Similarly, additional support must be given to the European assessment programme for new car models (Euro-NCAP).

This could be achieved, specifically, in the form of a proposal for a directive.

In the same way, we must consider intensifying the existing link between the environment and road safety (leading us, for example, to reassess road signs and marking to make them safer).

We must all accept our responsibilities, and that is what the rapporteur sets out to do in this initiative which does her great credit.

I shall therefore vote in favour of this report.

While everyone is in agreement in condemning the considerable number of road accidents in the various European Member States, the EDD Group is unable to agree completely with Ms Hedkvist Petersen' s report on the appropriate means to tackle the subject, for the solution cannot be ever more European authority, more money and more criminalisation.

This cocktail, which has already been applied in varying degrees in a number of countries, has proved ineffective.

On the other hand, reconciling practical measures with specific national characteristics would seem to be an avenue worth exploring if we want to achieve positive practical results.

The means of transport that the car represents, with all it entails, is more a matter of training, behaviour and culture.

So how is it therefore possible to find solutions standardised for the whole of Europe?

In our view, Ms Hedkvist Petersen' s report represents the very antithesis of the subsidiarity we strive to preserve, not out of dogmatism but in order to be as efficient as possible while respecting everyone' s diversity, all in the interests of our various peoples.

What stage are we at with the implementation of real solutions, the type of solutions that require significant investment?

Reforms in training (for example, driving lessons for school age children, or emergency braking in driving schools), systematisation of the active and passive safety components right from the bottom of the range by means of tax incentives to car manufacturers, or even the modification of the infrastructure by completely eliminating the 'black spots' , are the real issues of any intelligent road safety policy.

Though, of course, this is undoubtedly more difficult than adopting a purely punitive approach, which involves, for example, installing a radar monitor in an unmarked police car, at the end of a completely deserted sliproad to a three-lane motorway.

I wholeheartedly support the report by my Socialist colleague which calls for new measures to tackle road deaths and promote road safety in Europe.

Shocking statistics show the severity of the problem.

It is simply unacceptable that as many as 42,000 people are killed and over 1.7 million injured on roads across the European Union every year.

Of course, the numbers vary from country to country.

In Portugal and Greece, there are as many as 243 and 212 deaths per million, whilst at the lowest end of the spectrum, there are 60 and 61 deaths per million in Sweden in the UK, respectively.

Every person killed is one too many.

Every case is an individual tragedy which tears apart a community.

We desperately need to improve road safety with safety equipment in cars, seat belt campaigns and better road signs.

The Labour Government in Britain is at the forefront, leading a campaign against drink-driving.

The lives of all our citizens, especially our young people, are too precious to take for granted.

Road traffic accidents are the most common cause of death among children and persons under the age of 45 in the EU, which makes the problem a major public health issue.

In Sweden, 'Vision Zero' has been approved unanimously by Parliament as an overall objective of the work on road safety.

However, in order for these road safety objectives to be achieved, reliable tools are needed for meeting the targets.

Effective traffic surveillance, including vehicle inspections, speed monitoring using modern camera techniques, breathalyser tests, seat belt checks and pupillometer measurement in cases where drug-use may be suspected, is what is needed in the short term to bring down the number of fatalities on the roads.

In order for the target of zero road fatalities to be realistic, more use must be made of public transport so as to reduce the number of vehicles on the road.

We will support the report in the final vote, but we take the view that the efforts towards harmonisation are excessive.

The report is a parliamentary initiative, the main thrust of which is to demand proposals for the harmonisation of road safety at EU level.

We consider this desire to increase road safety to be all well and good, but this is not an issue in which the EU should be investing resources. Rather, it is an issue which is best dealt with at Member State level.

Madam President, back in my seat on the plane, I started chatting to the person sitting next to me - a pensioner called Lino Miserotti - and at one point he remarked that we were flying over Dsseldorf.

I looked out of the window and saw the city. Close to it are some huge sheds, visible even from that great height.

I asked my neighbour what they were, and he told me that they are a terminus for lorries and railway wagons 'That is an intermodal centre,' he said.

'These intermodal transport centres are very useful because freight has to be deposited in those sheds, so that transport is better, faster and cheaper.'

That is why I voted for this report.

Madam President, I wanted to explain that I particularly voted for the Poli Bortone report because Amendment No 1 was adopted.

This amendment reflects the concern felt about delays in creating the trans-European rail networks and rail corridors.

This is an issue of particular importance for the Alpine region, from which I come, and especially so in the case of the Munich-Verona cross-Alps line. We hope that as a result of Parliament's latest vote, the Commission will regard itself as being obliged to further speed up the relevant preparatory work and to push ahead with greater concentration and effort than has been the case up to now, so as to solve this urgent problem for the Alpine region.

Madam President, on the very crowded motorway between Bergamo and Milan I was sitting next to Lino Miserotti again, and we were talking about motorway tariffs.

Lino Miserotti told me he thought it was right for him, as a pensioner, to have to pay to use the motorway, thus contributing to the construction and maintenance of an important item of transport infrastructure, but that it would be good if people who were still working did not have to pay a toll.

So, in voting for this document, I am asking for a distinction to be made between those using the road for work and those using it in their spare time. The former should not have to pay as much as the latter.

The report adopted in committee struck a very careful balance between those who wish to move faster to build on the common transport charging framework with concrete measures and those who feel that public opinion is not ready for such a radical rethinking of the way society pays for the use of its transport infrastructure.

The rapporteur is pleased with the substantial agreement on the fundamental principles contained in the report, namely that the Community is competent to establish a common methodology for calculating transport costs; that external costs should be included in such evaluations; that revenue should be directed to reducing environmental damage and encouraging modal shift to less polluting transport alternatives; that implementation should be governed by subsidiarity; that the users and polluters pay in proportion to use; and that exemptions should be made for the less mobile members of society and those living in rural areas.

For these reasons, whilst I am sympathetic to many of the amendments tabled by the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance for concrete measures, I cannot support them here, since they would jeopardise the consensus on the above principles and can be examined later in the course of the implementation of a charging framework.

As usual, the at first sight laudable intentions of a European Parliament report turn out to conceal the worst.

In this case, the matter is charging for transport infrastructure.

You have to read between the lines, though, to see exactly what it is talking about and if you do so, you come across two of the pet themes of this institution: the creation of an environment tax and the war waged on road transport and the car.

The one main purpose hinted at in the report is to impose yet more taxes on the road users, who are already treated like Europe' s cash cows, and perhaps even to install toll gates and charge for the use of the main roads or minor roads.

What planet do we think we are on?

When the price of fuel is prohibitive, at five to six times the refinery sale price because more than 80% of the price is made up of taxes, you might well think that the road user is already paying more than enough for the right to use the public road network in proportion to the use he makes of his car.

That is without mentioning all the other types of road tax; it is too long a list and the litany of amounts involved is too depressing.

Indeed, after reading this report, one wonders just what the taxes we pay are actually used for.

Nothing, apparently, since in France, for example, the administration' s skimming off half the national wealth does not enable it to ensure the safety of the people, to achieve general welfare, to preserve their quality of life or to provide a consistent and effective transport policy.

The state, the States, should think primarily of the way they use our money before giving Brussels any sort of power to needlessly make the situation worse.

I share the report' s preliminary approach, which stresses the need to take the external costs of charging into greater consideration.

Obviously, infrastructure needs to be meticulously maintained and modernised.

But what funding must be sought?

The report stresses that nothing must hinder the development of the market in Member States, i.e. that business profits must not be made use of.

The social dumping practised by the road industry or the scandal involving motorway concessions, for example, are not challenged in any way.

Not wishing to increase taxation also entails preventing state intervention so as not to obstruct the sacrosanct rule of competition.

On the contrary, the rapporteur advocates pursuing "the aim of phasing out distortions of competition between Member States" .

Nowhere does the report make any reference to a state response to social needs, yet, on the other hand, the only response to the "all market" solution is to appeal to private companies, for both the construction and the management of infrastructure.

As a result, the only parties to pay that are clearly identified in the text are road users, and that is why I shall not be voting in favour of this report.

We agree with some of the elements of the report, specifically with the need to develop transport infrastructure for environmental sustainability and the preservation and improvement of the right of all citizens to movement and accessibility to public transport services, although we think that these points should addressed in greater detail in the resolution as a whole.

Nevertheless, we can only oppose the establishment of Community criteria that treat all users of transport alike, taking no account of the various levels of infrastructure that currently exist in the Member States.

For these reasons, we will not be able to vote for the report.

We politicians must develop a system that leads to a breakthrough in the principle of cost transparency for transport providers.

This resolution is an important step, and calls on the Commission to present some concrete proposals at long last.

Transport problems can only be solved on the basis of a European consensus.

As a representative of a country that has to cope with the considerable problems of traffic in transit through the Alps, I call on the European Union to devote more attention to this subject than it has to date.

The Union has not yet adequately accepted its responsibility in this area.

Fair competition between transport providers is only possible if external costs are also included in taxes.

It is essential for ecological and geographical aspects to be covered in this uniform system, for the benefit of both the environment and the public.

In the light of the principles of subsidiarity and democracy, I find it hard to entertain the idea that the European Union should be given its own right of taxation.

This applies also to the field of transport.

These proposals would, according to the calculations of the Dutch Government, increase the price of petrol by a further 15 per cent and the price of diesel by 21 per cent, as well as increasing the price of tickets for medium and long-distance train journeys by almost 50 per cent.

The consequences of this for sparsely-populated Swedish counties which have already been hit, such as Dalarna with its high levels of outward migration and considerable decrease in population, are obvious and totally devastating.

The rapporteur wishes to introduce new Government taxes and EU taxes, and also levies on roads, railways and airports, car insurance, lorries and buses, petrol and diesel.

Part of the funds obtained would go to the Governments of the Member States and then be earmarked for investments in infrastructure, and part would go to the Commission to use as it sees fit.

Should the resolution be approved by the European Parliament and the Council of Ministers, the EU would be given its own direct power of taxation, as in an actual nation state.

That is a development to which the Swedish Christian Democrats do not wish to contribute.

I take a very serious view of further increasing the costs of transport for people and goods.

It is patently obvious that this will be a merciless blow which will fall hardest on the sparsely-populated counties.

Moreover, it is hardly in keeping with the spirit of the European Community to make it more difficult and considerably more expensive for people to meet each other in and between the various countries.

Madam President, there is a lot of talk about quotas in Mrs Karamanou' s report.

I have abstained, and this is why.

I have been national secretary of the Pensioners' Party in Italy since 1983, and throughout that time people have been asking why I represent the Pensioners' Party when I am not a pensioner.

They say I am too young to be retired, which is very nice, but it often bothers me that people should think someone who is not retired might not be able to stand up for pensioners.

Madam President, do you think not being retired means I cannot defend pensioners with determination, conviction and constancy?

So does not being a woman mean a man cannot defend the rights of women just as well?

That is why I am not so keen on quotas.

Madam President, a majority of the Group of the European People's Party (Christian Democrats) and the European Democrats voted against the Karamanou report.

This signal could be misinterpreted or even turned against us to score political points.

We are not, of course, opposed to equal opportunities policy and we are certainly not against women's participation.

We agree with the principles enumerated by Commissioner Diamantopoulou at the end of this morning's debate.

We are in favour of mainstreaming measures in business, in public institutions, in education, training and culture.

We are in favour of building up political networks and we need European indicators such as benchmarking.

We are also in favour of concrete actions and measures being implemented in the EU Member States.

We have demonstrated this in countries where Christian Democrats and Conservatives are in power.

Women are demonstrably holding leading positions in our parties.

For example, in Germany, my own party, the CDU, has a woman leader and in the Group of the European People's Party (Christian Democrats) and the European Democrats a considerable number of the national delegations are led by women.

So there is no doubt that we support the objective of equal opportunities, and this was also apparent from the speeches that my female colleagues and I made this morning.

However, the rapporteur, Mrs Karamanou, and her Socialist Group were not prepared to support our amendments rejecting the establishment of quotas throughout Europe.

There are various different systems in the EU Member States for ensuring that women are properly represented numerically speaking.

And, contrary to what appears in the report, these are not laid down by governments, but by the parties, when they are drawing up their lists.

That is the way it should stay - that is what the principle of subsidiarity is all about.

So any attempt to make out that my group, because a majority of its Members voted against the Karamanou report, is in some way opposed to balanced participation of men and women in the decision-making process, any such attempt is certainly doomed to failure.

Madam President, it is not only necessary for the overall thrust of ideas and initiatives to be right - above all the detail must also be right.

We of course voted against the right-wing amendment which apparently viewed the report' s proposal that the proportion of women, or of men, in elected bodies should be at least 40% as excessive.

We voted in favour of this disputed clause in the Karamanou report even though we are convinced that quotas are no solution, far from it, to the inequalities which women suffer both in decision-making positions and, much more, in society in general.

I voted in favour of the Karamanou report.

Reports and contributions to this debate remind us that some of our worst fears are justified.

Discrimination still exists, and it still takes women with "fire in their bellies" to make it through the dense system of hidden prejudice and break through in political, trade and other organisations.

Affirmative action is still necessary - until real equality exists, not just where great talent is present, but also for those who are less forceful.

Women are universally under-represented where decisions are made.

At the start of the third millennium, women are still fighting for the right, on paper at least, to participate in the capitalist system, a right which socialism gave them at the beginning of the century.

The Communist Party of Greece sees the problem of the lack of participation by women in the decision-making process not simply as a problem of democracy; it is a sign of social inequality and exploitation of the classes, which is why it mainly affects working class women.

The apparent interest in democracy in the family expressed in the motion for a resolution is in fact an interest in reversing full employment (the motion frankly admits as much), and reducing and privatising welfare services.

Moreover, so-called equal opportunities policies and various EU programmes have proven to be nothing more than the means to promote capitalist restructuring.

They aim to divide the burden equally and to reduce social services to the family, thereby striking at the working classes and exacerbating the situation of women in practice and, as a result, they are responsible for excluding women from the mainstream.

Women will only gain their rightful place both in the family and in political and economic life by joining the mass grass-roots movement fighting to reverse the policies responsible for their under-representation.

Real participation by women cannot be achieved with quotas for their participation in institutions which fight against their interests and promote part-time work, the privatisation of health, welfare and education, longer working hours and a later retirement age.

We disagree with the imposition of quotas on political parties because they are organisations which people join voluntarily and they alone have the right to decide on their structure and how they operate.

To impose quotas on political parties is to interfere in their internal affairs and trample on the collective will of a political organisation.

We shall not oppose administrative measures to improve the participation of women in the decision-making process, provided that they are accompanied by the corresponding grass-roots policy and can therefore effectively remove barriers to the participation of women.

Administrative measures not accompanied by such a policy give rise to self-delusion and are misleading, which is why we cannot support isolated measures of an administrative nature, as proposed in the resolution.

These were the reasons why the Communist Party of Greece abstained from the vote.

I shall vote in favour of the report because it has the merit of once more highlighting a recurrent problem regarding the involvement of women in political life.

The report, quite rightly, points out that education is an essential tool in combating stereotypes and in equal training for children of both sexes from the earliest age.

However, two aspects which I think essential are missing.

The first is the economic situation: as long as women are the primary victims of an economic system which forces them into part-time work, secondary income and insecure jobs, to expect them to get involved in political life will remain a pious hope.

The second is the political situation: the report could at least put forward rules for elected representatives which require new people to be elected in each legislative term thereby enabling a turnover in members which would favour the election of more women.

Similarly, there should be a ban on holding more than one office, and there could be a time limit on re-election periods.

Madam President, last week I went to see a pensioner who lives in a village in the Bergamo valley. His name is Giuseppe Carminati and he is a woodcutter.

He told me he spends a lot of time on his own up the mountain, deep in the woods, sometimes at night because wood that is cut by the full moon burns better in the fireplace - but I have always known that. 'I do feel very lonely,' he said.

'But now that the European Parliament is voting to assist forest-based industries, please tell the President of Parliament, as a representative of all of you, that I will feel that the European Parliament is closer to me in my woodcutter' s work.

Even at night, by the full moon, it will be as if Mrs Fontaine is with me to keep me company, and then my work will be easier.'

The Seppnen report on forest-based and related industries is a step in the right direction, endeavouring as it does to overcome the confines of commercial competitiveness and create wider and deeper prospects for European forests. It is particularly important in this context to:

develop forest-based industries within the framework of viable development;

ensure that natural resources are renewable;

formulate a forest strategy and coordinate the various Community policies which affect it;

promote research and develop forest products for multiple purposes, such as medical applications.

Particular importance should be attached to forests in the Mediterranean and the Balkans which previously supported numerous communities and which are now in danger of disappearing.

That is why we need special Community action programmes for forests in the Mediterranean and the Balkans.

The Seppnen report has not received our support for a variety of reasons.

For one, the Commission and rapporteur largely limit sustainability in the forestry sector to replacement planting alongside cutting.

First of all, in this way, Mr Seppnen does not pay sufficient attention to biodiversity, whilst production forest can easily lead to monoculture.

It is therefore essential to plant a diverse range of species.

The original producer plays an important role in this, but is often bowing to the pressures of free market forces.

It is therefore necessary to circumscribe market forces.

It is regrettable that the report does not take this sufficiently into consideration.

Secondly, the report insufficiently highlights the need to minimise emissions.

Wood burning is not a sustainable source of energy, because CO2 and other polluting substances are released in the process.

More sustainable alternatives include gassing and composting.

Furthermore, it is questionable whether forests could be used as carbon sink in order to achieve the Kyoto emission targets. After all, wood burning must also be included as a source of carbon.

Additionally, the rapporteur does not do justice to the principle of subsidiarity when he asks for Community action in the field of education, technology and resources for the Commission.

Both within and outside the EU, sustainability is a factor in competitiveness which is gaining in importance.

It therefore deserves more of a boost than proposed by the rapporteur.

(The sitting was suspended at 12.55 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m.)

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I should like to speak on the subject of this afternoon' s agenda.

This morning, the President saw fit to propose postponing Mr Ferri' s report.

I agreed, as rapporteur on the subject of long-stay visas, to having my report discussed at 5.30 p.m. this afternoon.

Since then, however, I have received apologies from a great number of members who intended to take part in this debate.

The Chairman of the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs, Mr Watson, apologised as he will be unable to attend.

I also received apologies from Mr Pirker, Coordinator for the PPE Group, Mrs Terrn i Cusi, Coordinator for the Socialist Group, and from Mr Hernndez Mollar, who were scheduled to speak this afternoon.

There are other Members, too, in exactly the same position.

I feel that the absence of these Members who were down to speak on a report which was one of the priorities of the French Presidency means that we cannot have the proper debate which we ought to have on a subject on which Parliament must be consulted before the Council may decide.

In my capacity as rapporteur and on behalf of the PPE Group, I am therefore requesting, Mr President, that my report be postponed until a later part-session.

Mr President, I cannot agree with Mr Deprez.

I have some sympathy with your plight, Mr Deprez, but we only agreed the agenda at the beginning of the week, and Mr Ferri's comments this morning were incorrect.

He claimed that his report had been on this morning's agenda.

It shows the debate as running from 5.30 p.m. to 6.30 p.m., and his report was at the end of the list with the Deprez report.

In other words, it was clear from the outset that the Deprez and Ferri reports would be considered and voted on this evening, and I have made my own arrangements accordingly, and I wish to insist on this.

The President also said this afternoon that the vote would take place at 6 p.m. instead of at 6.30 p.m., and the debate on topical and urgent subjects of major importance would end at 5.30 p.m.

That means that we have half an hour to consider this topic.

I am vice-chairman of the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs, and I can tell you that if our colleagues are not here, I am quite happy to use all their speaking time and to state my views on the Deprez report, which is excellent.

Mr Posselt, that is an announcement of an intervention of almost twenty minutes during the debate on the Deprez report.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, Mr Posselt's last statement, his threat to talk for 20 minutes non-stop about the Deprez report, really is an argument for deferring the report at this stage.

However, the basic problem here is something quite different.

Mr Posselt has in fact said everything that needs to be said.

What we are witnessing here - and we have already debated this once this afternoon, as we also did on Monday and Tuesday - is, and I shall make no bones about it, an attempt to systematically undermine Strasbourg as the seat of Parliament.

Tactics like this are capable of achieving just that.

Mr Posselt, even if it would make a valuable contribution if you were to speak for 20 minutes - and I too could also speak for 20 minutes, as no one else is left from my group either - in reality it would mean that the work Mr Deprez has so carefully done would not be debated in the way it deserves here.

To that extent I can understand Mr Deprez's desire that his report, which is based on the approach developed in the committee and which should be reflected here in this Chamber, should be given a reasonable hearing in the plenary.

So I really am in favour of deferring a report as important as this one, and for my part I would recommend acceding to Mr Deprez's request.

We are not getting into a debate on a procedural point. We are hearing a proposal, one opinion against, and one in favour.

Now, commenting on what Mr Deprez has said, I have this to say.

Mr Deprez, on behalf of your group, you asked for the debate to be adjourned.

Then we heard a different opinion from Mr Posselt, who belongs to the same group.

But in any case, that is a secondary issue, because under Rule 146 of the Rules of Procedure a decision cannot be taken now on a matter like this.

We cannot vote on this point now.

You can request and propose - that is, a political group or at least thirty-two Members can do so - adjourning the debate to another time in Parliament' s schedule, but only at the beginning of the debate.

You can only present that proposal, on behalf of your group, when the debate starts at 5.30 p.m., not now.

Excuse me, Mr President, but surely in this instance the rule should have been the same as for Mr Ferri' s report this morning.

This morning, Mr Ferri' s report was postponed even though, according to your interpretation of the Rules of Procedure, this should not have been allowed.

Given that it was possible to do this for Mr Ferri, I do not, therefore, see why it would not be possible to do so in my case in order to organise this afternoon' s agenda better.

I am not asking for a special favour, simply for the application of the procedure applied this morning.

But I am not applying this morning' s procedure; I am applying Rule 146 and, despite the applause from Mr Ford and others, I am going to read it out to you: 'At the start of a debate on an item on the agenda, a political group or at least thirty-two Members may move that the debate be adjourned to a specific date and time.

Such a motion shall be put to the vote immediately.' So, not now, but at 5.30 p.m.

The next item is the debate on topical and urgent subjects of major importance.

Trial of former Khmers Rouges in Cambodia

The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions:

B50055/2001 by Mr Belder, on behalf of the Group for a Europe of Democracies and Diversities, on the law on the Khmer Rouge trial;

B50057/2001 by Mr Maaten, on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party, on the law on the Khmer Rouge trial;

B50063/2001 by Mrs Hautala, Mrs Maes, Mr Gahrton and Mrs McKenna, on behalf of the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance, on the law on the Khmer Rouge trial;

B50070/2001 by Mr Tannock and Mr Posselt, on behalf of the Group of the European People' s Party (Christian Democrats) and European Democrats, on the law on the Khmer Rouge trial;

B50075/2001 by Mrs Randzio-Plath, Mr van den Berg, Mr Corbett and Mr Iivari, on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists, on the international tribunal in Cambodia;

B50080/2001 by Mr Vinci, Mr Herman Schmid and Mr Manisco, on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left/Nordic Green Left, on the law on the Khmer Rouge trial in Cambodia.

Mr President, at long last we have a result. The leaders of the Khmer Rouge' s reign of terror are being brought before an "international" tribunal.

We are pleased that the Cambodian National Assembly has decided on this unanimously and would like the court rulings to be carried out as soon as possible.

After all, it is intolerable, certainly for the friends and relatives of the victims, that so far, not one single Khmer Rouge leader has been punished for his or her crimes and that the protagonists of years gone by are still free citizens in Cambodia, not to mention the former Khmer Rouge members' involvement in the government.

However, the content of the adopted legislative draft has forced us to make a number of critical comments.

After years of tug-of-war between the United Nations and Cambodia, it is becoming clear that a shaky compromise has been reached.

It is precisely those legal affairs against which UN experts expressed their veto in a recommendation three years ago, that have now been included in the model adopted.

The country' s regime, which is also culpable, has managed to squeeze every last drop out of the negotiations in this matter.

Dubious statements from Cambodian government leaders seem to suggest that they are attempting to delay the fair course of justice.

The minister in charge, Mr Sok An, recently claimed that the guiding principle behind this thinking was to maintain stability and peace in the country In other words, former Khmer Rouge members whose testimony could jeopardise current stability, need not be brought to trial.

King Sihanouk too is taking the unwilling authorities under his wing by pretending that "stability is more important than revenge" .

By way of conclusion, Mr President, we call on the international community and Cambodia to ensure that the Khmer Rouge killers are brought to justice in a speedy, fair and comprehensive trial, and to prevent the tribunal from degenerating into a charade.

Mr President, I believe Mr Belder has just hit the nail on the head.

Of course it is positive that this trial is now actually about to take place.

It is important for Cambodia to deal with the ghosts from the past which are still haunting the country.

However, we are not wild about what is about to happen there.

It is a matter of better some of a pudding than none of a pie.

We cannot do much else other than go along with it.

Cambodia' s parliament has given its consent.

Who are we then to criticise what is happening now, but we do have grave doubts about the way in which this has been organised.

Firstly, every court in Cambodia will have difficulty guaranteeing its own neutrality.

In this case, the Cambodian judges will be appointed by the Cambodian Supreme Council of Magistracy, which is ruled by the governing party.

How neutral can those judges be?

It is, of course, possible to appoint international judges, and they will certainly play a role in this, but will this role be so manifest that it will be clear to the Khmer Rouge victims that the judgments passed will actually be neutral and do justice to the situation as it was then?

It is, of course, extremely odd that people such as Mr Ieng Sary, who played a key role under Pol Pot, have already been released from the trial because the Prime Minister dismissed them from that trial, and that was not done by a court of justice but by Mr Hun Sen.

We are pleased that this trial is now going to take place, but we will monitor its progress with considerable suspicion.

We will only be able to reach a conclusion as to whether what is happening here is a positive step once the court cases are over.

We therefore hope things will go well, but we have major doubts.

Mr President, I very much welcome the establishment of courts to try the suspects of the former Communist Khmer Rouge regime.

It is important so that Cambodia can move forward into the future that those responsible for heinous crimes against the Cambodian population be brought to justice.

The Khmer Rouge regime was one of the worst human rights abusers of the twentieth century, being responsible for an estimated 1.72 million deaths in a short, four-year rule.

Although I welcome the establishment of the courts I have a number of reservations.

We have to remember that the members of the ruling Cambodian People's Party, including the prime minister, Hun Sen, were once activists of the Khmer Rouge, serving under the dictator Pol Pot.

Hun Sen has already decided who can and cannot be taken before a tribunal, thus challenging the powers of any court.

There have been genuine fears that several senior members of the regime might escape justice, in particular the former Khmer Rouge foreign secretary, Ieng Sary.

He was given partial amnesty after he defected with about 10,000 supporters in 1996.

Ieng Sary and other Khmer Rouge leaders were sentenced to death in absentia in 1997 by the People's Court, which was organised by the Vietnamese army occupying Cambodia at the time.

The amnesty granted by King Sihanouk refers only to this conviction and makes no reference to future convictions and therefore it is important that he is tried.

No Khmer Rouge leaders has ever been tried and only two are in detention, one being the person who ran a notorious torture centre in Phnom Penh from which only seven out of more than fourteen thousand inmates emerged alive.

The tribunal has an unusual framework for participation of both international and Cambodian judges and prosecutors.

Normally, in other war crime courts, there are only foreign judges and prosecutors.

This becomes ever more worrying when we see that while the UN-nominated judges will be screened by the Cambodian Supreme Council of the Magistrate, a body controlled by the ruling party of Phnom Penh, the UN has no power whatsoever to screen the judges appointed by Cambodia.

Finally, we also need to look at the involvement of China in all of this.

Although it has always maintained that it only provided the Khmer Rouge with technical expertise in agriculture, the Cambodian documentation centre recently unearthed evidence to show that it was directly involved in the setting up of the interrogation and torture centre in Phnom Penh where thousands of Cambodians died.

Mr President, there are people here who are old enough not to have forgotten the extraordinary and harrowing reports that came out of Cambodia in 1975, with aerial pictures of a deserted capital as the Khmer Rouge, their leaders schooled in the violent tenets of French revolutionary tradition and possessing a mixture of political idealism and mass psychopathology, moved two million people from the city to the countryside to begin a new society in year zero under the leadership of the "great" Pol Pot.

The sick were dragged from the hospitals or left to die.

What followed was to shock the world.

The human rights abuses of Bosnia, Kosovo, Sierra Leone, Chile, Angola are dwarfed by the sheer scale of the atrocities that took place under the Khmer Rouge.

The deliberate deaths of between one and two million people constituted a real genocide.

Perhaps, to be accurate, we should call it a sectocide for the intention was not to wipe out a race but an entire class, with victims selected on the basis of whether they were educated, whether their hands showed signs of manual work, or even whether they wore spectacles.

It is not surprising therefore that following Pol Pot's death and the defeat of the Khmer Rouge, there should be a need for some kind of national catharsis through the application of justice and a calling to account of those responsible.

Personally I hope that the prosecutions will not be restricted to the top 20 leaders but be extended to those who daily brutalised and executed their victims.

If the Cambodian people want these trials to proceed, and the political situation is sufficiently stable to permit them, then it is only natural that the international community, through the UN, should wish to support them in that aim.

We should beware, however, of imposing justice on other states, especially if such proceedings might unravel a political truce or accommodation that has brought peace or stability to the region and promises a better future.

Amnesties are sometimes necessary if unpalatable.

In Cambodia, though, it looks as though the people and government are ready to take the risk of overturning previous amnesties in order to secure justice.

If that proves to be the case we should wish them well in this venture.

Mr President, it is a positive step that the draft law on the trial of the Khmer Rouge members in Cambodia has been adopted in the country' s National Assembly and that King Sihanouk is to sign it after it has been discussed by the Constitutional Council.

The form the trials will take has been agreed between the UN and the Cambodian government.

As the Cambodian judicial system is still frail, the trials are to be organised in such a way that both international and local judges will be presiding.

During the time of the Khmer Rouge, nearly all those in the country' s legal profession were killed, and the country has not had time to evolve a new professionally run judicial system.

The international community has been concerned that many of those found guilty of genocide will not receive sentences, despite the law that supports the trial.

Those who caused the Cambodian state so much damage and its people so much unspeakable suffering must be held legally responsible for their actions.

In addition to this, however, account must be taken of the requirements of stability and the country' s future.

Last spring I myself was able to see how ordinary people were aiming at forgiveness, so that life could go on.

It is not always easy to distinguish clearly between the victims and the persecutors.

Restarting a spiral of large-scale revenge is to be avoided.

Although Cambodia' s problems and its bloody history are still close to us in terms of time, the country has been able to build the foundations of democracy.

Cambodia is the only country in Southeast Asia to have abolished the death penalty.

A friend of mine who works in the region said that at present Cambodia is the only multi-party system in the former French Indo-China, although there is still much to do to strengthen democracy and the rule of law.

While we joyfully welcome the legislation on a trial, we must give our dedicated support to the positive developments that have started in the country.

Mr President, what we have just seen is an attempt to wreck the Thursday sitting just as Friday's sitting as been done away with, partly by undermining these topical and urgent debates.

However, I would like to say that the subject of Cambodia very much demonstrates the importance of our topical and urgent debates.

As Mr Tannock has quite rightly said, the genocide which took place in Cambodia was often hushed up during the 1980s.

It was this House which, following its first direct election in 1979, was the first to give repressed peoples a moral voice, although it had virtually no powers at that time.

And this House took a very special interest in the fate of the people of Cambodia.

I recall that in the 1980s our colleague Otto von Habsburg, who I was working with at the time, regularly got the subject of Cambodia onto the agenda.

And if the Cambodians wanted to communicate with the peoples of Europe, they did it through the European Parliament's debates on topical and urgent subjects of major importance, here in Strasbourg.

A politician who recently died, Son San, a Democrat who trod the difficult path between the Khmer Rouge on the one hand and the pro-Vietnamese puppet regime on the other, gradually pushed ahead the re-establishment of a democratic Cambodia, chiefly with the help of the European Union and of the European Parliament.

Today we have an opportunity to build on this, and I am very pleased that the horrifying genocide committed by the Khmer Rouge will now be properly punished.

But it is also very positive - and I would like to say that Mrs Iivari is quite right here - that we as the European Union have a chance to actively support democracy, the rule of law and plurality in modern Cambodia.

However, this example should make us aware that it is not always a question of absolute power or authority.

This House, thank goodness, now has greater powers as regards external policy than it had 20 years ago.

It is a question of giving those who are deprived of their rights a moral voice and that is one of the primary duties of this House.

Mr President, the Commission has fully supported the efforts of the United Nations and the Cambodian authorities in their attempts to achieve an early agreement on the Khmer Rouge Tribunal.

During the past year, the Commission bilaterally, and together with the EU Member States, has called on the Cambodian government to express its support for the process leading up to the agreement on the Tribunal and has recalled that the Tribunal should meet international standards of justice, fairness and due process.

After some delays in the passing of the legislation, the draft law was adopted by the National Assembly on 2 January and by the Senate on 15 January.

It is now due to be ratified by the Constitutional Council and King Norodom Sihanouk.

While we welcome the adoption of the legislation regarding the Khmer Rouge Tribunal, both by the National Assembly and by the Senate, it should be borne in mind that we are still awaiting the official statement from the United Nations on the draft text.

There are indications that the text is not completely in line with what had been agreed with the United Nations.

Nevertheless, the first reaction from the UN after receiving an unofficial translation, has been cautiously positive, and the Commission hopes, therefore, that the remaining outstanding issues can be resolved so that the UN can improve the new court and the agreement between the Cambodian government and the United Nations can be implemented expeditiously.

One other outstanding issue which the Commission will follow closely is the question of which Khmer Rouge leader will be put on trial.

Although Prime Minister Hun Sen has given assurances that nobody would be immune from prosecution, he has also indicated that this is a very sensitive issue for parts of the Cambodian population.

In particular, Hun Sen has warned that "war could break out" if the Khmer Rouge deputy premier Ieng Sary is put on trial.

So there are very good reasons why we should follow this closely.

The vote will take place this evening, at 6.30 p.m.

Visa requirements between Russia and Georgia

The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions:

B50056/2001 by Mr Belder, on behalf of the Group for a Europe of Democracies and Diversities, on the visa regime in existence between Georgia and Russia;

B50058/2001 by Mr Haarder, on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party, on the visa regime imposed by the Russian Federation on Georgia;

B50061/2001 by Mr Dupuis, Mr Pannella, Mrs Bonino, Mr Turco, Mr Della Vedova, Mr Dell'Alba and Mr Cappato, of the Technical Group of Independent Members, on the visa regime in Georgia;

B50064/2001 by Mr Gahrton, Mr Lagendijk, Mrs Schroedter and Mrs Isler Bguin, on behalf of the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance, on the question of visas between Russia and Georgia;

B50071/2001 by Mrs Schleicher and Mr Posselt, on behalf of the Group of the European People' s Party (Christian Democrats) and European Democrats, on the visa regime imposed by the Russian Federation on Georgia;

B50076/2001 by Mr van den Berg, on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists, on the visa regime imposed by the Russian Federation on Georgia;

B50081/2001 by Mr Markov and Mr Vinci, on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left/Nordic Green Left, on the visa regime in force between Georgia and Russia.

Mr President, we can certainly support the thrust of the present resolution. After all, it is a clear departure from the Russian Federation' s unilateral decision to impose a visa obligation on Georgia.

The wording of Paragraph 2 - request for suspension of Moscow' s visa regime vis--vis Tbilisi - merits further development in our opinion. Naturally, we expect both parties to display the will to enter into joint consultation.

Much more serious, in our opinion, is an omission in recital D. It has a direct bearing on the very essence of Georgia' s political stability.

Recital D is right to require safety guarantees to be put in place for the group of approximately 35 000 Georgian refugees, some of whom have now returned to the southern region of Gali or commute there on a daily basis for their work.

The separatist Abkhazian regime is today in power in that region but - bear in mind - this is in the presence of Russian troops, so-called peacekeepers, who assume a purely passive role.

However, what is missing in recital D, is a reference to the large group of Georgian refugees from Abkhazia who have been on Georgian territory until now.

These are an estimated 175,000 to 190,000 refugees and displaced persons, and they are living in truly abject conditions.

It is precisely this specific humanitarian problem which poses a direct threat to the authority of President Shevarnadze.

These days, the refugees from Abkhazia are putting the thumbscrews on Georgian authorities to secure their return home.

In short, they are a continuous source of unrest in Georgia.

A situation which Russia is apparently keen to maintain by not forcing Abkhazia to accept a solution for these refugees.

Indeed, various schemes have been outlined under international supervision which the Abkhazians have so far put on hold.

Given these and other highly volatile political situations in the Caucasus, we welcome the suggestion in Paragraph 8 - the appointment of a special European envoy to this strategically and economically important region - with open arms.

A watchful European eye may have a preventive effect on this hotbed, and what is more, our presence will hopefully promote internal compliance with formally signed fundamental rights.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, we have had to wait a long time to get this resolution on the agenda.

Georgia is a long way away, it is true, and a few years ago, the Balkans seemed just as far away.

We have now seen the outcome of that situation and just how close they are in fact.

I think that, in many respects, Georgia and the Caucasus as a whole already are today what the Balkans were yesterday, the Balkans of the 1990s.

Chechnya, Karabakh, Abkhazia, South Ossetia and Georgia as a whole are very frequently experiencing tragic situations.

Georgia today is a country literally in the stranglehold of its larger neighbour, a country being blackmailed through the oil supply, the gas supply, the electricity supply, blackmailed through visas, with this unbelievable discrimination between the citizens of South Ossetia and Abkhazia and those of Georgia.

This situation is the work of Moscow, the new imperialistic policy pursued by President Putin.

Georgia is sinking fast, poverty is becoming widespread and the European Union, if you will excuse the language, does not give a damn, either about Georgia, or about this new focus of conflict at the very gateway to Europe.

No solutions are contemplated, although I do not see why it should not be perfectly possible, in a European Union which will have 450 million members, to have 455 million.

The only solution which might stabilise the whole region, right on Chechnya' s doorstep, and put a brake on Russia' s hold in this region, the only serious proposal, by which I mean a proposal that Georgia should accede to the European Union in due form, has not been made.

We ought at least to recognise that the European Union must, as a matter of urgency, visit Chechnya. This invitation is particularly directed at Commissioner Poul Nielson.

Mr President, Commissioner, he who sows the wind shall inevitably reap the whirlwind.

These words take on their full meaning when applied to the countries of the southern Caucasus.

What region of our own continent, or the next, is more crossed by tensions and issues?

What region has a greater need for pacification and normalisation?

The southern Caucasus is effectively caught in the pincer grip of regional powers - Russia and Turkey, of conflicts of interest, and hence related military conflicts, from the Nagorno Karabakh plateau to the mountains of Chechnya, or the regions of Abkhazia and South Ossetia.

The region is stagnating, ossified in political, economic and energy transition processes which continue to exist only in theory.

A situation which has until now been held in a vegetative status quo, which may be considered nonetheless as the lesser evil.

At least, everything was done to defuse the different justifications for war in the framework of an ad hoc stability agreement.

At least the recent incorporation of these three countries, as small geographically as they are strategic regionally, into the Council of Europe could be interpreted as a sign of interest from the nations of Europe, bringing hope of normalisation for the region and a guarantee of a more favourable future for these peoples.

How, then, is the recent unilateral decision by the Russian Government to impose a visa regime for the citizens of Georgia to be interpreted except as deliberate ostracism severing economic trade and historic links between the formerly fraternal Soviet states.

How is this administrative segregation between the citizens of the same country, which is recognised by the international community, the people of Abkhazia, South Ossetia and Tbilisi, to be interpreted except as official external ratification overriding the integrity of a sovereign state?

Indeed, is a government bill tabled in the Duma to provide for the possibility of annexing a foreign state, or part thereof, even if there are no borders?

These are just so many deliberate, calculated sallies in Russia' s muddled geopolitical game, and just as many reasons for us to use our votes to express our condemnation of Russia' s machinations involving its former vassal state and to take practical action to assist the political stabilisation of this region and its economic take-off, and, of course, to appoint, as the resolution proposes, a Special Envoy for the Caucasus: since a gust of wind in the southern Caucasus may indeed blow Europe away.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, the European Parliament's delegation for relations with the South Caucasus is deeply concerned about the dramatic events currently being enacted there.

The unilateral imposition of a visa regime on Georgia, with the exception of two regions of Georgia, will create new divisions in a country which is a member of the Council of Europe, wishes to develop democratically, and with which we have concluded an agreement precisely in order to support it in all areas.

These developments are leading to tensions with neighbouring states and to huge obstacles for the Georgians themselves, some of whom work in the Russian Federation and are now experiencing difficulties.

In order to obtain a visa, they have to travel back to Tiflis.

In some cases they cannot even afford to do this.

And the other side is that these disruptions will also have economic consequences.

We are very much concerned that because of its oil reserves the entire South Caucasus is now at the mercy of commercial interests and has also become a European trouble spot.

We should not just wring our hands about this, we should actually do everything in our power.

We know from our Georgian friends in national parliaments and from the embassy, which has contacted us, that they really are in dire straits, and that they fear further developments, especially as a wedge is being driven between Armenia and Azerbaijan, which Moscow evidently regards as greater friends.

Georgia fears that it will become isolated.

So these are truly dramatic events.

At the end of December, gas pipelines from Russia to Georgia were even blocked on the alleged grounds that payments had not been made, even though the financing arrangements were quite different.

So these are all things which when explained logically sound quite harmless, but which demonstrate to us that the situation has dramatically intensified over the last six months.

We are therefore asking the Commission to consider, in conjunction with the Council, whether we could not review and work out a better approach to these conflict situations, based on appropriate decisions which will help people there who want to build a democratic society and seek a peaceful future, and to support Georgia in observing human rights and complying with the other obligations it has entered into within the Council of Europe.

It is very hard in these difficult circumstances for Georgia to observe all its current human rights obligations.

That is why we are calling on the Commission to act here.

We have made requests and have largely reached cross-party agreement in Parliament that something should be done.

We need to work together to come up with solutions which will promote a peaceful way forward.

Mr President, I would like to firmly support Mrs Schleicher, who has worked with great commitment on behalf of the Caucasian region and in this case Georgia in particular.

We all know what these reprisals are about.

On the one hand they are linked with geo-strategic interests and with energy and oil interests, and on the other hand they are associated with the brutal war being waged to eradicate the people of Chechnya.

It is very clear to us what is being attempted here - to destabilise Georgia, just as Chechnya has been destabilised.

We all have an interest in preserving what is in any case very fragile nationhood and in supporting the first faltering steps towards democracy in this region and in Georgia.

That is why I would like to call on the Commissioner to pay even greater attention to this region.

Humanitarian aid in particular has a strong stabilising effect in addition to its purely humanitarian function.

I am delighted that a delegation from our neighbours, the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe, is currently visiting Chechnya, and I wish to appeal to the Commissioner to travel to Georgia and Chechnya in the near future and have a close look at the human rights situation there on the spot, just as the Council of Europe is doing in such a thorough way.

I appeal to the Commissioner to make our humanitarian aid the number one political priority - the Caucasian region has been a priority for the USA and for Russia for a long time. I say this because I have the feeling that the European Union, apart from Mrs Schleicher, who is doing marvellous work, is failing to take up this challenge.

We must not allow ourselves to repeat the mistake we made with the Balkans, where we also woke up to the situation too late, and again attract opprobrium by doing too little too late.

Mr President, I wish to begin by saying a few words about humanitarian assistance to this region.

We are the single most important provider of humanitarian assistance to the northern Caucasus and, over the years, we have also been the main provider of humanitarian assistance to the southern Caucasus region.

A year ago exactly I was in North Ossetia and I tried to get into Chechnya but the Russian authorities would not allow this for security reasons. But we are still there.

Right now our biggest problem is the abduction of the men who worked for one of the organisations we are funding in Chechnya.

This, of course, has caused a great deal of concern.

The immediate reaction was to withdraw from Chechnya.

However, many organisations in Russia have urged us to reconsider this and to come back.

As a humanitarian provider this puts us in a dilemma. On the one hand, we need to be there, and we are very pleased that Parliament understands the need for ECHO to operate on the basis of a "remote control operation" in these circumstances.

On the other hand, sometimes it is a little too easy for us to tell the organisations we are funding to go there - it is the voluntary staff who have to go.

We have to find a balance that is ethically acceptable as a donor.

At the moment we are reconsidering whether or not to go back to Chechnya, as we are needed there.

The EU has already expressed serious concern over the Russian Federation's unilateral decision to introduce visa requirements for Georgian citizens.

The entire international community, including Russia, is committed to supporting the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the independent states.

Applying a special visa regime or allowing exemptions for the inhabitants of secessionist regions could imply support for the legitimacy of their regimes and undermine Georgia's sovereignty and territorial integrity.

In addition to the introduction of visa requirements, Georgia has faced a number of other crises in its relations with Russia in recent months, in particular, over interruptions in gas supplies, the pace of withdrawal of military bases and rescheduling discussions with the Paris Club.

Concerning Russian gas supplies to Georgia, we urge that all actions are based exclusively on commercial and contractual considerations.

I want to stress that it is in Russia's interests to be seen as an internationally credible and reliable gas supplier.

I say this as a European.

We are naturally concerned about the humanitarian, social and economic consequences for the Georgian people, as well as the overall stability in the Caucasus.

Russia too has no interest in seeing increased instability in the Caucasus.

Georgia is a member of the UN, the OSCE and the Council of Europe and it has a partnership and cooperation agreement with the EU.

We call upon the states of the region to use the mechanisms of the OSCE, as well as any other appropriate peaceful instruments, to resolve that dispute quickly.

The vote will take place this afternoon at 6.30 p.m.

The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions:

Situation in Turkish prisons - B5-0059/2001 by Mr Duff, on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party, on the situation in Turkish prisons;

B5-0065/2001 by Mr CohnBendit and Mr Lagendijk, on behalf of the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance, on the situation in Turkish prisons;

B50072/2001 by Mr Van Orden, on behalf of the Group of the European People' s Party (Christian Democrats) and European Democrats, on the situation in Turkish prisons;

B5-0077/2001 by Mr van den Berg, Mr Katiforis, Mr Sakellariou and Mr Swoboda, on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists, on the operation by the Turkish government to end the hunger strikes in its prisons;

B5-0082/2001 by Mrs Uca, Mrs Morgantini, Mrs Ainardi, Mr Sjstedt, Mr Cossutta, Mr Korakas, Mr Miranda, Mr Seppnen, Mrs Frahm, Mr Papayannakis and Mr Theonas, on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left/Nordic Green Left, on Turkish prisons.

Situation in Algeria- B5-0062/2001 by Mrs Caullery, on behalf of the Union for a Europe of Nations Group, and Mr Morillon, on behalf of the Group of the European People' s Party (Christian Democrats) and European Democrats, on the situation in Algeria;

B5-0066/2001 by Mrs Flautre, Mr Cohn-Bendit and Mrs Maes, on behalf of the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance, on the human rights situation in Algeria;

B5-0083/2001 by Mrs Boudjenah and Mrs Eriksson, on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left/Nordic Green Left, on the situation in Algeria;

B5-0086/2001 by Mr Obiols i Germ, Mr van den Berg and Mrs Napoletano, on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists, on the political situation in Algeria.

(IT) Mr President, one year after Helsinki we have been following events in Turkey with anguish and apprehension. Thirty-three people were killed when the security forces intervened on 19 December, and what news is available on the state of health of those detainees forcibly transferred who have been on hunger strike since 20 October last, remains alarming.

And we can only condemn the campaign of systematic repression and the ban on any expression of support for the prisoners, which has targeted human rights organisations in the first instance.

We are well aware that the situation in Turkish prisons means we cannot ignore the violence and intransigence of certain prisoners and the fact that, in some cases, the Turkish authorities had lost control of whole sections of the prisons, as well as the constant reports from various authoritative sources of summary executions of prisoners who have tried to detach themselves from the organisations they belong to, and lots being drawn to select which prisoners are to fast until death.

But it has been demonstrated that the Turkish government is incapable of ensuring peace and security in the prisons without the excessive and ineffective use of force, so it is the Turkish government that bears prime responsibility for what has happened and it must find the remedy for it.

The remedy cannot be blind repression and paranoia about security.

It is the Turkish government' s duty to prevent an already tense situation taking root and deepening into hopeless violence, boosting and strengthening violent and extremist groups and parties.

It is up to the government to act.

Obviously the European Union, like all of us, has a direct interest in a process of stabilisation and peace, and we hope it will be rapid.

We have the clear duty to report and evaluate any progress towards greater respect for human rights in Turkey, which is why our group strongly supports the idea of sending a delegation into the Turkish prisons as soon as possible.

Mr President, the recent events in Turkish prisons are tragic by any standards and it is an enormous pity that the situation had been allowed to deteriorate over such a long period with the almost inevitable consequences.

However, these events must be put in context and we should acknowledge the resolve of the Turkish authorities to introduce a more human, acceptable, and indeed controllable, prison regime.

As relations between the European Union and Turkey develop in an increasingly positive manner, we need to take a measured approach in our comments on Turkey's problems.

At the same time our relationship with the Turkish authorities should be sufficiently robust that we can make justifiable criticisms.

I have to say that in the United Kingdom in the past we too have had difficulties in maintaining the right prison regime for those convicted or detained for terrorist offences.

We too have had situations where terrorists have more or less had total control over their accommodation and recreation areas and we too have had to deal with the tragedy of hunger strikes.

The prisons themselves take on symbolic significance.

The situation in the prisons becomes yet another facet of the armed struggle against the established government.

We should keep this perspective in mind.

Turning to the resolution itself we rightly deplore recent events but my feeling is that we should be more welcoming and encouraging concerning the reforms initiated by the Turkish Government.

After all Turkey is responding to the demands that we placed upon her to bring her prisons more into line with European systems.

We should remember that many of the inmates are revolutionaries who will accept nothing short of control of their situation.

Of course a prison regime must be humane and there must be mechanisms to enable prisoners to express legitimate grievances.

This is in everyone's interests but we cannot expect governments to negotiate with prisoners over their conditions and regimes.

The current problems started because the armed groups were not prepared to concede control over the prisons to the authorities.

The response by the security forces is not the cause but the consequence of the problem.

The Turkish security forces had to retake the prisons by force facing organised armed opposition and the circumstances of many deaths is not clear while of course every death is a tragedy.

I know that the Turkish authorities are greatly saddened by recent events.

They are also thoroughly committed to reform and open to close cooperation with the Commission and with the Union and its Member States on reform of the penal system.

They see this as part of the natural process of adopting the acquis.

We should rightly express our concern at what has happened and that the situation was allowed to deteriorate so far.

Let us now offer all possible professional advice and assistance and encourage rapid reform without giving further opportunities to undemocratic forces who seek to overthrow the Turkish Government and frustrate Turkey's progress towards membership of the European Union.

Mr President, I would say to Mr Van Orden: you had to release your own Irish political prisoners almost with military honours.

I remember the scenes on the BBC.

These are problems which cannot be resolved by violence but only by political solutions.

Mr President, today's debate and subsequent vote follow on from the debate which we held in this House on 14 December last year, when the urgent vote was cancelled following the decision by the three political groups to withdraw their motions.

That decision was a gesture of confidence on the part of the European Parliament in the will and the ability of the Turkish authorities to manage the hunger strike crisis in a non-violent, humane and efficient manner.

In fact, the motion for a resolution by our fellow members in the liberal group, which is signed by the honourable Mr Duff, states that Parliament is satisfied with the Turkish government's decision to postpone its plans to transfer prisoners to these prisons and to obtain the society's consent to the reform of the prison system.

Similar hopes were expressed in the resolution of the group of the Greens signed by Mr Cohn-Bendit, which quoted statements made by the Turkish Minister of Justice.

Some members may have been won over by the arguments set out in the letter on the matter from His Excellency the Ambassador of Turkey, who again did us the honour of sending us what is now his customary letter in such cases, in which he stressed that the Turkish government was handling the matter with the utmost seriousness and that Parliament needed to leave superficialities to one side when dealing with matters as important as the prison system in Turkey.

In the wake of all of which, honourable members, how tragic that the superficiality of the European Parliament has proven, in this case at least, to be closer to the mark than the seriousness and political maturity of the Turkish authorities.

As you know, a few days later, on 20 December, army and police divisions went on the attack in order, naturally, to save the prisoners' lives, as the Turkish ambassador informs us in another letter. Twenty-four prisoners were killed and 131 were wounded during this attack.

And, of course, three Turkish soldiers also died.

And what is the upshot of all this bloodshed?

The hunger strike in the Turkish prisons is continuing on a massive scale, making it impossible to exclude the possibility of more attacks, more deaths and more bloodshed.

Our joint motion for a resolution quite rightly suggests the need to avoid further tragedy and therefore calls on the Turkish government to take immediate non-violent measures to avoid any such developments.

Of course, what we also need is an objective inquiry with international guarantees and for responsibility to be apportioned for what happened on 20 December.

I think we also need the situation to be addressed with the assistance and under the supervision of the European Union. I talk of supervision because Turkey is, of course, a candidate country and its candidature must meet the Copenhagen criteria, which are damaged by such incidents, incidents which, of course, are recorded by us and, I assume, by the Commission, which is called on in our resolution to specifically mention the situation in Turkish prisons in its annual report.

These are, I am sorry to say, the stubborn facts and they are not counterbalanced by the overbearing, not to say insulting tone of the advice meted out by Turkey's representatives to the European Parliament.

Mr President, it really is virtually pointless to discuss how Turkish prisons should be organised.

Last week, I received a great deal of material from the Turkish delegation of the Parliament dealing precisely with the internal conditions in these prisons.

I do not think, however, that the problems we are basically discussing are about the good or bad treatment of offenders.

A great many of the prisoners in Turkish jails are, after all, convicted for political offences.

It stands to reason that they will continue their political struggle as political prisoners.

In this way, the efforts of the Turkish Government involving military troops and repressive measures also becomes part of a political battle directed against the Kurds and other minorities that populate the Turkish prisons.

The situation is totally impossible for Turkish society and the Turkish Government.

A totally different approach must be taken.

The political parties and the popular movements in Turkey must be allowed to operate as freely as parties and movements in the rest of Europe.

The battle between different forces must be fought by peaceful means.

As long as that is not happening, I cannot see how there would be any possibility of Turkey' s becoming a Member of the European Union.

The Turkish Government must show the way.

It must be accepted that Turkey consists of different national and cultural groups which must all have the same rights.

Languages and cultures must be accepted in the schools, especially in the Kurd-dominated areas.

I believe that the only thing that can be done is to grant amnesty to these political prisoners and to release them from jail.

When this happens, there will be no more problems in Turkish prisons than in English, German or French prisons.

Mr President, when a debate on the unacceptable situation in Turkish prisons was scheduled during the last plenary session of the European Parliament in December 2000, and the relevant motions for resolutions were withdrawn due to a lack of coordination between the political groups involved, the disturbance in the Turkish prisons was still in its infancy and the reaction of the Turkish authorities had not yet manifested itself in all its barbarity.

Of course, for a less problematic country than Turkey, the very fact that the European Parliament intended to take an interest in the matter would be incentive enough to put a stop to any thought of violating its legal and moral obligations.

Turkey, however, did exactly the opposite, confirming yet again that it is indeed a problematic country.

It blatantly and disdainfully ignored the Parliament of the European Union, which it nonetheless aspires to join and, applying its favourite standard practice, engaged just a few days later in the shameless slaughter of dozens of prisoners, provoking an international outcry.

Today's condemnatory - and in my view excessively lenient - resolution is, nonetheless, the obvious and a positive albeit, unfortunately, inadequate reaction in the case of Turkey, which has repeatedly proven that it is indifferent to such reprimands.

So what we need, at long last, is for the European Union and the wider international community to deal with Turkey - in deed not just word - using the same weights and measures and the same rules as those used in similar problematic cases in order to impose respect for democratic principles, human rights and the rule of law, i.e. without postponing expedient political and other action and interests and without showing tolerant understanding of so-called Turkish idiosyncrasies.

And as regards the European Union in particular, to make it crystal clear at long last to Turkey and to its non-European supporters, not just in words but - I repeat - with deeds, that the door by which Turkey is to enter the European family, even though there is some doubt as to whether it belongs there, will remain very firmly shut unless it absolutely and unreservedly brings its internal and international conduct into line with the rudimentary rules of law and ethics which underpin the workings of a modern cultivated society.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, it really is deeply disturbing that we find ourselves obliged to address the situation in Turkey - or rather the situation in that country's prisons - again and so soon.

I would be pleased if we were able to give Turkey credit today for having solved a difficult situation in a peaceful way.

We in the European Parliament must therefore demand that Turkey itself should investigate - and where necessary that the Commission should also do its share in investigating - how this disastrous situation has arisen in Turkey at all. I have in mind not only its prisons and the hunger strike there, but also how the need arose for military and police intervention at the cost of so many lives.

Secondly, we must demand in no uncertain terms that there should be transparency in the treatment of prisoners, and that prisoners should have the right to see doctors, and not just under the supervision of police and prison officers, but also in circumstances such that the doctors can genuinely carry out serious examinations with proper results.

Thirdly, we must demand that Turkey should attempt to reach a consensus within its borders, in particular with human rights organisations and in relation to the human rights situation in prisons, and that it should consider how the situation can be improved and a basic consensus can be achieved in this respect.

Fourthly, those inmates who are currently being held as political prisoners under existing and defunct laws - and it is often admitted in Turkey that there are such prisoners - should be released.

This would certainly defuse the situation in overcrowded prisons.

Fifthly, we must demand a change in Turkey's laws.

After all, it is not just a question of saying that once they are detained, prisoners should be properly treated and that when there is a hunger strike an attempt should be made to resolve the situation peacefully.

The real question is why there are so many people in prison.

The reason that there are so many people in prison is that there are laws which provide for people to be punished because of their convictions, which may also find expression through written declarations or statements, rather than punishing them for actual acts which they have committed.

This is simply unacceptable in a modern democracy.

With that in mind, Mr President, I wish to appeal once more to Turkey to finally eliminate these laws from its penal code and to stop incarcerating political prisoners.

Mr President, I should like to start, on behalf of the Communist Party of Greece and the Greek people in general, by expressing our solidarity both with the political prisoners in Turkey and with all the Turkish people who suffer under the Turkish regime.

I should then like to point out that every crime has its perpetrators and its accessories.

There are those who commit the crime and there are those who aid and abet.

The perpetrator here is, of course, the Turkish regime which, a priori, sees every left-winger, every Communist and every Kurd as a terrorist, whom it then tries to eliminate.

The accessories, however, are more serious; they are the international imperialist system, the United States,  and the European Union, all of which have tremendous economic, strategic and political interests in Turkey and are using all possible means to support the militaristic regime in Turkey, the regime which has no qualms about opening fire, because what we had here was not in fact a case of political prisoners setting themselves on fire; it was a case of their being killed with flamethrowers.

So these accessories need to be sentenced, the accessories who granted Turkey candidate status, the accessories who do nothing to help the political prisoners.

We identified the problem back in August, we asked on more than two occasions for the president of the European Parliament to intervene - and nothing was done - and the last time we called for intervention was when the attack had already been carried out - and again nothing was done.

I am afraid that the resolution before us is very weak, it barely even condemns the action by the Turkish regime; more importantly, it does not condemn those who are behind the Turkish regime.

It would, of course, be strange if those who yesterday applauded the war criminal Javier Solana were to take a different attitude towards Turkey.

Mr President, the resolutions of three political groups were withdrawn during the last part-session under obscure circumstances and today we are debating a joint motion for a resolution by five groups on the same subject.

This is not the time to assess what has happened and what has changed and what we perhaps encouraged with our attitude.

Turkey is a candidate country for membership of the European Union.

However, there is evidence of doublespeak on several counts and the matter is very serious.

I personally am in favour of Turkey's European prospects.

However, we have noticed - even recently - that people who have played and who still play an important role in European developments, such as former chancellors Kohl and Schmidt, tend to be in favour of Turkey's European prospects when they are talking as politicians but, when speaking at private seminars and conferences, maintain that Turkey has no place in the European Union.

This conflict of words paints us into a political corner.

Perhaps, politically, it helps those who we say want an economic Europe; however, it does not help the political Europe which interests the European Parliament.

So as long as certain parties behave in a way which gives the impression that the system which currently has the upper hand in Turkey could take hold in Europe, then we are again painted into a corner.

Because every time we look for arguments against Turkey's European prospects, we find them in Turkey's failure to adapt to European practices.

And the prospect of adaptation must be an absolute effort as far as we are concerned.

Ladies and gentlemen, we must be absolute and we must be fair: absolute as regards compliance with European criteria by Turkey, as regards its prospects, and fair as regards the way in which we control them.

This policy serves us, it serves Turkey and it serves its people.

If, for any reason, we are not absolute on matters of respect for human rights, democracy, freedom and, at the same time, compliance with international law, then we shall not be doing either ourselves or Turkey any favours.

Mr President, at the start of this part-session, the request from our group, the Union for a Europe of Nations Group, for a debate on the situation in Algeria was accepted.

The reception accorded this request was just what one might expect, namely a wave of fine feelings, fine but perfectly gratuitous, on the part of the usual ranks of those for whom the all-purpose defence of human rights has become a sort of knee-jerk reaction in the place of any real political analysis, sometimes, as is the case for at least a few, with no result other than to hide more obscure intentions.

So our own message is not compassionate but political.

We, of course, wish to express our distress at the heinous violence which bruises the Algerian nation a little more each day, but we are also aware that the Algerians have had more than enough compassion.

Since, thanks to the courageous policy of their president, President Bouteflika, it has been demonstrated - and that at least is an achievement - that no voice of reason, no promise of amnesty, no attempt at reconciliation, in a word, no political solution will be accepted by the fanatics. We must take action, and we must recognise that those Member States that grant their leaders asylum, and sometimes more than that, are well and truly guilty of collusion in the events we are condemning here, with each speaker outdoing the last in a spiral of hypocrisy.

That, ladies and gentlemen, is the heart of the matter.

Several Member States are actually guilty of conniving with the perpetrators of massacres.

They express regret officially, whilst, behind the scenes, protecting, concealing and welcoming.

Sometimes they even welcome in France, in full knowledge, the perpetrators of criminal acts committed in my own country.

We believe that any proper defence of human rights must begin with the reinforcement of the rule of law in Algeria and must contribute towards ensuring the authority of a government and a president elected in what we persist in considering democratic elections.

Democratic human rights monitoring should not apply exclusively to the established governments.

I am thinking in particular of the other countries of North Africa, Morocco, Tunisia and Libya.

It must also help support them, in particular, aside from all the details which have been blown up out of all proportion, when they come up against such an indiscriminate killing frenzy, which is all the more dangerous because it is secretly supported by external powers, powers which are not even European, if you get my drift, and which are taking advantage of an unstable situation to pull strings behind the scenes, working through these fanatics.

The old games between empires are at work, and the victim is not just the Algerian people, but Algeria itself, and its oldest and ultimately most faithful friends.

So, Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, let us attempt once and for all to get a clear grasp of the state of affairs in Algeria.

Yes, there are external forces at work in Algeria.

Yes, once again Algeria, although, admittedly laying itself open to this with its centuries-old internecine divides, has been given over to power struggles and my own country, France, which undoubtedly bears some responsibility towards this country, will continue to accept them in the name of ancestral friendship and to ensure that the government and the president which the country has chosen succeed in ensuring as best they can in the face of instability and certain external machinations - including, I repeat, by some of our friends - peace and the authority of a state which is, even today, a constitutional state.

Mr President, Commissioner, we must not lose hope.

The hopes raised in Algeria and throughout the world by President Bouteflika' s civil concord initiative must not give way to the disenchanted view that there is really nothing that can be done in this country to eradicate violence and establish the rule of law.

In the same way that we have made a commitment to supporting those who, in the Basque country, have rebelled against indiscriminate terrorism, it is our duty to do all we can to support those in favour of concord and reconciliation in Algeria.

It is Europe' s duty, and it is also in its interest.

It is in Europe' s interest to extend the area of peace and stability which it has succeeded in establishing within Europe to the southern Mediterranean, by continuing the Barcelona Process.

It is in Europe' s interest to listen to the appeals it receives from the whole of the continent of Africa to re-establish forms of cooperation which will easily turn a page on the painful history of decolonisation.

We Europeans must become aware that we have as much to gain as to offer in getting this off the ground.

Our own future will depend on the way we succeed in assisting the continent of Africa to emerge from poverty and chaos.

I am resolutely opposed to the temptation to seal ourselves off in a Fortress Europe which would be bound, one day, by its very nature, to find itself under siege.

That is why I shall support the joint motion for a resolution which will be put to the vote in this House shortly.

On this occasion, I would ask our Algerian partners to understand that we certainly do not want to look like we are sermonising out of some sort of feeling of superiority, but as people of goodwill, determined to assist them, if they so wish, in putting an end to their current tragic plight and to re-establishing with them, in future, the bonds of friendship which have linked us throughout history.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, in Algeria, the month of Ramadan has been marked by a new escalation in the terror: after all the dreadful massacres which have taken place since 1991, at the start of the civil war, not to mention the thousands of people traumatised or missing, and the anguish and terror of their families.

Despite the civil concord law initiated by president Bouteflika, there has been no halt to the violence.

The Algerian people still aspire to peace and reconciliation, yet these appear to be irreconcilable with lack of punishment.

As the international human rights organisations have shown, the fight against Islamist terrorism is being waged illegally.

It is crucial for the Algerian authorities to agree to bring all those responsible for all these crimes before the courts.

In this context, one question arises.

What is the meaning of the apparent impotence and passivity of the armed forces?

In Algeria, no one can deny the intransigence of the senior military hierarchy which has been in power for 39 years, blocking the political system and cultivating a lack of transparency.

For too long Europe has elected not to intervene in events in Algeria, siding with the established administration.

We need urgently to adjust our simplistic Manichaean view which sees Islamism as solely responsible for the current deterioration.

Algerian society is deeply stricken by widespread corruption and social and economic exclusion.

Europe' s failure to adopt a strong position entails the risk that the social forces for change, which offer hope for the future and which are attempting to free themselves of the pressures relating to power, will be endangered and smothered.

By remaining attentive to the threats affecting the people, and by making it possible to recognise a right of asylum, solid bridges may be built between the two sides of the Mediterranean.

In order to help Algeria to gain democratic freedoms, relations should cease to be purely a matter of state, but should be in the interests of the peoples.

Let us never forget that any infringements of rights primarily affect the working classes and provide an ideal breeding ground for all sorts of extremism.

Mr President, last Tuesday night, 11 people were murdered at a false roadblock in the Ain Defla province; on Saturday, 24 December, a young cabaret singer was murdered in a discotheque in the town of Annaba; a week before that, 16 high school students were savagely murdered inside their own boarding school.

Algeria has just experienced its bloodiest Ramadan for two years.

Over two hundred people - men, women, children, the elderly - have been murdered; girls have been abducted and raped.

The horrendous, barbarous and inhuman violence perpetrated by the Islamist guerrilla groups appears to be on the increase, if indeed it ever actually ceased.

This information is obtained mainly from the newspapers.

Indeed the relative official silence, except perhaps in the case of foreigners, can only be regretted.

So I should like to pay tribute to the Algerian press, one of the most independent in the Arab world, which has paid such a high price at the hands of those who are implacably opposed to any form of freedom of expression and who dream of an uneducated people subject to their diktats.

Yet, in the last year, and more, thousands of terrorists are supposed to have surrendered their weapons in return for a total amnesty.

The election of President Bouteflika had given the people hope, but we are forced to acknowledge that the path taken by the 'civil concord law' is a very long way from leading to peace.

Even though the Algerian people displayed remarkable resistance in order to reject fundamentalism, the amnesty for such murders - described by some as crimes against humanity - and the lack of punishment enforced upon the perpetrators of these crimes appear to have exonerated them to the point that they are continuing their murderous work.

Surely attention should be paid instead to the opinions of the associations of the families of the victims of terrorism, which are outraged that they have received no form of compensation while 'penitent' Islamist rebels are given financial support in order to be reintegrated into society?

Surely the doubly courageous fight of Algerian women should be recognised, since they are the main victims of terrorism yet, at the same time, still subjected to a family code which flouts their most basic rights?

Finally, the economic and social situation is also perilous, when it already proved a propitious breeding ground for the rise of Islamism in the 1980s.

Subject to intense external pressures - I am thinking of debt - Algeria finds itself in a crisis which has already led to an unprecedented rise in unemployment.

More than ever, solidarity with the democrats and with an Algeria which is fighting against terrorism and death and for a free future is urgently needed.

Mr President, much has already been said by other Members.

This new terrorist tragedy where even three-year-old toddlers are killed without hesitation takes us back to a situation we hoped was behind us.

While we all recognise that, sadly, Algeria will have to live with terrorism for some time to come, this upsurge during Ramadan is turning the clock back.

We did hope President Bouteflika' s initiative would have a positive effect, but the events of the last few days give us cause for concern.

That is why, like other Members, I believe we must not hesitate to condemn terrorism and offer full cooperation to the Algerian government to defeat it.

Having said that, we must not let the terrorism obscure the genuine progress being made towards democracy and the rule of law, and the fight against terrorism cannot justify the continued domination of Algeria by the opaque, inscrutable power of the army.

So, on his visit, President Prodi was right to sign an agreement and to give EUR 5 million to bolster the independent press and establish a statute for journalists.

I think that is exactly what needed to be done, along with offering victims of violence asylum in our countries. Unfortunately, that is not possible in some of them, while it has been possible, on the other hand, to provide hospitality for many terrorists who have organised very dangerous networks from there.

Finally, I think we should consider sending a delegation to Algeria.

It is a long time since Parliament visited that country and the first thing we need to do is find out exactly what is going on.

Mr President, why is there a deafening silence when it comes to Europe' s response to the mass-scale crimes in Algeria?

This silence is in stark contrast with our condemnation of what else goes wrong in the world.

The massacres in Algeria have not ceased.

Torture is still the order of the day.

In the past year alone, two to three hundred people were killed each month in the most appalling way.

If we take stock of ten years of excessive violence, the statistics are horrifying. One hundred and fifty-thousand people killed and another ten thousand people vanished.

That is twice as many as under the Pinochet regime.

President Buteflika made fine promises to curb violence, enter into dialogue and look into disappearances. But little of these promises has been translated into action.

Barbarians who in the dead of night carry out monstrous slaughterings, continue to get off scot-free.

Similarly, security troops who are guilty of wrong-doings are not being brought to justice.

Plenty of reason, therefore, to take the Algerian authorities to task about this.

But why, in fact, is this not being done?

Is it because of the French business interests in the former colony?

Are the Member States keeping quiet because they are hoping to secure some lucrative business deals themselves?

Are we fearful about Algerian terrorism in our own countries?

Or is it mainly the fear of further fanning the flames of Muslim fundamentalism?

The most fundamental task of the state is to protect its people.

It is shameful how the Algerian authorities do not come up to the mark in this respect.

It is high time that the European Union took a stand for the sake of the Algerian population and put its own interests second.

The violence has got to stop.

An association agreement must be struck at the earliest opportunity, thus allowing us to intensify the political dialogue.

My question to the Commissioner is the following: what is the latest?

For we cannot keep quiet any longer.

The Commission shares Parliament's concern about the situation of the Turkish prisoners who are still on hunger strike.

The health of certain of these prisoners is a matter of serious concern.

It calls upon the Turkish authorities to seek a peaceful solution.

In any event, the Turkish security forces should exercise restraint.

Concerning the operations conducted by police and army in 20 prisons in December last year, the Commission expects that investigations will be carried out into the causes of the deaths and the casualties which occurred during these operations and that those responsible will be identified.

Allegations of torture and ill treatment of prisoners during their transfer after the operations should also be investigated.

The Commission recalls that the improvement of detention conditions in Turkish prisons is addressed in the accession partnership for Turkey which received political approval by the Council on 4 December 2000.

In the accession partnership, the improvement of the detention conditions to bring them into line with the UN standard minimum rules for the treatment of prisoners and other international norms is considered as a priority.

Turning now to Algeria, I can say the following: The Commission backs the Algerian authorities' efforts to bring about national reconciliation and end the violence.

Democracy, the rule of law, human rights and fundamental freedoms are key principles that the European Union applies even-handedly to all its partners.

We applaud Algeria's acceptance of the relevant clause in the negotiations for an association agreement.

The violence, however, produces new victims every month.

We are particularly concerned by the upsurge of violence during Ramadan which claimed many lives across the country.

Algeria must also find a way of addressing the past crimes of terrorists who have renounced violence.

Though understanding the difficulty of tackling terrorism in Algeria, the Commission nevertheless remains concerned at the human rights violations and, in particular, the disappearances.

It is vital that resolute action be taken against retrograde moves and violations in the matter of human rights.

We continue to raise these issues at every level of the political dialogue with the Algerian authorities.

Mr Prodi, for example, stressed the need to restore peace throughout the country during his visit to Algiers on 12 and 13 January.

As part of this approach and in order to provide material support for Algeria's efforts, the Commission, represented by Mr Prodi, has signed financing agreements granting EUR 13 million for two human rights projects.

One consists of support for the country's media and journalists and the other one relates to modernisation and educating the police force, making it able to work as a police force should in a democracy.

Depending on when the debate ends, the vote will take place at around 5.30 p.m.

As you know, after the topical and urgent debate, we will have a short break until 5.30 p.m. and then the decision will be taken as to whether or not to postpone the debate on the Deprez report.

The vote will then take place after the discussion on the Deprez report at 5.30 p.m. instead of at 6.30 p.m.

The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions:

B5-0060/2001 by Mrs Malmstrm, on behalf of the ELDR Group, on the ratification of the Treaty of Rome to establish the International Criminal Court;

B5-0067/2001 by Mrs Frassoni and others, on behalf of the Verts/ALE Group on the speedy establishment of a truly permanent International Criminal Court;

B5-0069/2001 by Mrs Bonino and others, on behalf of the TDI on the speedy entry into force of the Treaty of Rome on the International Criminal Court;

B5-0073/2001 by Mr Salafranca Snchez-Neyra and Mr Posselt, on behalf of the PPE-DE Group, on the ratification of the Treaty of Rome to establish the International Criminal Court.

B5-0078/2001 by Mr Sakellariou and others, on behalf of the PSE Group, on the ratification of the Treaty of Rome to establish the International Criminal Court.

B5-0085/2001 by Mr di Lello Finuoli and others, on behalf of the GUE/NGL Group, on the International Criminal Court.

Mr President, I welcome the fact that this matter features on the agenda here today, for the International Criminal Court is doing well.

The deadline for the states to sign this Treaty of Rome was 31 December.

We all know how difficult is was to bring it about.

Despite this, we saw how in the very last days of 2000, all of a sudden a huge number of countries signed the Treaty.

At the time, 120 countries voted in favour and 7 against.

At present, more than 130 countries have signed it, including the United States which originally voted against it, but also Israel, Iran and Yugoslavia signed it at the last moment.

At any rate, this widespread support for the Treaty demonstrates that the Treaty cannot be considered a northern-hemisphere treaty or one of developed countries.

The support for it is far too widespread for that.

We now need to ratify the Treaty, and that is what the resolution is about.

It is a joy to see that 27 countries have already ratified it, eight of which are in the European Union, but Sweden, the United Kingdom, Portugal, the Netherlands, Ireland, Greece and Denmark have not yet signed it.

They are thinking about it, but it has not yet happened.

Of all the applicant countries, not one single country has ratified it, and Turkey did not even sign it.

We therefore need to roll up our sleeves, and we call on the Council to add this matter to the agenda.

It is important for Europe to take the lead.

That is something we can do ourselves, and we should not just lay the blame on others in the process.

We can take action, and it is important that we do so without further delay.

Mr President, I will be brief. The next speaker but one on the list is down as Mr Franz Xaver Mayer.

But it is Mr Hans-Peter Mayer who will be speaking for our group.

One is a first-class politician on agricultural matters; the other is a first-class jurist.

I simply wanted to clarify that for you to avoid there being any confusion about who will speak.

You are as it were our resident lookout.

Thank you for pointing that out.

I am sure that I would have noticed later on, because the right Mr Mayer is also in the Chamber.

(Verts/ALE). (IT) Mr President, I must say I do envy Mr Posselt his powers as a tribune, which not all of us in this House possess.

However, the twenty-seven countries which have ratified the Treaty of Rome include eight Member States of the European Union, while the other seven have failed to respond to the call.

That is one of the paradoxes of the European Union and it is also a consequence of the lack of a genuine common foreign policy.

Indeed, what other motive can there be for the Member States of the Union which have not yet ratified the court statute, apart from hesitation about a real, significant further transfer of sovereignty and a certain lack of confidence in themselves, perhaps still fearing that one day they may somehow find themselves in the uncomfortable position of the accused?

That obviously applies even more to the other major players on the international scene.

It was right to note, as we did in our resolution, that President Clinton signed the Treaty of Rome at the end of last year, but it is legitimate to wonder if he would have done so had the Florida vote chanced to give the victory to Al Gore.

There is still a long road, fraught with obstacles, to be covered before the court can actually start work.

As the resolution suggests, it is vital to prevent changes to the statute and there needs to be action to bring the implementing regulation rapidly into force or, at least, finalise it.

We hope the European Union will make this one of its foreign policy priorities since we are all in agreement, in theory, and we also hope Parliament can continue to play an influential role to make the court a reality, putting the issue of the criminal court on the agenda for every meeting of the mixed delegations, and supporting and adopting resolutions like the one we will be voting on shortly.

I therefore regret the fact that the joint motion for a resolution does not pick up the issue of the mixed delegations, but I fully endorse the proposal and hope we will be able to adopt it.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, in a few minutes Parliament will be adopting a resolution on the International Criminal Court for the eighth time in four years.

This is evidence of Parliament' s determination and resolve in following, step by step, the slow development of an increasingly necessary international justice - as demonstrated by the cases of Milosevic, Mladic, Pinochet and so many others. They are now beginning to lose the impunity which has so far ensured that so many assassins and criminals have been able to carry on in their posts undisturbed, and even take retirement with full honours.

It also demonstrates how committed Parliament is to that development, pointing the way for the European Union in many cases.

I remember the early resolutions, when we called loudly for a European Union with 15 Member States united and resolute in this fight, defending the essential principles of the court: the independence of the prosecutor, the court' s autonomy in trying criminals, the definition of the purpose of the court' s mandate and so on.

Mrs Frassoni has rightly stressed the importance of confirming those objectives and defending the content of the statute from those who sign up to it - such as Clinton, for instance, or others - to continue to belong to the Court Assembly of Member Parties, but actually in order to influence the negotiations negatively, even seeking exemption for American soldiers.

Exemption is not what is needed; what is needed is to achieve the sixtieth ratification as soon as possible. That is the real test for the fifteen.

I hope the issue will be on the agenda in our relations with third countries, and I hope the seven countries of the Union which have not yet ratified the statute will do so this year.

Mr President, it does indeed cause some confusion when two people have the same surname and not even the parliamentary staff are able to distinguish between them.

Our post also gets mixed up sometimes for the same reason.

Following the horrific events of the Second World War, the United Nations refloated the idea of setting up an international criminal court.

Further impetus was given to this initiative by the violations of international law in Yugoslavia and the massacres in Rwanda.

Some people are asking where the International Criminal Court will have jurisdiction compared with the courts which already exist.

The ECJ in Luxembourg rules on the application and interpretation of the treaties of the European Union.

The International Court of Justice in The Hague rules on international disputes.

The International Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg passes judgement on violations by States of rights arising from the Human Rights Convention.

The International Criminal Court is being set up for the four particularly serious crimes of genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes and crimes of aggression.

Until now the United Nations has authorised special courts, for example the ad hoc criminal tribunals for the crimes committed in Yugoslavia and Rwanda.

In the future, the International Criminal Court will send out a clear signal that perpetrators of any of these crimes will be prosecuted and punished.

War criminals will no longer be able to hide behind the borders of sovereignty.

The new Court is an important achievement for the international community which will allow it to close loopholes in criminal prosecution.

I should therefore like to call on all of the Member States to ratify the Statute soon, and I would recommend adoption of the resolution.

Mr President, this joint motion for a resolution on the ratification of the Rome Treaty to establish the permanent International Criminal Court comes at an opportune moment.

Only yesterday in this House we debated our priorities for the United Nations Human Rights Commission in Geneva.

The Swedish prime minister once again reiterated the importance of human rights during the Swedish Presidency.

The discussion this afternoon is yet another vivid reminder of injustices around the world.

Therefore it must follow, and I hope the House will agree, that if we are serious about the human rights of men, women and children, then we must have a permanent International Criminal Court to prosecute those who carry out or commission crimes against humanity.

We need a criminal court with international jurisdiction, which can independently judge those accused of such atrocities.

Only with complete determination to implement the Rome Treaty will we be able to end the impunity of the perpetrators of these crimes and contribute to the deterrence and prevention of such crimes in the future.

As we have heard, 139 governments have signed the Rome Treaty yet sadly only 27 have ratified it.

Sixty such ratifications are needed for the Treaty to enter into force and for the Court to be set up.

Therefore I believe it is imperative that the Member States set an example.

Already Italy, France, Belgium, Luxembourg, Spain, Germany, Austria and Finland have notably and honourably ratified the Treaty.

It is now time for the remaining Member States of the Union to follow suit.

Cynicism is an easy option and I will not indulge in it.

I believe we should welcome the signing of the Treaty on 31 December by the United States of America and we should also welcome the Yugoslav Federation signing the Treaty on 19 December 2000.

We must now call upon those parliaments to ratify the Treaty.

Nonetheless, at the same time we must urge all states to continue to support the work of the International Criminal Tribunals for Rwanda and former Yugoslavia.

History teaches us that we must never forget.

Therefore, look back across the last millennium.

Look now across the world as it is and remember that the price of freedom is eternal vigilance.

Future generations will never forgive us if we turn our minds away from those who have suffered such terrifying atrocities and who continue to suffer as I speak.

The time for action is now.

Sign the Rome Treaty on the ICC and thereby signal our commitment and our challenge to the rest of the world.

As co-author I urge the House and the Council to support this motion.

Mr President, if we look at the list of EU Member States which have already ratified the Treaty, we see that five of the six founder Members have already completed ratification.

Only the Netherlands has not, although it campaigned exceptionally hard for this Court and also for its headquarters.

We therefore wonder what lies behind this.

Of the remaining nine Member States of the European Union, there are only three which have already ratified it, including much maligned Austria.

I should also like to call on the other States of the European Union to initiate the ratification process as soon as possible.

We need this Criminal Court so that international crimes against humanity - which, as you know, have unfortunately not diminished but tended to increase in number - can finally be referred to a significant, objective and worldwide body.

We are debating the former Yugoslavia.

The special tribunals which are set up there are certainly justified.

But we must be aware that they are being defamed by some nationalist forces in these countries who say that they are victors' courts.

To prevent this from continuing to happen, it is tremendously important for there soon to be one unified criminal court throughout the world so that we no longer need to operate through special courts.

The Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia in The Hague is very commendable.

But you will have seen that two days ago President Kostunica, who only recently was making solemn speeches in Parliament, refused to receive Justice Del Ponte because she was allegedly not of equal rank in accordance with the rules of protocol.

It shows how important it is not only to enshrine legal standards in international law throughout the world, directed against expulsion, mass murder and aggression, but also to provide the corresponding instruments with which to enforce them.

This is first and foremost this Criminal Court.

We have worked hard for it and it is high time that it be able to take up its duties.

Even though the setting-up of the International Criminal Court does not come within its remit, the Commission hopes that the required number of 60 ratifications will soon be reached so that the Court can become operational.

As of 31 December, the statute was signed by 139 countries and ratified by 27.

The Commission notes, with satisfaction, that the United States signed the Rome Statute on 31 December and the Yugoslav Federation earlier on 19 December.

In its relations with third countries the Commission will make every effort to recall the necessity to sign and ratify the statute as swiftly as possible.

In the meantime, the Commission will continue to provide grants to initiatives in support of the International Criminal Court.

So far, approximately EUR 4.8 million of grants have been provided to support the activities of NGOs or institutions working on information campaigns concerning the International Criminal Court.

The Commission will provide further support for these activities this year.

We want to promote this and use our cooperation with NGOs to keep up the momentum to make this Court a reality.

The vote will take place at around 6.30 p.m.

The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions:

B5-0068/2001 by Mr Nogueira Romn and others, on behalf of the Verts/ALE Group, on the earthquake in El Salvador;

B5-0074/2001 by Mr Galeote Quecedo and others, on behalf of the PPE-DE Group, on El Salvador;

B5-0079/2001 by Mr Seguro and others, on behalf of the PSE Group, on the earthquake in El Salvador;

B5-0079/2001 by Mr Wurtz, on behalf of the GUE/NGL Group, on the earthquake in El Salvador.

Mr President, disaster has struck once again in El Salvador, two years after Mitch, the terrible hurricane whose effects are still being felt to this day and for which, I might add, it would seem the European Union still has not come up with the money it had promised.

I welcome the resolution which we were able to draft together, but I do consider it to be the bare minimum after all the disasters which El Salvador has experienced, and now after this last earthquake disaster.

If truth be told, I find it a bit of a flimsy resolution, for although the feeling of solidarity which we all share and which gave rise to this resolution may be expressed well, we need to translate our solidarity into action, and that is why, on behalf of our group, we have tabled a few more amendments in order to bring this idea more into focus and to reinforce it.

Among other things, this is to enable the existing plans for improving the situation to be put into practice, especially the reconstruction programmes, but we should also deliver the money that Europe had set aside for this.

Despite this, we believe that the entire world, and we, along with the world, must express our dismay and solidarity, now that thousands of people have fallen victim to this earthquake.

An earthquake in a poor country is, of course, all the more serious the less resistance and less resilience the country has.

El Salvador has survived a war and natural disasters, and now there is this on top of everything else.

In order to work ecologically in environmentally responsible circumstances, the government too should set its political preferences for certain forms of politicisation of aid to one side, and we, on the other hand, must meet our obligations.

Mr President, with regard to this resolution, which has received the consensus of all the groups, I would like to mention the last section, which refers to the need for effectiveness of the economic aid which, on this occasion, we are going to send to El Salvador, that very needy country.

I have just spoken to the office responsible for humanitarian aid in Nicaragua and I would like to communicate to this House, and to the Commissioner, the great concern of all those self-sacrificing people who, today, are working on emergency aid, and who, tomorrow, will be involved in cooperation work, and the concern of the Spanish and international media about the fact that we have yet to send the promised economic aid following hurricane Mitch, when we are now facing the next tragic event.

Members of the Commission, let us see if, this time, we can make it on time.

I am saying this not only as a member of the Delegation for Relations with the Countries of Central America and Mexico, but also as coordinating spokesman of the Group of the European People' s Party and European Democrats in the Committee on Budgetary Control.

To spend so late is to throw money away.

Money must be spent on time and the officials - not only those in El Salvador, but also those in Brussels - will have to assume their responsibilities.

Mr Kinnock' s reform must serve some purpose. Let us see whether or not, this time, the aid to alleviate the consequences of the earthquake arrive before another tragic event strikes this sister country.

To be effective, aid must arrive at the right time.

Otherwise, there will be so many people working with no compensation in those countries, so many people waiting, so many administrative costs, and for what?

If we cannot do it any other way, let us send aid by means of the Member States.

We already give money to the UN - to the UNHCR - we are the main contributors, and they only fly the United Nations flag.

So, although it does not look good, let us do it by means of Spain or Austria, or under two flags, but the emergency aid, and especially the cooperation aid, must arrive.

Let us not make fools of ourselves again.

Madam President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, the figures and images coming out of El Salvador are terrifying, with the hundreds of dead, the thousands of wounded, the hundreds of people who have disappeared and the approximately 26,000 who have lost their homes.

There are continual aftershocks in El Salvador and even in Nicaragua.

This situation occurring in Central America is nothing new.

As Mrs Maes and Mr Pomz Ruiz pointed out, Hurricane Mitch, in November 1998, also had tragic consequences in both human and material terms in that part of the world.

Central America is one of the world' s poorest regions.

Around 40% of the population live below the poverty line and Europe therefore has a particular responsibility to the region not only because it is a region that has experienced much serious conflict and where there is still tension, particularly over borders, but also because we need to assist their recovery for the sake of democracy.

I am happy to say that all bodies there are democratically elected, but very undemocratic habits still remain in these Central American countries.

Apart from this, they have a very large foreign debt and only two countries are involved in the initiative that has been launched.

Therefore, the impression we receive from the principal authorities in Central American countries - and on Tuesday we had the opportunity to receive the President of Honduras - is of a people that is suffering and that, just when it sees a little light at the end of the tunnel and starts to pick itself up in order to confront its problems and its history, is struck by tragic situations caused by these natural disasters.

Europe acted promptly in sending emergency aid, both in November 1998 and this time.

Nevertheless, the problem requires - as my two fellow Members have already stated more than adequately - more structural aid.

It is vital that the Commission implements its reconstruction programme for Central America.

What we are proposing, Commissioner Nielson, is that there should be a rapid redefinition of this programme, with greater resources, both human and financial, to achieve the objective of assisting El Salvador as well.

On 26 March of this year, another meeting will be held between the San Jos Group and the European Union in Guatemala.

A positive way to conclude this meeting with the San Jos Group would be to proceed to implement the reconstruction programme for Central America with the new procedure for helping the victims in El Salvador.

Mr President, my group, the Confederal Group of the European United Left/Nordic Green Left, would like to add its voice to the expressions of sympathy for the families of the victims of the recent earthquake, and for the people of El Salvador, following this latest tragedy.

In fact, I had the honour and gratifying responsibility of presenting a report to this House, on behalf of the Committee on External Affairs, on aid for the reconstruction of Central America following Hurricane Mitch, which was adopted unanimously.

The truth is that I feel frustrated that our hopes and efforts have not been accompanied by efficiency on the part of the people responsible for the implementation of this programme.

On that occasion, I pointed out that, when the hurricane struck, the Commission acted quickly in terms of initial aid.

This has been the case this time as well, but we must continue to provide this aid. We must be more efficient.

The scale of the earthquake was considerable.

This region was beginning to recover and it is going to be essential that we make an immense effort to achieve levels of economic, social and democratic security.

The European Union has to do some very hard work in this area and, amongst the problems to be faced, there is one I would like to highlight: the fraudulent diversions of the aid sent.

The European Union - and the Commission in particular - must prevent this from happening, by guaranteeing that associations, NGOs and local authorities actively participate in the utilisation of the aid, for the sake of the efficiency and justice of the efforts made by the European Union.

Mr President, the PPE-DE Group is shaken and filled with consternation at the news of the severe earthquake in El Salvador.

We express our deep sympathy and solidarity with the many who died or were injured and the many who have lost their family and their possessions.

The PPE-DE Group supports the motion for a resolution tabled by several groups in the European Parliament.

It is good to know that the Community has responded to this natural catastrophe so promptly by dispatching experts and money.

This is a convincing example of solidarity.

This is a suitable occasion for me to add that, as a positive member of the generation of 68, when I was a reserve officer in the German army in the seventies, I did not throw stones as other young men did, but searched with my own hands for the dead and injured in an area of Italy which had suffered an earthquake. On that occasion we were able to rescue very many people who had been buried alive.

I can still see the dreadful images from the seventies of the earthquake in Italy, and I can understand the sense of distress prevailing in El Salvador.

It is excellent that Europe has sent help so quickly.

It is to be hoped that the aid will not come too late and that it will enter El Salvador through the proper channels.

Mr President, I really must say that I am quite amazed at how one can manage, in a debate about an earthquake in El Salvador, to say that one was a reserve officer in the German army and a "positive" member of the generation of 68 and to talk about stone-throwing members of the 68 Movement.

I do not know what one has got to do with the other, apart perhaps from the fact that Mr Knolle felt compelled to tell us a little of his own biography, but this is perhaps not without interest either.

According to the descriptions of my colleagues, the events in El Salvador are dramatic and we have heard many speakers state quite correctly that if the question being asked here is how quick and efficient our aid is, then in the case of this natural catastrophe it does actually seem to be arriving quickly, our initial assistance I mean.

What concerns us, however - and what also characterised the discussion about the motion and how it should be worded in our group - is the fact that we know from experience that this has not always been the case.

We call on the Commission to ensure that the aid - when the European Union helps by providing a go-get-it approach, know-how, equipment and people on the ground - does not only arrive when the people have, for the most part, already helped themselves or when the next natural catastrophe is due to be dealt with.

The European Union's credibility, both internally and in its relations with its partners, is threatened when money is admittedly made available and aid is promised, but because of bureaucratic obstacles the aid either arrives far too late or not at all.

On the one hand, therefore, this is about immediate help for the poorest of the poor, who need our solidarity, but on the other hand it is also about the fact that we need to bear in mind that our aid is futile if it becomes entangled in a jungle of red tape.

That is why we are glad that this motion has been drafted jointly by several groups.

We hope, Commissioner Nielson, that the Commission will work just as quickly on this motion as Parliament has.

As for Mr Knolle, I hope that he does not encounter any stone-throwing foreign ministers.

Mr President, let me reply to Mr Seguro, who talked about the situation in Honduras.

I want to make it clear that as part of our decision last year, supported by this House, to increase our stake in the whole HIPC initiative - EUR 1bn, we decided to spend it globally, not just on the ACP countries.

The reason for this was that, as a consequence of Hurricane Mitch, Honduras was included in the HIPC initiative.

We needed to find a budget line outside European Development Fund money to make it possible for the European Union to be even-handed and support Honduras.

Honduras will receive EUR 15m as debt alleviation from us because of this.

This is, of course, in addition to what Honduras is receiving from the Hurricane Mitch mid- and long-term rehabilitation and reconstruction follow-up as part of the regional programme.

Several Members have raised concerns about the slow delivery of the more long-term reconstruction part of the Hurricane Mitch follow-up.

I can only agree with the criticism.

I myself have characterised this as a real scandal.

It took almost one and a half years for the Commission services to find the six to seven people to send to Managua to form the unit to run the implementation of the regional reconstruction programme of EUR 250m.

It is not just bureaucracy, it is a totally dysfunctional set-up of different parties who do not talk to each other.

This is exactly why I am still in the market for more TNT to blow up those kind of structures which are blocking good performance in the Commission.

The situation today for the implementation of this programme is that these people have now been working in Managua since early autumn.

Of the EUR 250m, we have specifically earmarked and started the execution in a number of the states covered by the reconstruction programme of more than EUR 80m.

So EUR 80m out of EUR 250 are now set to work.

Things are finally starting to happen on the ground.

I still want to make the very clear distinction - which I urge everyone who has spoken in this debate to note - between the immediate humanitarian short-term response to disaster and the long-term reconstruction work.

They are two totally distinct types of activity and this has to be borne in mind.

Nothing has moved slowly in the Hurricane Mitch follow-up, except, as I mentioned here, finding seven people to send to Managua.

Let me now turn more specifically to the terrible situation in El Salvador.

Of course, the Commission fully shares the consternation and solidarity expressed in Parliament's resolution on the terrible earthquake which struck several countries of Central America, and in particular El Salvador.

The Commission - President Prodi, Mr Patten and myself - immediately expressed its condolences to the families of the victims and the authorities and announced a quick and efficient Community response to this catastrophe.

As in the past, when it assisted El Salvador after the 1986 earthquake through the construction of a new hospital and provided very substantial humanitarian and reconstruction aid to the countries stuck by Hurricane Mitch, the Commission stands ready to help Central America and El Salvador to face the present dramatic challenges.

As soon as the earthquake occurred the Commission humanitarian aid office, ECHO, directed a field expert stationed in Honduras to go directly to the scene and he was there by Sunday.

ECHO also arranged this Monday for a mission to be sent to make an initial assessment of the needs as regards cooperation with other donors and the local authorities.

On Monday I decided that the first response in terms of money should be EUR 2 m.

This would cover the things that we knew would be necessary in any case.

Without any type of coordination or further studying, it was clear that drinking water, sanitation, shelter, food aid and medical supplies would be needed.

We also were immediately clear as to the organisations we should ask to take care of this on behalf of the Commission, namely a couple of European NGOs and the Red Cross family.

We will follow up these initial decisions with further commitments, depending on the feedback we get on what we are going to do compared to other donors and so on.

Let me add here that this terrible catastrophe once again proves that poverty as such is dangerous.

Most people think that earthquakes and these types of catastrophe are much more damaging in our sophisticated societies with all the elaborate infrastructure we have, yet in El Salvador the immediate consequence has been that more than 50% of water provision to the whole nation is cut off because of damage to pipes, electricity etc.

So the secondary impact is enormous, often because the systems are vulnerable, not functioning very well.

For instance the flooding in Mozambique caused much greater damage to dams, road, bridges and so on than it would have done if the country had had normal, well-maintained, strong and more expensive infrastructure. So poverty is dangerous, and this has to be kept in mind.

For this reason, we are giving more emphasis to disaster preparedness activities as part of our humanitarian assistance.

We are also considering as favourably as possible the requests for a re-orientation of resources available in Commission-supported development projects in the zones and sectors affected, including those foreseen in the framework of the post-Mitch reconstruction programme.

My view here is that we need additional resources for this.

It is not acceptable to divert money from the post-Mitch reconstruction programme which has had enough problems already due to our bureaucratic difficulties, but it is an asset that we have a unit in place in the region which consists of people who are specifically engaged in these kind of reconstruction activities.

Of course, this is an asset and we will definitely come back to the more long-term problems for El Salvador when we get beyond the immediate humanitarian response.

So I thank you for the very strong support here.

We will come back on how to do these things.

The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.

I now turn also to colleagues in their offices who should be here not at 6.30 p.m., as stated on the printed programme, but at 5.30 p.m., depending on when we are able to begin the vote.

The President already said at midday today that it would be 6 p.m., and it may be that it will be 5.50 p.m., and depending on the result of the vote on Mr Deprez's request it may even take place earlier than that.

I would therefore request, in accordance with the decision of the Conference of Presidents, that you please ask your colleagues to come into the plenary as early as 5.30 p.m. for the vote and help us to ensure that we are all here at 5.30 p.m.

(The sitting was suspended at 5.15 p.m. and resumed at 5.30 p.m.)

The next item is the report (A5-0388/2000) by Mr Deprez, on behalf of the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs, on the initiative of the French Republic with a view to adopting a Council Regulation on freedom of movement with a long-stay visa.

Excuse me, Mr President, but I thought that you had received an official request to postpone my report to a later part-session.

I have not received an official request, I was in fact waiting for an official request.

That is why I delayed slightly in announcing the debate, but apparently no one wished to approach the Presidency.

Mr President, as far as I am aware, a signed document was submitted to you earlier on behalf of the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance.

Therefore, I assume that you have received it.

And, again, as far as I am aware, this document is valid.

This certainly shows that the President of this sitting is utterly impartial.

I have not received this document, but I take it that what you say is true.

You are aware of the procedure concerning requests to postpone a report, we take a speaker in favour of the request, then one against, and then, if necessary, we hear from the rapporteur.

Mr President, I was distracted by Mr Knolle, but I will spare you the details of what he wanted to tell me.

Those who were in the Chamber just now know what I mean.

If I remember correctly, Mr Deprez wanted his report to be postponed.

Now I do not know why I have been given the floor first.

As rapporteur, he has in fact not yet told us why he is requesting this postponement.

That is why it would be only fair for you to give him the floor first.

Afterwards I will give my opinion and that of my group on this.

As a rule, we ask for a speaker in favour of postponing the report.

You were the first to raise your hand, Mr Schulz, you were the quickest.

However, I would, naturally, like to allow Mr Deprez to speak.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, in this morning' s sitting, the President informed the House that the Mr Ferri' s report had been postponed to a later part-session.

At that point, I myself accepted that the report that I had worked on and which, moreover, was unanimously adopted by the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs, would be postponed until this afternoon.

However, in the meantime, I was informed that most of the people who had taken part in this debate in my committee, and who I hoped would be able to speak before the House, had unfortunately sent their apologies as they were unable to take part in the debate.

This affects more than half of the speakers who were to attend this debate on a matter on which we are basically at odds with the Council, since, in the legal basis, there is a contradiction between what I propose and what is acceptable to the Council, and this is likely to have significant consequences for thousands of people who, every year, would like to benefit from free movement in the Schengen area.

Regretfully, then, I have had to note the absence of Mr Watson, chairman of the committee; Mr Pirker, coordinator of the Group of the European People' s Party; Mrs Terrn I Cusi, who was due to speak and who is coordinator of the Group of the Party of European Socialists, and Mr Hernndez Mollar, who also sends his apologies, being unable to attend, as well as two other speakers.

In these circumstances, concerning a matter where we require all the political groups to adopt a clear position, where it is a question of fundamental conflict between Parliament and the Council, I believed that it was important to have an in-depth debate and a full vote.

That is why I request that this report be postponed until Parliament' s next part-session.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, in principle I support Mr Deprez's request.

I also support it on behalf of my group, because we believe that this is such an important issue - as Mr Deprez has said - that it requires the attention of the whole House.

And he has put forward a persuasive argument that many of the speakers who commented on this in the committee and who wanted to speak this morning are no longer here.

What was right for the Ferri report this morning must also apply to the Deprez report this afternoon.

But of course I should also like to qualify this by saying that we cannot deny that this debate is, amongst other things, about an agenda and calendar problem.

If we do not change our minds and make both Thursday and Friday working days here, then we will discuss this problem over and over again every Thursday afternoon.

In my opinion this can be resolved by creating a coherent and internally logical system for doing our work which runs until Friday afternoon.

In this specific case Mr Deprez has a right to have better attendance than he has now.

Mr President, of course I entirely agree with Mr Schulz's last point, but I should like this once to state quite clearly that, now that the Friday sitting has been abolished, there is a systematic campaign to abolish the Thursday sitting too.

On the other hand, the responses to this are far from systematic.

On Monday, Mr Seppnen said that his report was too important to be taken on Thursday evening.

Nevertheless, following Mr Seppnen's speech, this House made a democratic decision to take his report on Thursday evening.

Then at midday on Wednesday, the President of the sitting explained that with the agreement of the groups Mr Seppnen's report would be moved to Thursday morning.

This morning we were presented with an agenda, out of which it emerged that the Ferri and Deprez reports would be dealt with this evening.

This morning nobody protested against this.

At lunchtime Mr Ferri realised that he would be leaving and asked for his report to be postponed.

His request was granted, and Mr Deprez sat there and did not protest.

This afternoon Mr Deprez realised that his speakers had gone astray and now this evening he wants his report to be postponed.

This is looking increasingly like a Punch and Judy show, I really do have to say.

I should like very clearly to oppose this postponement.

Mr Schulz, Mrs Boumediene-Thiery and I are Members of this committee.

We can air our views on this issue, and we should go ahead with the debate.

However, I would hope that proceedings could be more orderly in the future.

Mr President, I shall be taking more than five minutes, because the speakers from my group who have withdrawn have left 15 minutes.

Therefore, I can take 20 minutes.

So, Mr President, I shall speak as slowly as appropriate, because I believe that you do not intend to disallow a genuine debate that includes a full presentation of each argument.

Mr Deprez, I shall apply the Rules of Procedure.

You have been allotted five minutes and I shall allow you to speak for five minutes.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, my report is based on an initiative by the French Republic concerning third-country nationals, who are holders of what is called a national long-stay visa; in other words, one valid for no more than three months, which has been issued by a Member State of the Schengen area.

These third-country nationals are awaiting their residence permits in the Member State that approved their entry.

Under current Community law, namely, Article 18 of the Convention implementing the Schengen Agreement, third-country nationals are only permitted to transit through the territory of other Member States in order to reach the country which issued the long-stay visa.

Following their arrival in this country, third-country nationals cannot travel any further within the Schengen area until they have obtained what is called a residence permit.

This is exactly where the problem lies. It can take several weeks, if not several months, for a residence permit to be issued, mainly due to cumbersome administrative procedures, poor coordination of administrative departments in some Member States, and because the person concerned has difficulty in finding out the correct procedure to follow.

Accordingly, and this concerns thousands of people every year throughout the Union, a holder of a long-stay visa and who has not yet received a residence permit, is in the least favourable position by comparison with other third-country nationals as far as freedom of movement in the Schengen area is concerned.

The fact that a whole raft of extremely stringent conditions must be fulfilled, in each of our countries, in order to obtain a national long-stay visa makes this situation even more paradoxical, and, to my mind, even more scandalous.

Apart from cases involving family reunion, applicants for long-stay visas are subjected to a preliminary in-depth enquiry.

They must prove that they have adequate resources and, depending on the circumstances, produce either a document to certify that they have been accepted in an educational or research establishment, or a valid employment contract.

The objective of the French Republic is simple and is very clearly stated in the Explanatory Statement.

The aim is to enable freedom of movement in the Schengen area for holders of a national long-stay visa who are awaiting their residence permit.

All of us, or so I hope, at least, share this objective which aims to facilitate freedom of movement for these nationals.

Therefore, the problem lies not in the objective itself, but in the way that the French Republic has chosen to achieve this goal and the consequences of this in terms of the discretionary powers of Member States with regard to citizens' rights.

It is rather surprising that the French Republic initiative takes Articles 62(2) and 63(3) as its legal basis, as both of these relate to procedures and conditions for issuing visas.

Yet, if the real aim of the initiative is to facilitate freedom of movement for nationals, the required legal basis is Article 62(3), which stipulates that the Council shall, within a period of five years of the Treaty of Amsterdam' s entry into force, adopt measures setting out the conditions under which nationals of third countries shall have the freedom to travel within the territory of the Member States during a period of no more than three months.

Ladies and gentlemen, the choice of legal basis is never an innocent choice.

In reality, the legal basis selected in the French initiative proves that the main aim of this initiative is to harmonise conditions for issuing long-stay visas by bringing them into line with uniform short-stay visas.

This means that, if we accept the proposal as presented by the French Republic, it would give any Member State involved in the closer cooperation under the Schengen Agreement the right to be informed of all requests for a long-stay visa made in every other country of the Schengen area, through what is called the prior consultation procedure, and, as a consequence, it would be able to block the freedom of movement by persons that this country does not approve.

In practice, if we accept these arrangements, it would mean that, through the prior consultation procedure, the French government could request to be systematically informed if Spain were to issue a long-stay visa to an Algerian national tomorrow, and it would have the right to object to the request, without anyone' s knowledge, because currently no one knows which countries make use of the prior consultation procedure and the Council refuses to release the list of countries.

Therefore, I myself chose to amend the initiative of the French Republic in order to bring it into line with the stated objective, as set out in the Explanatory Statement, which is to facilitate the movement of holders of a national long-term visa while awaiting their residence permit.

Moreover, I support the aim to implement a uniform long-stay visa system, as already currently exists for short-stay visas.

However, I hope, and I believe that we should all hope, that this initiative should be part of a clear, consistent, overall proposal from the Council and not part of an initiative which is sketchy in scope and shaky in its arrangements, like this one.

That is why I shall ask the House to accept the amendments that I have made with the full support of the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs.

Mr President, I am grateful for the opportunity to speak for the Committee on Petitions.

This is not the only issue concerning legally resident third-country nationals where we have a problem concerning the appropriate legal base.

I am thinking, for example, of the extensions of the 1408/71 Regulation concerning the coordination of social security systems.

The Tampere Summit in 1999 spoke of according similar rights to third-country nationals as those enjoyed by EU citizens.

Yet we still have those who wish to view them as short-term travellers, rather than as people who have much contribute to the Union.

Otherwise why would our governments be so keen to encourage inward investment from American and Asian companies?

We believe we need political coherence in our policy-making in this area.

The lack of such coherence partly explains the argument over the legal base.

The Committee on Petitions supports the view taken by the rapporteur, Mr Deprez, and thanks him for his diligence in this matter.

It was our committee's view that we could reduce the number of such disagreements with the Council in future by reducing the number of individual national initiatives in this area and looking instead for Commission proposals which go through an initial vetting procedure.

I know that the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs has already raised this with the Swedish presidency and we must hope it bears fruit.

On the substantive issue, while being aware that not all Member States are involved in the Schengen Agreement, of course, it seemed to our committee that we should bring the rights of third-country nationals into line with those of citizens.

This is particularly important where partners, not parents as it says in my explanatory statement for some very strange reason, are affected by a different legal status, and we have had a number of petitions on these issues which we added to our opinion.

We felt it was also important to support the position of Mr Deprez, as the need for this proposal itself is more the result of bureaucratic delay than decision-making.

It is our hope and expectation also that the Committee on Petitions will automatically be asked for an opinion in good time on such issues in future.

Mr President, I should like first of all to congratulate Mr Deprez on his brilliant report which deserves our full support.

We have of course worked very hard on this report in our Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs.

My dear Mr Deprez, I could not have wished for a better time for this report to be dealt with, because this is an excellent time - whenever Parliament sits is an excellent time - but I would have wished you better speakers.

But irrespective of this, I believe that the speakers who will now take the floor instead of the original speakers are perfectly able to make a contribution to this debate.

I should like to say quite clearly that both Mr Deprez's comments on the legal basis and his criticism of the Council and the Commission's approach to this area deserve our full support.

The Council and the Commission are acting just as unsystematically on this important issue as we almost did just now and as we have done this week regarding the agenda.

Where asylum and immigration are concerned we are dealing with a completely confused policy where individual initiatives are put to us one after another - sometimes by the Council, sometimes by the Commission, sometimes by individual Member States - but where there is no strategic approach.

But this is also precisely what this proposal - which is perfectly sensible in practice - is suffering from.

There is no strategic approach which draws a clear distinction between asylum and immigration, which regulates both appropriately and which deals with the important issue of burden-sharing, and all of this gives rise to problems.

These problems are then once again resolved by the back door by means of bureaucratic chicanery, and they are not resolved for good: these are pseudo-solutions.

If this initiative really does make the lives of those people who have a long-stay visa in the European Union easier then I welcome it.

But you cannot treat cancer with aspirin.

The way in which we have handled this important field in the last few years - and unfortunately still do so - cannot be allowed to continue.

That is why I believe that Mr Deprez's critical comments are more than justified.

Practical easing of restrictions in the interests of people, yes.

Sensible burden-sharing where burdens arise, yes.

And of course free movement for third-country nationals within the European Union.

But we call on the Council and the Commission finally to move from patch-up jobs to a systematic, strategic policy in this area and to present an overall, unified vision through which we can move step by step.

Mr President, I should like to express my satisfaction.

When we were talking this afternoon and I would have had to begin my speech with the phrase, "Mr President, absent friends," because altogether five colleagues were present, Mr Posselt said that if there were no other speakers there from his group apart from him, he would take over all of the PPE Group's speaking time.

This would have meant that we would have had to listen to Mr Posselt for a whole fifteen minutes.

Now this cup has passed from us and we can turn to the issue addressed by Mr Deprez.

Mr Posselt, burden-sharing, which you talked about - one of your favourite subjects - has nothing to do with what we are discussing today, although I do concede that we need to talk about burden-sharing.

Allow me first of all to say to the Council that we are dealing with an initiative of the French Government, and recently in the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs we have seen individual Member States taking initiatives time and again, and we have then seen that the Member States sometimes happen to be mistaken about their choice of legal basis.

For once I will dare to take up something which Mr Posselt said.

There is no strategic plan, particularly in the Council.

That is why the Council would be better advised to adopt Commissioner Vitorino's strategic plan, which is actually available, instead of blocking most of his ideas.

I say this as a point of principle to the Member States and the Council itself.

My second point is, why is there no strategic plan?

There is no strategic plan for one simple reason.

Policy in the European Union as far as freedom of movement is concerned, to the extent that it is pursued by the individual governments of the Member States, is characterised - not in all of the Member States but in the vast majority of them - by a defensive attitude, because in principle most governments in the European Union have as their premise the restriction of freedom of movement and not the granting of freedom of movement, which, incidentally, is defined as one of the four fundamental freedoms in the Treaty establishing the European Community.

We are dealing with a deficient strategic plan because we talk about the free movement of services, capital and goods, and from cattle to uranium they can move around freely in Europe.

It is only people who are subject to restrictions in the European Union.

They are subjected to these restrictions because of a defence mechanism.

When Mr Posselt talks about freedom of movement, he mainly means people from the southern hemisphere or asylum seekers.

But I am talking, say, about an American professor who accepts a chair at a German university, receives a residence permit for the Federal Republic of Germany and who, when he wishes to give a guest lecture at the Sorbonne in Paris has to apply for a visa, which he is possibly still waiting for because the French or German authorities are not making progress on it. This is because of the diverse and - for the lack of a strategic plan - very heterogeneous administrative provisions in the Member States.

I am talking about the engineer who is sent from a third-country to the EU by a firm which has offices in various different locations.

He is subjected to the same bureaucratic obstacle, which incidentally ought not to exist at all in a free market and in a free economy.

That is why, in connection with Mr Deprez's excellent report, I call on you, when you are debating the freedom of movement and its regulation, not only always to employ a defence mechanism against those whom we supposedly or really do not want here, but finally to realise firstly that freedom of movement is a human right and secondly that it makes economic sense in the European Union.

Ladies and gentlemen, the French initiative that we are discussing today once again demonstrates the importance of clarifying all the measures on free movement which present the problem of opening up borders.

All the statistics show that migratory flows have not diminished and that they will even increase over the coming years.

Therefore, the problem of free movement of third-country nationals within the Schengen area will again rear its head and become even more acute.

Yet, the citizens of Europe expect a clear and consistent overall policy on migration.

The amendment of Article 18 of the Schengen Agreement is the key element of the French initiative.

A holder of a long-stay visa should not enjoy fewer rights than a person who holds a short-stay visa.

The issue is to facilitate the free movement of migrants who return home regularly, whatever visa they hold.

We should be aware that, currently, third-country nationals may only transit through the territory of another Member State in order to reach the country which issued their long-stay visa.

From then on, they can no longer move around within the Schengen area until they have obtained a residence permit.

This is where the difficulty lies.

In terms of the principle of free movement, third-country nationals with a long-stay visa are in the most unfavourable position, even though they might have had to wait several months or even years to obtain the visa.

Furthermore, the text of the French initiative omits the problem of family reunion, a problem which arises in particular when citizens of the Union marry third-country nationals.

Why not therefore treat those who hold a long-stay visa as already resident so that they can enjoy the same right to freedom of movement?

As Mr Deprez also highlighted, the legal basis of the proposal could have been envisaged in a different way so that it covered all aspects mentioned in these arrangements.

To sum up, it seems right to reject an imprecise and incomplete initiative relating to a matter as sensitive as Community immigration policy.

In order to respect and fully guarantee Community legislative power, we must urgently adopt legislation on rights to freedom of movement, immigration and asylum.

The only way to prevent a Fortress Europe being built is to make our repressive visa policy considerably more flexible. The current system does nothing to reduce the migratory flow, on the contrary, it encourages networks of smugglers of illegal immigrants to thrive.

Mr President, I absolutely agree with Mr Deprez.

This is a really important issue which goes to the whole heart of why we have the European Union.

The fundamental principles of the Union are freedom, respect for democracy, human rights, and if you remove freedom of movement, if you stigmatise people because they have applied for a visa or they hold a particular type of visa, I believe you undermine the fundamental principles of the Union.

That is why I welcome the broad thrust of Mr Deprez's report.

It is a well-considered report and, as he said quite rightly, it is relevant to thousands of people.

But even if it was relevant to only one person, we would still be acting, I am afraid, years, decades, after the time when we should have acted.

It is, as he said, a means to achieve a goal and I welcome his legal basis of Article 62(3).

I share Mr Deprez's concerns and his amendments afford freedom of movement for those awaiting a definitive visa.

I welcome his refinement of the French proposals.

There is a real need for these proposals.

We must treat people fairly and with dignity and remove the stigma of visa stays.

Some Member States will have reservations, but we must recognise that change is essential and that people must not be penalised in terms of their freedom of movement by unjustifiable and cumbersome administrative procedures.

I congratulate Mr Deprez on an intelligent and reasoned approach, with measures that facilitate freedom of movement for third-country nationals on Member State territories for a maximum period of three months.

We should welcome it and therefore welcome his report.

Finally, perhaps this report will at some time enable us in this Chamber and in the Union to have a rational and reasonable debate on immigration and visa issues, decoupled from the ugliness of nationalism and xenophobia.

Mr President, on behalf of the Commission, I should like to offer my congratulations on the thorough and exhaustive work of the rapporteur, Mr Deprez.

The Commission supports the objective pursued by the French initiative to facilitate freedom of movement within the Schengen area for holders with long-stay visas prior to the issue of a residence document with equivalent status to a visa.

However, the Commission cannot support the selected legal basis, which has obvious implications for the content of the actual instrument.

The Commission accordingly shares your rapporteur's position.

It considers that the proper legal basis for this regulation is Article 62(3) of the EC Treaty, "measures setting out the conditions under which nationals of third countries shall have the freedom to travel within the territory of the Member States during a period of no more than three months".

For the sake of consistency with that legal basis, the Commission also agrees with your rapporteur on the need to amend Article 21 of the Convention for the implementation of the Schengen Agreement, which regulates the movement of foreigners, rather than Article 18.

The latter article merely specifies that long-stay visas are issued on a national basis and sets the conditions for transit by holders of long-stay visas.

The only further point that the Commission might add to those made by the rapporteur is this: it regards the amendments to the Common Consular Instruction as going far enough.

It is also necessary to amend the Common Manual so that border police can be informed of the new status of the long-stay visa.

Finally, the Commission can confirm its intention of shortly presenting an overall proposal for legislation as regards the right to travel in the Schengen area to avoid fragmentary action that would not be conducive to transparency and clarity in the public mind or certainty as to the law.

The vote on the report will take place immediately after the votes on the topical and urgent subjects of major importance, which are about to begin.

Mr President, this is the last explanation of vote of the part-session and if, with my foot broken and in plaster, I succeed in getting to the end of this last explanation as well, I shall have some hope of not having put my foot in it too often.

That said, I want to tell you that I consulted my daughter Elisabetta about this report. She is a young lawyer and also a regional assembly member for the Pensioners' Party in Lombardy.

Her advice as a lawyer was to vote for the report as it stood, because it would mean more cases and lawsuits.

But as a legislator and assembly member, she said she should do, and advised me to do, what was best for the citizens, and vote for it only if it was amended.

And that is what I have done, Mr President.

We should like to thank the Fatuzzo family for their comments on the Deprez report.

The directive proposed by the French Republic is based on the mutual recognition of deportation orders as soon as they are issued by a Member State of the European Union.

The Communist Party of Greece rejects this approach because, at a time when deportation orders are already being abused in various countries of the European Union, the new directive will foster further violation of the law.

Experience has shown that the administrative authorities are even prepared - all too prepared - to issue deportation orders against legal immigrants who happen to violate certain rules (including the highway code), using the pretext of the threat to public order and national security.

The new law on aliens currently passing through the Greek parliament contains provision to this effect.

For these reasons, we voted against the Deprez report.

The Deprez report proposes that the holder of a long-stay visa who is awaiting a residence permit should enjoy the same rights to freedom of movement as the holder of a residence permit. This marks an improvement on the French initiative which proposed that a long-stay visa should offer the same rights in terms of movement as a short-stay visa.

In 1986, when, on the pretext of combating terrorism, France reintroduced tourist visas, the European Parliament requested that these be withdrawn, perceiving "discrimination towards citizens of non-member countries" .

Today, such discrimination has been made commonplace by the Schengen Convention and by communitising policy on migration.

Visas are refused by consular offices that operate with a total lack of transparency and rarely have to explain their reasons.

European consulates simply refer to "the migratory risk" or registration in the Schengen Information System.

In addition to the vast number of official rejections, an incalculable number of verbal requests have been refused point-blank.

A good deal of trafficking goes on in consulates because so few visas are issued.

This constant humiliation of nationals from the Southern hemisphere has no purpose except to stop them crossing borders and no effect except to encourage illegal immigration.

The Deprez report rightly concludes that there is a lack of transparency and democratic control when it comes to visas and movement in Europe.

That is why I shall vote in its favour.

I declare the session of the European Parliament adjourned.

(The sitting was closed at 6.15 p.m.)

I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday, 18 January 2001.

Ladies and gentlemen, on 26 January, ETA claimed another victim in a bomb attack in San Sebastian, which cost the life of Ramon Dez Garca, an army cook, and injured two other people.

I should like to offer the European Parliament' s sincere condolences to the family of the victim and to send our wishes for the prompt recovery of those injured in this attack.

Unfortunately, all we can do is to reaffirm our feeling of revulsion and absolute condemnation of this indiscriminate violence.

At the same time, let me welcome to the visitors' gallery Mr Luis de Grandes and Mr Jess Caldera, respectively the heads of the Popular Party and the Spanish Socialist Workers Party delegations of the Spanish parliament.

They have come to present to the European institutions the agreement for freedom and against terrorism signed by their political parties on 8 December 2000, to which many trade unions, employers' associations and Basque peace associations, among others, were signatories.

Your stance is all the more courageous, gentlemen, since ETA recently declared that all the present and future signatories to this agreement will be targeted by their actions.

Please be assured that you can count on the European Parliament' s solidarity.

Ladies and gentlemen, I invite you to observe a minute' s silence.

(The House rose and observed a minute' s silence)

Ladies and gentlemen, I have a statement to make.

The President of the Court of First Instance of the European Communities issued an order on 26 January in which he set aside the decision of the European Parliament of 23 October 2000 recognising the French Government' s notification announcing the ending of Jean-Marie Le Pen's mandate.

The order states that Mr Le Pen should rejoin Parliament and, of course, it is my responsibility to apply this court decision immediately.

Furthermore, I have asked the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market for an opinion on what action the European Parliament should take in respect of this matter.

I have already noticed one new element: the President of the Court of First Instance has conferred upon the European Parliament discretionary powers in relation to a decree ending the mandate of the European Parliament.

If this decision were to be confirmed, the Le Pen case would be a further step to establishing the powers of the European institutions over national governments

I wrote to you yesterday, Madam President, because the largest democratic country in the world, India, is going through a particularly tragic experience, and I think it would be appropriate for Parliament to show its intention of standing by the Indian authorities and people at this time, and I would ask you, with your approval, to observe a minute' s silence.

I did of course send a message to this effect to the Indian authorities immediately.

Thank you for your suggestion, which, I believe, is the same as the suggestion Mrs Gill wished to make. I will readily invite you to observe a minute' s silence in honour of the victims of this horrendous disaster.

(The House rose and observed a minute' s silence)

Madam President, thank you very much for that message of condolence, which is what I wanted to talk about concerning India.

Madam President, I rise concerning Rules 7(1), 7(2) and 8(4) of our Rules of Procedure to ask whether you or your services have received a communication from the British Government informing you that the Conservative Party has asked to change one of three names on its list, which would remove the name of someone elected in the East Midlands region in the European elections last June.

The change would be to remove the name of Mr William Newton Dunn and replace it with Mr Javed Arain, the fourth-ranked Conservative, who is here with us today in the public gallery.

You will no doubt know that the system of proportional representation was used for the first time in the UK in the last European elections and the people who voted in these elections voted for a party whose views they agreed with, not for an individual.

Perhaps if no communication has been forthcoming you could contact the British Government to ask for their official, legal position.

Finally, under Rule 7(3), I ask that the committee responsible, mentioned in this rule, look into the credentials of Mr Newton Dunn to see whether he has, in fact, proceeded in accordance with the Act of 20 September 1976, as detailed in our Rules of Procedure.

Madam President, Rule 2 of our Rules of Procedure says that we all sit here as individuals, not as agents of political parties and we do not take orders from outside.

(Applause from the centre and left) The essence of democracy is that individuals have guaranteed rights against the state.

The Conservatives, I am sorry to say, are now wishing to introduce a new doctrine that political parties have power over individuals.

That is the beginning of totalitarianism and that is why I left them.

(Applause from the centre and left)

Madam President, Mr Newton Dunn is perfectly correct when he draws attention to Rule 2, but what he forgets is that the elections in 1999 took place under proportional representation.

No elector voted for Mr Newton Dunn, or indeed for me or for Mr Heaton-Harris.

They voted for a party list and Mr Newton Dunn represented himself as fully in support of the Conservative Party, its leader and its European policy.

He has now completely abrogated that position and he is therefore denying the democratic rights of the voters of the East Midlands, over 40% of whom voted Conservative.

I call on Mr Newton Dunn to resign.

Although this British debate is very diverting, Mr Helmer, we do have an extremely important Commission communication on economic and social cohesion.

Madam President, I shall be very brief, but I too wish to speak on the subject of Portugal.

This was an enormous tragedy and the most serious aspect is the fact that six people were killed.

In addition to these deaths, which we can do nothing about, it has unfortunately already been predicted that there will be huge material damages and it will therefore be necessary to obtain the solidarity of the European Union.

As Mrs Figueiredo stated, we hope this House will support us in Strasbourg.

Madam President, it is the case that, although the United Kingdom electoral system is a list system, the names of those on the list appear in the order in which electors are invited to vote for them.

Therefore, it is the case that we are here as individuals as well as representing a political position.

That is very important and it should be known that the United Kingdom Conservative Party was among those parties that voted for the provision that names should be on the ballot, not off the ballot.

I should like to draw your and Parliament' s attention to a man-made disaster with which we shall be confronted in the course of the next few days.

Last week, I and two of my colleagues, Feleknas Uca and Konstantinos Alyssandrakis, were on a visit to Istanbul where we met former prisoners, their families and their lawyers, together with human rights campaigners in Turkey.

A large number of prisoners in Turkish jails are on hunger strike, with some of them prepared to die because of the Turkish Government' s policy towards prisoners.

I should like to call upon you, Madam President, to make contact with the Turkish authorities and press for a new dialogue to be embarked upon between the Turkish Government, on the one hand, and prisoners' organisations and the human rights organisations, on the other.

Otherwise, we shall see a succession of fatalities next week, for the hunger strike has been going on for months.

I have certainly taken note of your comment.

Madam President, for reasons of a topical nature, I am in a position to give this issue my wholehearted support.

The day before yesterday, I had the opportunity to speak to Turkey' s Minister of Justice, and I made him aware of the urgent nature of the situation.

I would therefore ask you to take action accordingly.

Madam President, I wish to add my voice to those of the speakers who raised the issue of the tragedy that took place in Portugal last weekend.

In order to gain some insight into what happened, we need only bear the following in mind: last winter was the driest of the century and last December and January were the wettest in living memory. These factors meant that all of the country' s actions to control the floods failed.

Furthermore, everything happened so quickly that unexpected deaths and floods occurred as a result.

We therefore need to make a much greater effort than might be considered necessary, because the situation has been truly exceptional.

Madam President, I too would like to express an opinion on the issue raised by Mrs Frahm.

I was a member of the delegation, as she rightly said, and like the rest of the delegation, I too was highly embarrassed in front of the parents of the political prisoners because, although they did indeed beg us to help their children, we were unable to respond.

I am surprised that, despite repeated appeals, by both my fellow Member Mr Korakas and me, still no representations have been made to the Turkish authorities.

I should like to ask you to make such representations as quickly as possible, before we start to mourn even more victims than we are mourning already from the attack on the prisons by the Turkish authorities in December 2000.

Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, in the last few days, various parts of Portugal, especially in the north and the centre of the country, have suffered from terrible weather conditions, with torrential rain that has led to the loss of human life, the destruction of homes, families being displaced, damage to buildings, enormous harm to farming, fisheries, industry and trade, the destruction of communication lines and the closure of harbours and ports.

Not all of the damage has, of course, been fully assessed yet, but the total cost may reach billions of escudos. This will require the mobilisation of Community special assistance grants in order to deal with the economic and social problems caused by this devastation.

Therefore, in addition to sending our heartfelt condolences to the families of the victims and expressing our sympathy for the people who have lost their homes and their possessions, in which, I am sure, all Members of this Parliament join, we ask you, Madam President to make representations to the Commission, urging it to provide, in conjunction with the Portuguese Government and the local authorities, emergency aid for the most badly affected communities so that economic activity may be restored.

I would also ask the Conference of Presidents to include this matter in the topical and urgent debate in Parliament' s next part-session.

Madam President, as a Basque MEP, I would like to express my rejection and condemnation of the terrorism and violence of ETA.

I would also like to express my condolences to the family of Ramn Garca and to all the families of victims of terrorism and violence.

On behalf of the Basque Nationalist Party, I would also like to say that our overwhelming priority is the ethical principles of human rights and, above all, the right to life.

You have presented us with the anti-terrorist agreement drafted by Spain' s Popular Party and the Spanish Socialist Workers Party.

I must tell you that this agreement does not offer anything new and that it contains only repressive measures, police measures and impositions.

It does not offer any valid proposal to resolve the political conflict in the Basque Country.

It is now ten years since the Basque parliament approved the right to self-determination but, nevertheless, the Spanish Government has deliberately ignored this free democratic decision adopted in the Basque Country.

In the Basque Country we need less fascism from ETA and less centralism and imposition from the state; we need more dialogue, more democracy and more respect for the democratic decisions of the Basque parliament.

Madam President, two days ago, after the announcement concerning the pardons for 14 torturers and the medal awarded to the former head of the political police of San Sebastian, Amnesty International concluded and I quote: "The award of pardons and honours for torturers sends out a clear message. The violation of human rights will not be effectively punished in Spain."

This is not the first time that pardons or honours for torturers have been granted or awarded by the Spanish authorities.

In its June 1999 report, Amnesty International stated its belief that there is a climate of impunity in Spain.

Article 6 of the Treaty of Amsterdam . . .

(The President cut the speaker off)

Madam President, referring to this document that he mentioned, Mr Ortuondo talks to us about centralism.

I do not know if he is referring to the centralism of Spain in relation to the Basque Country.

I am sure he is not, because, as he knows, the Basque region has the highest degree of self-government of any European region.

However, I would like to ask him whether that document also talks about the statements by the leader of his party when he said to ETA: "Do not kill the cooks, kill the powers that be" .

By "the powers that be" he is referring to the Popular Party. I am sure, Mr Ortuondo, that in this respect "the powers that be" means the Popular Party, and the Socialist Party, and that the whole of this Parliament embodies that power.

The whole of this Parliament is therefore in a position to consider itself a victim of ETA.

Madam President, Parliament knows, because we have said it many times and today we have explained it to some of you, that in presenting and defending an agreement in favour of freedoms and against terrorism in the Basque Country, we are defending and presenting an agreement which goes beyond the merely political field, since it is an agreement in defence of freedoms, in defence of life, in defence of pluralism.

There may be people who do not support this agreement; there may be people who criticise it; there has even been one organisation - the terrorist organisation ETA, of course - which has threatened to kill the signatories, and those people who might sign it later, for defending it.

Well, ladies and gentlemen, despite all of this, we will always continue to defend freedoms.

We will always continue to defend the right of any citizen of the Basque Country, whether they are in favour of autonomy or of independence, to be able to move around our country without escorts.

I want no more and no less than Mr Gorostiaga does: I want to move around my country with my children, like they do, without having to take escorts.

Madam President, I wish to speak briefly, following the latest speeches by the representatives of the Basque Nationalist Party and Euskal Herritarrok, to express my solidarity and agreement with the statement you have made, Madam President, on behalf of the European Parliament, in defence of democracy and peace in Spain.

Our main problem in Spain is terrorism, and fascist positions such as those of Euskal Herritarrok are a threat to peace in Spain and in Europe.

The fact that there are internal problems in Spain resulting from the political differences between the central government and the Basque parliament does not prevent us here in the European Parliament from standing for peace and democracy and against fascism.

The next item is the Commission communication on economic and social cohesion.

I give the floor to Commissioner Barnier.

Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, before coming to the main subject of my address on behalf of the Commission this morning, I should, with your permission, like to raise one point very briefly.

Madam President, I should like to respond to the concerns expressed earlier by Mrs Figueiredo, and by the Secretary of State, Mrs Torres Marques and the Minister, Mr Cunha, following the very serious natural disasters which have stricken the northern region of Portugal. As I am the Commissioner responsible for dealing with these issues, I wish to inform them that we shall take advantage of every possibility of reallocating appropriations, just as we have done in other circumstances in the event of natural disasters elsewhere in Europe, in order to stand by the Portuguese authorities in meeting the exceptional costs of reconstruction, repairs or indeed preventative measures necessitated by these disasters.

Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, this morning, the greater part of the discussion in the European Commission was taken up with approving the report, the Second Report on Economic and Social Cohesion in the Union, which it was my honour to present, with the agreement of my fellow Commissioners, Mrs Diamantopoulou and Mr Fischler.

I presented this report pursuant to Article 159 of the Treaty, with which you are familiar, just as Monica Wulf-Mathies did in 1996. It was as a result of this 1996 report that the first information became available, which was used in drawing up Agenda 2000.

A detailed summary of the report is available in three languages at the entrance to the Chamber. The first part of the report which I am presenting gives, for the first time, a snapshot of the European Union in terms of cohesion for the 27 countries of the Union post-enlargement.

The second part of the report analyses the impact of other Community policies on the Union' s objectives. It assesses the results achieved by the Structural Funds and the Cohesion Funds.

Finally, in the synthesis section, the report outlines a number of potential avenues or recommendations for the future. Let me repeat, we have already made a summary available to each of you.

The complete report, ladies and gentlemen, will be available as of this evening on the Internet, along with all the appended maps and statistics pertaining thereto.

There are two points I would like to make in my opening remarks, before listening to your views. What are the issues at stake in cohesion within the enlarged Union and how can we address these issues?

The first issue I shall raise is that of a global environment undergoing rapid and far-reaching change, which affects each of our countries and hence also the European Union as a whole: the issue of globalisation and the context of new activities based on intelligence and knowledge, the new economy, the information society, and the issue of demographic structure.

This is compounded by the ever greater expectation on the part of our fellow citizens, as you are well aware, for our policies to be clearer, to involve the citizens themselves, and for increased partnership.

We face the prospect of a European Union with 27 or perhaps even 28 members, and what becomes clear from reading this report carefully is that this enlarged Union will contain greater disparities, greater inequalities, to an extent unprecedented in previous rounds of enlargement.

There are three key figures you should bear in mind in this respect: with the forthcoming enlargement, the population of the European Union will increase by 30%, and the surface area of the Union will increase by 30%, yet the Union' s gross domestic product will increase by only 5%.

That is why in this report we identified a third group of countries, which will include the eight poorest candidate countries, which will comprise 16% of the population of the enlarged Union, where the per capita income is approximately only 40% of the Community average.

This is where the main challenge and the real change lie.

Consequently, with enlargement, the centre of gravity of cohesion policy is going to shift eastwards.

Of the 105 million inhabitants of the candidate countries, 98 million will be living in regions where the level of GDP per inhabitant is less than 75% of the average in the enlarged Union.

Yet, ladies and gentlemen, the entry of extremely poor Eastern European countries into the European Union is not going to turn the existing poor regions in southern, northern and central Europe - I am thinking of the remote and outermost regions too - all of a sudden into prosperous and rich regions, as if by magic.

The regions currently covered by Objective 1 are still in difficulty, even if there has been some progress.

Per capita income in these regions has moved closer to the Community average.

It has increased from 63% in 1988 to 69% in 1997.

Partly with the help of the Structural Funds and the Cohesion Funds, the countries covered by cohesion policy have experienced economic growth at a rate higher than the Community average.

Yet, within an increasing number of Member States, the tendency is not towards the elimination of disparities.

Disparities continue to exist and are even being exacerbated.

Unemployment stands at more than 20% in some regions, regions which have for a considerable length of time been left out in terms of progress due to their remote nature and depopulation, and the employment rate for women is 19 percentage points below that of men.

These are the observations you can read in the report, in which we describe the territorial inequalities, the pockets of poverty, sometimes extreme poverty, in some urban districts and some rural areas.

How can we address these issues?

Ladies and gentlemen, in our view, cohesion policy must continue to be the key element in the European Union' s societal model.

We are part of a European Union which wishes to formalise its structures of solidarity.

This means we have to ask three questions of cohesion policy: why, for whom and how?

I sometimes hear it said that it is not possible to do everything from Brussels and that more subsidiarity is needed.

I am all in favour of greater subsidiarity, but I am not and I shall never be in favour of allowing cohesion policy to become nothing more than the transfer of funding.

It is not enough just to send cheques. We cannot accept any form of renationalisation of cohesion policy for we still have shared priorities, genuine Community priorities and it is in our shared interest to ensure the sustainable and balanced development of a frame of reference for cohesion policy.

The debate is only just beginning.

I do not have any decisions to offer you, just some thoughts, perhaps.

One of these thoughts is based on the experience gained over more than ten years of cohesion policy, and leads me to think that there are matters that are more crucial and more serious than others for the development of our territories.

As I have mentioned already, there is the urban issue, networking, or even the specific issues affecting areas that are handicapped in geographical terms; by remoteness, mountainous topography or other natural handicaps.

Human resources, too, must be taken into account, since that affects employment.

Our report specifically lays down some guidelines to achieving more high quality jobs, improved social integration and equal opportunities.

Finally, taking this debate into consideration, ladies and gentlemen, the Commission could be ready, when the time comes, to propose a more strategic and coherent approach to EU territorial development to the other community institutions, so that our continued objective of economic and social cohesion would be strengthened by an increased territorial dimension and territorial support.

For whom do we implement cohesion policy?

I am convinced of two points in this respect, and these convictions are shared by the Commission as a whole.

The first is that we must continue to prioritise support for the regions lagging the furthest behind in development terms, for future Member States but also for current EU Member States.

The whole problem of priority support for the most underdeveloped regions, of course, raises the question of the level at which we shall have to set the eligibility threshold for regions which are developing too slowly.

My second conviction is that the regions lagging behind in development are not the only ones facing problems to which we must find solutions. Other regions within the enlarged Union are affected too.

If we are to have Community priorities then we must contemplate measures that can be implemented throughout the territory of the European Union for often, within a single state, there are regions that are richer than others and sometimes even within a single region there are areas of exclusion right next to highly dynamic areas - as is shown in the urban audit which I issued a few months ago.

Ladies and gentlemen, I think it is increasingly possible to delegate implementation to the Member States, applying the principle of subsidiarity better than in the past, on condition that we are sure that Community priorities are being respected and that European funding continues to go to those that have the greatest need. How are we to carry out this cohesion policy?

This can be summed up in two phrases, improved efficiency and improved management.

I have presented my explanations to the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism, and I shall present my explanations to the Committee on Budgetary Control - but it must be a credible policy with ambition, as I have just mentioned, and with sufficient funding.

We did not, at this stage, wish to carry out assessments or budget estimates.

It would be too early; we would be putting the cart before the horse.

Let us first discuss objectives, content and European priorities.

Only afterwards will we have to find the resources to support these priorities.

My only observation, one which I wish to bring to the attention of the House, is that among the various issues decided in Berlin in 1999, one specific decision was that in 2006, at the end of this programming period, by adding up the amounts allocated to the Structural Funds, the Cohesion Funds and the pre-accession appropriations, particularly ISPA, and the appropriations set aside to cover the costs of the first accessions prior to 2006, we obtain a total allocation, combining all these, equivalent to 0.45% of Community GDP.

I see that figure as a reference point.

It will be a key figure in the discussion of financial matters that we shall have with you and the Member States when the time comes.

Ladies and gentlemen, whatever the level of expenditure in relation to the increase in disparities, I think it safe to say that any cohesion policy will be credible only insofar as it is supported by adequate funding.

Whatever the level of structural expenditure, the key thing is that the content of other Community policies should also promote cohesion, as the Treaty recommends.

In terms of coordination with other Community policies, there is still progress to be made, particularly in order to improve synergy.

I am thinking here of the common agricultural policy.

Ladies and gentlemen, thank you for your attention. Before answering your questions, I would like to stress that this report does not offer any firm or definitive guidelines.

It does not put forward any decisions, it merely opens the debate.

It is a tool for information and assessment, a snapshot of the European Union which includes 27 Member States for the first time, and at the end we ask a few questions and make a few recommendations.

We shall be much more precise in the third report in 2004, which will be issued very shortly before the time when decisions are taken on the new agenda.

I merely consider that this debate on cohesion policy and this report testify to the fact that cohesion policy has been effective and useful, in accordance with the goals of the Treaty.

Increased European unity, increased solidarity between the peoples of Europe and respect for the diversity of the territories of Europe: this continues to be our objective.

This debate on cohesion forms part of the broader debate on the future of the European Union which was initiated in Nice and in which we are going to take part.

You may count on us in the next three years leading up to the new intergovernmental conference in 2004 in the matter of this broader debate and of the specific debate on our concept of the European Union, the concept of the level of solidarity between nations and territories.

Thank you, and may I assure you of the European Commission' s respect for the valued role that Parliament will play in these discussions.

Commissioner, as Chairman of the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism, I have to say that the report on cohesion is indeed an excellent basis for discussion and I trust that we shall be holding this discussion in the Committee on Regional Policy very soon and that it will be a very global discussion.

Now, as a Member of the European Parliament, I have to say that it is clear from the report on cohesion that there has been a relative improvement in our efforts to achieve economic and social cohesion in the European Union and that, as you rightly said, we have had more success with the economic indicators than we have with the social indicators.

Some countries, such as Ireland, have taken greater advantage of the opportunities given to them than have other countries.

So the message which we should send out from the House today is that we need more efficient administration on all sides, especially on the part of the Member States and regions and, of course, we need incentives, such as the performance reserve, so that we can use European taxpayers' money more efficiently.

Obviously, I agree that we need to start focusing on the poorest regions and countries of the European Union right now and again after 2006.

But we must not forget one very important point: today's poorer countries are not going to get richer purely and simply because enlargement will artificially reduce the average per capita GDP in the European Union.

That is something we must bear in mind if we are to avoid straying into misguided policies.

I therefore think that we need to concentrate resources, we need to make better use of resources, we need to call for better administration both on the part of the Commission and of the Member States and regions; however, that must not cause us to forget one basic fact: that more people will want a slice of the cake after enlargement and as far as I am concerned, Commissioner, it is vital that we increase the size of the cake, that we increase the resources of the Structural Funds after 2006.

I should like to hear your views on this.

Mr Hatzidakis, I go along with your analysis, of course.

I formed my own assessment in the same spirit and on the same bases as yourself.

I should point out to the House that if the twelve candidate countries were to actually join the European Union right now, then the mean GDP for the Community would drop by 18 points.

This would automatically have the mathematical effect of raising regions which continue to be in difficulties above the mean in one fell swoop.

It would not, therefore, be fair.

We are going to have to find some solution for these regions which would thereby be placed automatically above the Community mean.

Mr Hatzidakis, you tell me more money will be needed.

At this stage, I can express only a personal opinion.

We have not yet reached the point of discussing the future Financial Perspective.

I have only given you a rough indication, and a personal opinion at that.

I think that the figure of 0.45 % of Community GDP, which will be achieved in 2006 in line with the Berlin decisions, if we add together the Structural Funds, the Cohesion Funds, pre-accession appropriations, SAPARD, PHARE, ISPA, as well as the appropriations placed in reserve to support the first accessions in 2004, for example, will give a total representing 0.45% of GDP.

I see this as a reference point.

To elaborate further, my frank opinion is that if we take on board another twelve countries in the state they are at present, then we shall not be able to conduct any credible policy at anything less than this percentage.

That is all I can say for the present.

Madam President, I should like to thank the Commissioner for the open manner in which he chose to present his report in plenary.

It is the beginning of a debate - an honest debate - that we want to be involved in as parliamentarians.

The Commissioner and Mr Hatzidakis said that regional disparities will become twice as great.

The challenge to achieve cohesion will be greater: we have an unprecedented expansion of the Union and we still have poor regions.

There is a multi-million euro question which is, to use the words of a former French Commission President: "Have we got the means to match our ambitions?"

That is not to say that the means have to be financial, but we must also look at other policies.

It is clear that there will be a cap on budgetary contributions.

Therefore I ask you, Commissioner Barnier and your colleagues, to look at the opportunities offered by other policies, in particular the real and tangible benefits of involving the private sector in regenerating our regions.

Can you be sure, Commissioner, that an enlightened view will be taken, in particular by Mr Monti, the Commissioner responsible for competition, to ensure that we have private sector innovative approaches to reducing regional disparities across the Union?

Thank you, Mrs McCarthy, for your assessment.

I can indeed confirm the attitude of the Commission, which I, in particular, share, and our determination to take part, not just here but also in the national parliaments, and in and with the regions, in as decentralised a way as possible, in a major debate.

My whole team in the Directorate-General is going to participate in presenting the results of the assessment of this snapshot and open the debate over the next two years, in an extremely transparent and open manner.

The current annual allocation is approximately EUR thirty billion.

Once again, I have told Mr Hatzidakis what I though of the lower limit beyond which we should not go if we wish this policy to have any credibility.

I also think, like you, Mrs McCarthy, that this European policy must act as a lever, bringing other funding and other synergies to bear.

That is why I attach great importance to partnership, the modernisation of private funds, and the intervention of the European Investment Bank as our partner.

I quite understand, moreover, your concern for greater coherence with the competition policy for which Commissioner Monti is responsible.

We have to find a way forward which reconciles complying with the Treaties, especially in terms of the rules of competition, and regional policy.

Quite simply, Mrs McCarthy, let me share my personal conviction that we shall not achieve solidarity and cohesion in Europe simply by counting on the laws of the market, on supply and demand or on a simple tax transfer policy.

I do not believe that liberalism alone can help the poorest regions cease to be the poorest or that it can help reduce the gap between them and the richest regions.

That is why I shall fight to ensure that we continue to have public intervention in Europe.

Mr President, Commissioner, I would like, on behalf of my group, to thank you warmly for your excellent report.

I am sure it will provoke solid, but also controversial discussion, and so I would just like to take this opportunity to stimulate debate a little with a two-fold question.

The current system will actually remain in force until the year 2006.

Given that we are negotiating with the candidate countries with the aim of their acceding in 2004/2005, how then, can we make it clear to them that, even if they join under the current conditions, they cannot rely on our being able to continue the system, in other words, how are we going to make them understand that irrespective of what they sign up to now, they are going to have to adapt to an amended cohesion policy?

Secondly, perhaps you could allay a little the fears which prevail across a good many regions by explaining to us how is it going to be possible for the regions which may receive less support after 2007, regardless of the ceiling we apply, not to lose support and solidarity at a moment' s notice?

How can we make it possible for them - as has, in fact, been done hitherto using the phasing out method - to achieve the upturn gradually, without their being dropped from the system straightaway?

You may be able to assuage quite a number of fears with your answer.

Thank you for asking this question, Mr Jarzembowski. It is probably the main question to be debated in terms of finance.

Let me specify, nonetheless, that the Berlin Financial Perspective made provision to set aside some EUR 39.5 billion for the candidate countries likely to join before 2006, to enable them to be integrated into the current cohesion policy. After 2006, however, they will of course be entitled, like the current Member States, to participate in a policy which will probably be rather different.

My report outlined four possible approaches to cater for the regions which would automatically find themselves above the cut-off threshold as soon as we incorporate a number of very poor countries into the Union, and all I can do at this stage is outline these options.

The first option is to continue to apply the strict threshold of 75% of Community GDP which is the current threshold below which regions are eligible for Objective 1 status, and therefore a greater concentration of appropriations.

The second option is to link this 75% threshold with a phasing-out policy over a set period, supported by a substantial amount of money, in order to facilitate the transition for regions which, post-enlargement, would suddenly find themselves above that threshold.

A third option is to raise the threshold above 75 % to make more regions eligible.

In that case, we should probably have to tackle the issue of finance.

The fourth option is to have two thresholds, one for regions currently within the Union and one for the regions of countries joining the Union.

I am not in a position, nor do I have any wish, to decide the matter right now.

I am here to listen to your views.

I shall be listening to the views of the Member States, and the members of parliament and elected representatives of these regions.

In the end, though, we shall have to opt for one of these four alternatives.

Mr President, Commissioner, you said that in the future, the main focus of cohesion will lie in the East and that a cohesion policy of this kind will only be possible if there are sufficient means available.

Would you agree that we also need to allow sufficient time for this, because we know from experience that it takes time to develop regions?

How can we rely on the Commission having the commitment to allow both time and money, in order to pre-empt the effects of the cohesion policy?

EUR 4 billion are available in Category VIII for the year 2002.

Would it not make sense to deploy this with a view to achieving cohesion in the East, even before enlargement takes place?

Where do you stand on this?

Mrs Schroedter, we do need time.

In the report I even mentioned the fact that for the countries which are currently in the greatest difficulty within the European Union, the regions lagging furthest behind in development, it would take another generation to reduce this gap.

I pointed out that it would take roughly, and I can only make a rough prediction, two generations for the countries scheduled to join us in approximately 2004-2005.

I concur with your view that we shall be able to make a greater success of enlargement and the actual accession of these countries if we make the best possible preparations at this stage.

That is why, alongside my fellow Commissioners, Mr Verheugen and Mr Fischler, who are responsible, respectively, for the PHARE programme and the SAPARD programme, whilst I myself am responsible for the ISPA programme for the environment and transport, I am committed to ensuring that this money is used properly, and that part of the technical assistance associated with these funds is used to set up territorial frameworks.

This is the real weakness of the candidate countries whose regional divisions have not existed for very long.

The Voivodships in Poland have only been in existence for two years.

We must therefore support the territorial frameworks by means of these Structural Funds. Indeed, I never miss an opportunity to urge local communities within the current Union to set up twinning partnerships and decentralised cooperation agreements with candidate country regions in order to establish more ongoing cooperation on the human level within each territorial community.

We attach great importance, therefore, to using these pre-accession funds as usefully as possible.

I cannot, however, make any commitments, Mrs Schroedter, as to what we shall do with the money placed in reserve after 2002 - I mentioned approximately EUR 40 billion - if these countries do not join in 2002. For the time being the funds have been set aside to cater for those accessions that do actually take place.

In response to your question, however, I should like to point out that we have pre-accession instruments and that these are what we should be using, when the time comes, to carry accession through successfully.

Commissioner, I agree that there can be no union without economic and social cohesion, and that there can be no cohesion without means.

I also agree that the Structural Funds used have been effective and positive.

My specific question is therefore: is enlargement possible without an additional effort on the part of the European Union - from the moment of the first accessions - above and beyond this budgetary reserve?

Secondly, Commissioner, I must say that there is disquiet in certain European regions and some of your replies do not provide any comfort, although it is true that we are in a context of a very rapid dialogue.

However, for this very reason I believe it is necessary to specify something else.

You say that we have to find a solution for those regions which are currently receiving funds, especially the Objective 1 regions. I would like you to be more specific, Commissioner.

What is going to happen, according to your criteria, to Castilla-La Mancha, Estremadura, Andalusia, Galicia, regions of Portugal and Greece, and 'Lnder' which have just entered Objective 1?

Let us be specific, because disquiet in those regions will only be prevented by clarity.

Mr Izquierdo Collado, I do not have all the answers at this stage, and if I did, you would be justified in criticising me.

We are only launching the debate.

The budgets have been determined; the regulations have been defined.

All these EU regions have received guarantees until 2006.

I have endeavoured to tell the truth, because we cannot make speeches on enlargement and the enlarged European Union, integrating the closely related peoples of Eastern Europe, without looking at the figures as they stand.

Yet I did not want to wait until 2005 before telling the truth and asking the questions which have to be asked of the Commission proposals, when the time comes, by the Heads of State and Government and by Parliament.

So there is a problem, but there is no need to panic.

I should also like to say, in answer to your specific question with regard to specific regions, Extremadura, southern Italy or the Lnder of eastern Germany, that it will depend on the level of income achieved by around 2005-2006.

What I do know, however, is that if we retain the criterion of per capita income - which I hope we do, since it is an objective criterion - then the average Community GDP is going to drop as a result of enlargement.

The rate is going to drop to a greater or lesser extent, Mr Izquierdo Collado, according to whether the twelve candidate countries join at the same time or not.

Once again, then, there is no need to panic.

The drop will perhaps not be as much as the 18 points I mentioned earlier.

The fact remains, however, that some regions currently covered by Objective 1, which are currently enjoying a good level of development even though this is still below average, are liable to find that they are above average following enlargement.

We are going to have to find a solution to this.

As I have said myself, these regions are not suddenly going to become rich just because Eastern European countries are joining the European Union.

We are going to have to find a substantial solution for these regions and continue to support them, and I have outlined a few possible approaches.

One of these, for example, would be to have a total budget allowance, similar to the system we set up for Ireland and other regions, to cover phasing out and a transitional period, particularly for those regions which were closest to the average.

Even then, even with the new average, there will still most probably be, even looking at the maps provided in the report, which I urge you to examine carefully, extremely poor regions such as still exist in Spain, Portugal and Greece, and even in Italy, within the European Union of today.

A solution, a largely financial solution, will have to be found for the band of intermediate regions, and what I am seeking to do is to ask the questions to obtain the help I need in order to find appropriate solutions when the time comes.

Mr President, this debate is our opportunity for a proper discussion on the issues facing us.

It is clear that enlargement will not just mean problems for the struggling regions which we are attempting to embrace in the Union. At the same time, if in this case the single market works, other regions will also reap the benefit.

Now, in all honesty, I am a little concerned about this reasoning on averages, for it may be that the problem of income distribution will highlight regions which we could induce - although I do not know how - to contribute a little more to the overall financing of the system in view of the enlargement process.

I therefore feel that it could well be appropriate to set rather more refined benchmarks for the cohesion policy and I continue to call for the implementation of the project to enlarge Europe to provide us with less rigid objectives and establish a more flexible scale, rather than necessarily tying us to this idea of a totally automatic process, which sends the regions flying from category to category.

Mr Costa, as I said earlier quite forcefully - you will forgive me repeating it - I wanted to initiate this debate immediately, early enough to discuss the essential issues and our vision of Europe, which is not just a supermarket but a community.

I want us to discuss solidarity and to reach agreement on our political objectives.

Thereafter, once we have agreed on the objectives and priorities and the line of approach, we must give ourselves the resources to carry them forward.

So, discussing the money involved at this stage would be a poor way of opening the discussion.

I know perfectly well that we shall have to discuss finance when the time comes.

We must continue to promote solidarity between States.

You are well aware that there are States that are net contributors and others that are not.

I therefore feel that this form of redistribution is quite fair and quite efficient.

Thirdly, I must thank you for stating in your initial speech that enlargement entails problems and risks but also provides opportunities. This is also my view.

If you look at developments over the last twenty years, with Spain, Portugal and Greece, my own personal conviction - and I never miss the opportunity to say so in the public debates I take part in - is that in the medium and long term, any enlargement process ultimately contains more opportunities than risks and problems.

Quite apart from morality and politics, it is just not in our interests to allow people living on our doorstep to continue to live in poverty.

Poverty, of the kind we have right next door to us, as in the countries of Eastern Europe or Albania or the Balkan states, always leads to the same outcome.

When people do not have enough to eat, they emigrate.

People living in poverty are prey to all sorts of nationalist conflicts, war, trafficking, and mafia exploitation.

It is therefore in our own interest, quite apart from moral or political concerns, to undertake this enlargement and to pay the price for sharing progress.

I must also thank you for giving me this opportunity to say that this debate must also prove that in the great challenge of enlargement there are more opportunities than risks.

Mr President, Commissioner, I have not yet had the opportunity to read the report, but the first report on cohesion clearly showed that the common agricultural policy was not contributing to cohesion in the European Union.

The Agenda 2000 reform was limited to maintaining the status quo in the CAP.

I now wish to ask the Commissioner whether he can tell us anything about the report' s conclusions on the CAP.

Mr President, what I have to say to the Commissioner is far simpler.

Very quickly, then, I would like to suggest that other criteria are used for the allocation of funds than just the rate of GDP and of unemployment.

Surely other factors such as population concentration and distribution, potential or lack of potential in terms of new technologies and research, and geographical accessibility should be taken into account?

And finally, my last question: surely the current situation forces us to contemplate redefining the Financial Perspective before 2006?

Commissioner, at the beginning of your speech you indicated that the challenges facing us are globalisation and enlargement.

Together with other MEPs, I have just attended the World Social Forum in Porto Alegre, where it was clearly shown that with the problem of globalisation we are entering a new era, in which the European Union must play a fundamental role in the world.

This problem of world social balance must form part of our economic policy and, since you referred to it, I would like to ask you what the European Union is going to do in this respect, because this is clearly going to have an influence on our internal economic problems and also on our budgetary problems.

Secondly, Commissioner, I would like to ask you: to what extent do you consider it fair that States, such as Spain, which still receive cohesion funds, are considering zero deficit as an economic policy, at the risk of...

(The President cut the speaker off)

Mr President, thank you very much Commissioner, you mentioned that we will also require new rules for enlargement, and probably more money too.

I would like to ask a couple of questions on the subject of new rules and, as such, on the subject of new ideas.

Would it really be feasible, indeed would it also be wise in the future, to largely target the support at one particular area, time and time again?

Would it not make more sense to place more emphasis than we have done hitherto on particular project ideas, or else on particularly needy areas?

This would also allow us to spend the money in a more targeted way.

Mr President, Commissioner, I am pleased to be able to say that I am glad to hear this.

I have not yet had the opportunity to read the report, but I liked what you had to say about it.

I would like to ask you whether the Commission is prepared to fight to see the Community budget increase from the current 1.04%, to 1.27%, as has been approved?

I ask this because if we have the budget that has been approved, then we will have money.

My second question is: what will happen to the outermost regions?

You have not said anything about these regions and they are of concern to me.

Mr President, I want to thank the Commissioner for using the word solidarity in connection with this report.

This is, of course, precisely what cohesion policy and regional policy are about.

I also want just briefly to ask whether the future debate will also cover all other policy areas in the European Union which are important for regional growth - education, research and social policy - so that it is possible to make use of everyone' s ability to get involved and contribute to regional growth.

Mr President, I am the one who should apologise for having gone on too long, most of all to those Members of Parliament who were unable to ask their questions.

I shall, however, remain at your service, as you know, in the weeks and months to come in order to continue this discussion.

Mr Cunha, if you read the report, you will see that we actually say that the CAP, whose objectives are production, export capacity and sufficiency, has not actually become involved in the way we might have hoped in this territorial cohesion policy, particularly because, in the regions likely to benefit from cohesion policy, farm sizes are that much more modest.

I have, therefore, myself, stressed the fact that we should, as I said earlier, improve synergy through the common agricultural policy.

One of the means to do so would perhaps be, in future, to boost the emphasis on the rural development arm of the CAP, which was started in Berlin.

Mrs Darras, I do not believe that we shall need to renegotiate the Financial Perspective in the matter of cohesion policy.

The plans made in Berlin seem to me perfectly adequate.

In anticipation, we even made provision for 2002, and now it is quite clear that no new countries will join in either 2002 or 2003. Sufficient sums were set aside to cope with these accessions, and so I do not think we shall need a new Financial Perspective.

You mention changing the criteria, if necessary.

We might continue to discuss possibilities, Mrs Darras, but I should like to point out that we are not too far off the real situation when we work on the basis of the standard of living, of per capita GDP, because it can be observed that where there is the lowest standard of living there is also the highest rate of unemployment, the worst environmental conditions, and the lowest levels of Internet access.

Thus, in some way, taking a snapshot of the per capita standard of living, we have produced an accurate snapshot of the real state of the regions - and indeed it is no mere accident that my predecessor, Mrs Wulf-Mathies, and all the other Members of Parliament who have given some thought to these questions all agreed on this criterion.

Now, you know we can combine this criterion with other aspects, especially unemployment, but I would like us to retain this criterion as I think it an objective one.

Mr Nogueira, I do not have sufficient time to take part in a debate on globalisation.

I even, as you identified earlier, mentioned the new context of cohesion policy associated with globalisation, which constitutes the risk which Jacques Delors and others clearly identified fifteen years ago, and which impelled them to propose this cohesion policy.

In the same single market, there is a risk that wealth, trade and people will continue to be concentrated in the same locations and that the poorest regions are impoverished and marginalised further.

That risk in the single market is exacerbated in a Europe living in an age of globalisation.

That is why I think we do indeed need a cohesion policy and support for cohesion in future.

Mr Rack, yes, I am willing to look into new methods with you, particularly as far as development of the new Objective 2 policy is concerned.

I wonder, for example, about the sense and usefulness of the Brussels-driven zoning for Objective 2, in which I am required to officially specify, in agreement with the Member States, whether every individual district, community or village is or is not to receive Objective 2 status.

I do not think that all this bureaucracy is particularly useful, and that is why Objective 2 policy, concerning regions other than the most underdeveloped, could be simpler and more decentralised, with instruments subordinated to Community policies or to regional development, the urban areas, mountainous regions, island regions, border regions or cross-sector objectives such as social cohesion and the fight against poverty.

I am perfectly willing to look into developing instruments which are decentralised in terms of their administration within the Member States and which do not convey the impression of excessive bureaucracy that the people of Europe sometimes have.

Mrs Torres Marques, I cannot go any further than I already have on the subject of the Financial Perspective.

I have not forgotten the outermost regions; I even mentioned them in my opening remarks.

There is a specific paragraph on these regions.

As Mr Prodi requested, I do a great deal of work for these seven outermost regions.

This is why, a few weeks ago, the Commission published an important report on adjustments or exceptions in the field of structural aid, and aid for agriculture and fisheries which, overall, have been well received by the authorities in these outermost regions and I think that, pursuant to Article 299 of the Treaty, we must continue to have a special policy for these outermost regions precisely because they are our outermost regions and, as such, our most remote active frontiers in the Indian Ocean, the Atlantic or near the American continent.

Mrs Hedkvist-Petersen, thank you for pointing out the importance of the term 'solidarity' . I also consider it important.

The title that we wanted to give this report, ladies and gentlemen, is "European Unity, solidarity between nations, regional diversity" , and, as you will see when you read it in detail, I was careful to stress - since this was a concern of mine - the need to coordinate Community policies with regional development and cohesion, particularly in terms of research or the social agenda while noting that Member States and national governments will, of course, retain their jurisdiction on social policy.

I am working within the scope of the Community' s current jurisdiction.

The next item is the joint debate on:

the report by Mrs Muscardini (A5-0008/2001) on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy on the common strategy of the European Council of 19 June 2000 on the Mediterrannean region - European Council Declaration on the common strategy on the Mediterranean region [C5-0510/2000 - 2000/2247(COS)], and

the report by Mr Nar (A5-0009/2001) on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy on the communication from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament: to prepare the fourth Meeting of Euro-Mediterannean Foreign Ministers: Reinvigorating the Barcelona Process [COM(2000) 497 - C5 -0630/2000 - 2000/2294(COS)]

Mr President, I would like to thank those Members who, through meetings, discussion and dialogue, have contributed to what we consider to be a step forward in Europe's strategy for the Mediterranean: the Mediterranean as a gateway not just to the Middle East but also to the Atlantic, a cultural as well as economic area, consolidating the South-South dialogue but also the North-South and East-South dialogues at a time when impending enlargement calls us all to assume specific responsibilities.

Development must respect human dignity and the protection of the environment and health.

Economic development must not disregard human rights or mutual respect for differences.

We all realise that Europe needs a new philosophy, namely that in order to be effective, common strategies must be realistic and practicable. Therefore, we must set ourselves clear, achievable targets so that, step by step, progress can be made towards development, security and stability.

On the one hand, a poet would say: "Woe betide the man who does not dare to dream great dreams!" but a statistician would reply: "Woe betide the politician who gets carried away on empty dreams and does not see or resolve the problems which are staring him in the face!"

We have attempted to make our hopes practical and realisable in the short and medium terms.

In other words, we have put forward proposals which will give all the countries of the Mediterranean the same dignity and the same opportunity for development in a new multi-faceted relationship with an increasingly large and more complex Europe, a relationship that will have to fight for its international credibility in the tough competition with the whole of the rest of the industrialised world.

Protecting the environment and health, dignity for workers, safeguarding the quality of products in order to protect the consumer and safeguarding a free - as long as it is fair - market, attentiveness to the specific cultural differences and traditions including architectural styles of each country and registered designation of origin products, a ban to prevent us Europeans from outrageously abusing the partnership relationships and exporting products to our partner countries which we have banned in Europe because they are dangerous, the boost for the development of all the capabilities of our Mediterranean partners, including assistance for placing the thousands and thousands of young people who have studied or trained in Europe in employment, child protection, the fight against the exploitation of minors and modern-day slavery, attentiveness to the situation of working women and, in any case, to the dignity of all human beings are significant steps forward, just as Europe's commitment and endeavours to do all in its power to bring about peace and mutual respect in the Middle East must be substantial and given priority status.

It cannot be denied that, although the successive Summits were a milestone in that they pinpointed a large number of problems, they did not do anything to resolve them.

Indeed, I regret to say that the governments have not implemented the proposals adopted at Barcelona: democracy, the rule of law, transparency, social rights and an internal policy to prevent communities being forced to leave their countries.

A new policy of trilateral trade, safeguarding typical productions, including European productions, condemning and preventing counterfeiting and fraud, food and environmental safety, the development of craft products and the establishment of programmes to fight desertification and facilitate the conversion of non-drinking water into drinking water and the development of tourism are some of the many points which we have discussed.

At this point, I would like to thank the officials of the committee and of the political groups for their work, which was particularly demanding because of the need to meet the earlier deadlines.

The time is now ripe to tackle practicable projects, and practicable projects are those which do not originate from specific preconceptions or concealed motives but from a policy's ability to marry the needs of the citizens with economic and social concerns.

This is why Europe as a whole, not just Mediterranean Europe, to which, as an Italian, I have the honour to belong, must now recognise its strategy on the East and on the South and its commitment to these regions as absolutely essential, and confirm that if healthy, lasting progress is to be achieved, the requirements of the economy must go hand in hand with human dignity.

This text was not written in order to be published as a mere declaration of intent: it was written to be implemented, and for this we place our confidence and our trust in the Commission and the Council, so that their cooperation with the European Parliament becomes practicable and updateable.

Mr President, last November, the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy appointed me as rapporteur on the Commission communication entitled 'Reinvigorating the Barcelona Process' .

This Commission communication serves a dual purpose: to assess the achievements of the Barcelona Process and to put forward recommendations in preparation for the ministerial conference to be held in Marseilles in November 2000.

Before proceeding to discuss the actual substance of the issue, let me first thank my fellow members of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, with whom I had many discussions that were extremely helpful for the final draft of my report.

I should also like to say that I framed this report taking into consideration what has already been achieved in Parliament, and Parliament' s regard for the Mediterranean question, and at this point I would like to pay special tribute to the work carried out by Mr Yannis Sakellariou.

In its text, the Commission once again sets out the three main goals of EU-Mediterranean policy, namely: the creation of an area of peace and stability, the creation of an area of shared prosperity through the progressive establishment of free trade and, finally, the improvement of mutual understanding amongst the peoples of the region and the development of an active civil society.

Mr President, of these three goals, only the establishment of a free-trade area can be deemed to have actually got off the ground.

So I was pleased to hear Commissioner Barnier comment in this vein earlier, since in the midst of profound inequalities, liberalisation alone cannot bring about economic development nor the integration of deeply divided societies.

This is, furthermore, a free-trade area on European terms, as may be illustrated by a single statistic: total transfers from the EU budget to the Mediterranean countries amount to EUR 1 billion per year, whilst those resulting from the Mediterranean countries' trade deficit with the EU amount to EUR 34 million per year.

In other words, the Union' s financial contribution to the Mediterranean countries represents less than one-thirtieth of the advantages which Europe derives from the free-trade area.

As regards the creation of an area of peace and stability, the European Union does not carry much political clout, despite the fact that in the countries of the South there is a genuine demand for Europe.

There are many areas of conflict, which are liable to jeopardise the entire Barcelona Process.

As to the development of an active civil society, it may be said that the people who actually benefit from the MEDA programmes are mainly those who had previous contact with Europe or who have close links with governments.

Civil society has demonstrated a clear lack of interest.

Finally, the programmes for decentralised cooperation, which are supposed to enable representatives of civil society from both sides of the Mediterranean to meet for the purpose of devising joint projects, have been frozen since 1995.

The degree of success is rather modest, then, and the degree of frustration rather high. Many saw the Marseilles conference as a partial failure.

In my view, the grand vision of the Euro-Mediterranean Partnership which was inaugurated in Barcelona in November 1995 has now given way to a negotiating process which lacks any genuine political will.

In my report, I attempt to present a number of proposals intended to overcome this situation.

I shall now introduce the six major areas to focus on.

Firstly, I think that the free-trade area must be set in the context of a proper strategic approach.

Together with our Mediterranean partners, we must lay the foundations of an associate common market, capable of interacting satisfactorily with Europe' s economy, taking local parameters of development in the South into consideration.

We should advocate converting the planned free-trade area into a genuine 'common market' encompassing goods of all kinds.

Secondly, migration must be placed at the very heart of development today.

There will be no real partnership between the two sides of the Mediterranean until the organised movement of people is put on the agenda.

This is why I feel that, in coming years, migration is going to represent a crucial aspect of our relations with these countries.

We need joint management of migration flows, including measures to combat illegal immigration and the mafias which profit from it.

We also need to lay down policies on temporary migration, similar to what the International Labour Organisation is currently proposing, without entitlement to permanent residence.

I also feel that we should introduce a special travel visa for those involved in the Euro-Mediterranean Partnership.

We should also harness immigration to assist development in countries of origin.

Immigrants contribute to the development of the country of origin.

I know that the European Union and the Commission are working hard to achieve this.

I would urge the Commission to go further by financing immigrants' micro-projects.

In this vein, I would also suggest setting up a monitoring centre on migration to study migration flows with a view to presenting proposals to the European Union.

We must also facilitate the enhanced association of the Euro-Mediterranean states that so wish.

Turning to a proposal from Commissioner Patten which I find extremely interesting, the Commissioner said that certain regional projects should be accessible to a variable number of directly interested Member States and Mediterranean partners on the basis of configurations which could vary from one project to another.

I support this approach as I believe it establishes genuine, and genuinely strong, relations between the countries to the north and south of the Mediterranean who wish to go further together.

My fourth point is that we also have to reform the management of the MEDA programme.

The Commission tends to be critical of our Mediterranean partners.

It must, however, be noted that, while it is true that some partner countries have experienced difficulties, particularly because of deficient infrastructures, the under-implementation of MEDA funds is primarily the result of the Commission' s inability to manage these funds and to rely on operators capable of implementing them properly.

The defence of human rights must also be made into something more than a mere statement of principle, for the goal is actually to assist the development of constitutional states in the countries of the southern Mediterranean, and not just to create economic systems which fit into the proposed structural adjustment programmes.

My sixth point is that considerable funding must be allocated.

The deadlock in the Middle East peace process is an obstacle to any sub-regional dynamic, be it economic, social and/or cultural.

I think the Commission should take this situation into account.

In conclusion, I shall say that the organised movement of people, codevelopment and decentralised cooperation are the main concerns behind the report I am presenting today. I think they should also be the main concerns of the Commission.

Mr President, as draftsperson of the opinion of the Committee on Culture, Youth, Education, the Media and Sport on the Barcelona Process, I would like to communicate some of the concerns and suggestions which have been unanimously approved in committee.

Firstly, I wish to draw attention to the need to promote cultural programmes, which I know is not what attention is usually drawn to.

We know that the Euromed Heritage programme has been the most successful of all programmes for cooperation with the Mediterranean.

Furthermore, we believe that culture promotes wealth.

For example, where would Egypt be without its cultural tourism, which has been one of its main links with the world and one of its main sources of wealth?

Culture, therefore, is one of the factors which is most easily accessible, closest to hand, most developed and which has accumulated the most experience in the field of Mediterranean development, which means that it can be closely linked to communication between people and can continue to open doors.

At the same time we wish to draw attention to education.

We believe that if a Mediterranean trade area does not deal with the issue of education, it will become an area of Mediterranean colonisation.

Therefore, the only way that there can be a social scheme capable of being incorporated into the business world and the Western world is through education.

Furthermore, we believe that that is where a genuine and indigenous scheme also can be found for establishing the pillars for future development.

Furthermore, the only way in which we can spread our ideas about human rights is by creating a better trained and better educated population.

We are therefore not talking about clichs, but about reality.

Another point that also concerns us is the way in which the Commission adapts to the philosophy and circumstances of the countries towards which the aid is directed.

I believe that a large part of the failure of the MEDA programme is due to the fact that we are applying a European-scale mentality, which suits Commission projects.

What we need, however, is many small projects.

We need to look to the internal social structures of the countries involved, the universities, the educational institutions, the museums, the cultural field, and society itself, so that we can rely on it for future development.

Mr President, the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy has on several occasions made considerable contributions to the debate on the European Union' s Mediterranean policy and on reinvigorating the 1995 Barcelona Process.

We played a major part in the discussion on the MEDA activity report that I presented on 5 September 2000, which was adopted almost unanimously by Parliament, as was, moreover, the amendment of the MEDA Regulation (MEDA II).

We would have liked the meeting at Feira to refer to the MEDA programme, since it is the main instrument for implementing this policy and will be allocated a financial package of EUR 5.37 billion for the period 2000-2006, excluding funds from the European Investment Bank.

Furthermore, we hope that this budget will be increased, as European Union Mediterranean policy should not have to suffer because of the appropriations that have been legitimately allocated to the Balkans.

All the debates, regardless of the committee in which they are held, whether it be Foreign Affairs, Industry, Agriculture or Culture, or in Parliament, are unanimous in constantly reiterating the same recommendations. As far as we are concerned, we would like to stress, first of all, the need to define a Mediterranean strategy, in conjunction with third countries.

Secondly, the need to develop decentralised cooperation that aims to enable contracts with local authorities and civil society, particularly NGOs, for both cross-border regions and in the South-South context, as well as for regional integration. Thirdly, we should like to highlight the decision of Parliament and the Commission to carry out an annual assessment of the human rights situation in signatory countries.

My fourth point is to stress the urgent need to adopt the Charter for Security and Stability so that we can play a more active role, particularly in restoring peace in the Middle East. We consider it particularly important to encourage local measures and sustainable development, although this was omitted from the Feira Council conclusions, and to carry out progressive evaluation in this area, to implement major programmes on the environment and water, to reinvigorate the Start programme, and for third countries of the Mediterranean region to take part in the Sixth Research Framework Programme of research and technological development.

The Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy gave its unanimous opinion on this range of questions.

Mr President, assuming a driving role in the European Union means implementing a series of guidelines which have thus far existed more on paper than as part of practical action.

We have already committed ourselves to developing a lasting partnership with North Africa, Asia Minor and the Balkan states, but we are pursuing this too slowly.

It is one of the duties of Europe, which has the task of being the driving force of a balanced system of trade, the market, development, growth and economic prosperity.

This is also necessary in order to stem the disturbing migration flows of this last decade, which are a clear indication of the lack of a bilateral cooperation policy.

It is precisely from these last two issues that we must start if we genuinely want to restore the Mediterranean area to its former glory and, above all, to resume our leading role with political dignity.

It is essential for Europe to be at the forefront in this geo-political scenario, using the association agreements as springboards towards the financial instruments granted by the EIB and, in particular, by the MEDA programme.

At the same time, the adoption of the Euro-Mediterranean Charter for Peace and Stability, in which the two sides of the Mediterranean cooperate actively and the bases of which derive from the rights of individuals, of the family unit, of cultural diversity and of religious dialogue, cannot be put off any longer.

In fact, the issue of immigration, which is one of the greatest challenges, must be tackled in respect for cultural and historical differences and itself become a means of development.

It cannot be denied that the European labour requirements are constantly increasing, but, at the same time, we must put an end to illegal immigration and the numerous existing cases of illegal trafficking.

Failure to establish an effective, solid barrier blocking all that works against legality or the laws of democracy can only exacerbate division, annoyance and even violence once again, which would cancel out all the effort put in and undo any progress made in dialogue thus far.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, the Swedish Presidency sees the EU' s Mediterranean cooperation as an important and pressing issue.

I therefore listened with great interest to Mrs Muscardini' s and Mr Nar' s presentations of their reports.

It is gratifying to note that criticisms made in both reports relate to the Swedish Presidency' s main priorities.

In political terms, the presidency wishes to promote democracy and human rights, social and economic progress and progress on environmental matters and, in addition, equality and the struggle against various forms of discrimination.

In the economic and financial sphere, we want to work towards an economic and financial partnership which is both dynamic and has a human face.

The concept of prosperity includes both economic growth and social equilibrium.

To date, no conference of trade ministers has been held within the Barcelona Process, in spite of the fact that trade and the economy form one of the three pillars of Barcelona cooperation.

The presidency is therefore going to arrange a meeting involving the 27 countries' trade ministers.

The aim is to give a dynamic edge to the most important aspects of trade covered by the Barcelona Process and to agree upon the guidelines for continued work.

The need for regional integration is another important issue which should be discussed.

Other priority sectors include rules of origin, accumulation, harmonisation measures, norms and standards and intellectual property protection.

In this context, I also wish to point out that the presidency shares the view that agricultural products ought not to be excluded from the free-trade discussions.

It is also important to encourage and support trade and cooperation between the partner countries themselves.

This is a neglected area in which a great deal must and can be done.

More than five years have gone by since the Barcelona Process was embarked upon.

A lot has been achieved, but it has not been possible to implement many of the plans.

To some extent, the way matters stand in the peace process has restricted the potential for progress, but other factors too have had a part to play.

We are convinced that a good deal can and should be done to give more impetus to Mediterranean cooperation and to make everyone involved feel that they own more of the process.

I shall therefore be listening with great interest to today' s debate, which I am convinced will make a valuable contribution to strengthening the EU' s Mediterranean cooperation.

Mr President, I would like to start by thanking the two rapporteurs, Mrs Muscardini and Mr Nar, who have produced sound, high-quality reports on the future of the Mediterranean policy.

I feel that a boost needs to be given to the political, cultural and economic aspects of the Mediterranean policy: because we must increasingly consolidate democracy and the parliamentary system, because we must expand the borders of the rule of law, because we need to realise the importance of protecting human rights, because we need cultural exchange promoting mutual awareness of societies, particularly where Islamic communities are concerned, because we need to create multiethnic, multiracial, multireligious and multicultural societies and therefore reassert the principle of respect for minority cultures as part and parcel of democracies and emphasise the importance of peace in the daily lives of the citizens of the southern side of the Mediterranean, thereby excluding from the cultural process all radical or fundamentalist behaviour and all hate, which leads to conflict, massacre and war.

Moreover, commercial interexchange is important for Europe, and it is also important to be able to provide and guarantee vocational training and adequate financial instruments, and also support and advice in respect of the currencies of these countries, for, apart from anything else, the free-trade area will then have to become a euro zone.

However, I feel that the European Union needs to do an about-turn for, in my opinion, the current line is to withdraw from the expected prospects and commitments.

The cutback in the MEDA programme, for reasons which I see as excuses, and delays in the partnership processes are alarming.

Declarations of principles have been followed not by action but by delays in action.

We must prove wrong the theory that enlargement means a decline in interest in the Mediterranean.

We call for decisive reversal of the trend; we also call for resolute commitment to the Mediterranean peace process between Israelis and Palestinians, and not just between these two peoples but in the entire area, to tackle the problems of the Lebanon, Syria, Iraq and Iran, so that all this can bring peace and tranquillity to that region of the world.

Let us therefore make our Mediterranean a sea of peace - for it used to be a sea of culture - where children, women and citizens can trade and move freely throughout the area.

Mr President, I too would like to thank the rapporteurs and point out that this debate has brought progress in Parliament's position on the issue of the Mediterranean policy, progress which is extremely important because, apart from anything else, over and above the differences between political groups, I can see that we have common ground on this matter which adds to our strength and the strength of the European institutions.

The Union's Euro-Mediterranean strategy is just as important as its strategy on enlargement to include the countries of Central and Eastern Europe, but we have outlined a path to follow for enlargement whereas we are still searching for a strategy for the Mediterranean policy, even though we have the partnership established by Barcelona behind us and despite the region's numerous problems, starting with the continual conflict.

I will not dwell on this as the matter will be discussed later on when Mr Solana is here.

For now, I just want to say that we call for a more active, more substantial role to be played by the European governments, giving the High Representative the power to develop a policy which is not in conflict with or an alternative to the policy of the United States, but is much more substantial than the strategy currently employed by Europe with regard to the partners, whose job, I regret to say, we cannot do for them.

We must therefore always bear in mind that the agreement must be based, first and foremost, on understanding and dialogue between the Palestinians and Israelis.

On the other hand, we cannot lose sight of other areas of conflict such as the Western Sahara.

We must never forget that the United Nations exists but that, within that framework, there is room for a European initiative, and my opinion is that, at the moment, there is room for a European initiative in the Western Sahara issue and that we could put an end to this last colonial battle.

On the subject of the partnership, I feel that we should tackle the more recent aspects, to which we invite the Commission and the Council to attach more importance than we have here today.

I would like to focus on human rights and the rule of law.

The Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union represented a considerable step forwards: that is, we acknowledge that the social and individual rights of all people are recognised on Union territory.

This places us in a position where we can have dialogue with these countries, tackling the question of a Euro-Mediterranean citizenship where human rights issues are not a question of us interfering in their affairs but of the common need to establish values which are at the basis of the kind of peaceful coexistence we want.

Similarly, with regard to immigration, I would argue that it is in both our and their interest to fight illegal immigration and therefore establish a European-scale policy.

With regard to agriculture, I would point out to the Swedish Presidency that it is very easy to say that we are going to open up agriculture to free trade as well.

You must realise, gentlemen, that, even now, when they are subject to duties, our products are already competitive with local products on the markets of those countries: let us therefore take care for liberalisation could destroy a sector which is of vital importance for some countries.

Our Moroccan friends remind us that agriculture means keeping people in the countryside, maintaining employment and protecting the environment.

Let us therefore avoid superficiality and undue haste in developing strategies on sectors where we need to progress in a partnership which does not harm these countries.

Mr President, I would firstly like to offer our thanks for the work carried out by Mrs Muscardini and Mr Nar and for their receptiveness to our proposals, and I would also like to say that our group supports both reports.

More specifically, I would like to highlight some positive aspects which have been introduced, particularly in the field of human rights, and more especially an amendment from our group which asks for condemnation of the death penalty and a moratorium on pending executions.

It would be cause for great hope if the moratorium were to take effect immediately.

On a different issue, I would also like to express our confidence in the impetus that the amendments provide in the regional and local field and to civil society, especially to private investment as a genuine driving force for development, over and above state aid and European aid at the highest level.

I will not go into any more detail, because I believe that the main points have been made clear by Mrs Muscardini and Mr Nar in their speeches.

However, I would like to make two observations in relation to the debates which we have held in committee and in our group.

One of these concerns political priorities and the other concerns the coherence of our actions.

We do not all believe that we have to set the priority of enlargement towards the East against the priority of the Mediterranean.

I also believe that the President-in-Office of the Council, Mrs Lindh, made this clear the other day in committee.

They are two real priorities but they are different.

Enlargement is an operational priority for which we have set objectives, we know where we are going and we know what we want and, in reality, there are no alternative strategic options.

On the other hand, Mediterranean policy is a strategic priority, in which we do not know where we are going or, to be more precise, we are moving inexorably towards a place to which we do not want to go.

The foreseeable change in income, bearing in mind current demography and economic growth, indicates that our average per capita income will rise and the average per capita income in North Africa will decrease and, unless this is prevented, the problems we all envisage, and which there is no need to mention, will increase.

We know what will happen, but we do not know how to prevent it, although we want to prevent it at all costs.

Let us not, therefore, set political priorities against one another.

My other point concerns the coherence of our actions, because, in order to get results, we must be more coherent.

Clearly, we need will and we need resources, but, in fact, resources are not being used; and this means that there is insufficient capacity for management on our part, and there is insufficient capacity for absorption on the part of the receiving countries.

More is requested and then is not used.

Therefore, somebody should ask 'why do we not readjust the figures?'

But what we really need is a budget and it must be used.

For all these reasons I believe that we need conviction as well as the capacity for absorption.

I hope that these reports will help us to find the correct method, but quite honestly I am not convinced they will.

Mr President, I am going to focus on an aspect of the common strategy for the Mediterranean region which is not being taken into account in all respects: the South-South dialogue, which is an important driving force within the strategy for relations between the European Union and the Maghreb countries.

The creation of centralised authorities and mechanisms which thoroughly monitor the most pressing problems is essential.

The management of projects on specific points and on common aspects is a need which has become a real one in relation to cases in which, on a private level, citizens and cities from both sides of the Straits of Gibraltar have been cooperating with wonderful results and without Community patronage.

For the purposes of this local management, it would be necessary to create a new body which, as a decentralised and permanent mechanism, would bring together all the institutional, political and social leaders of these territories which are so close and yet so far away.

The 14 kilometres which separate the European Union from the Maghreb are real, but let us ensure that this does not become an insuperable distance which prevents the closest possible cooperation.

Immigration, its causes and consequences - which are sometimes terrible and irreparable - business, agricultural and fishing exchanges, social, technical, educational and university exchanges, aspects of common development, such as those in the energy sector, and the essential democratising political aspects which the European Union must promote in those countries all require the creation of new mechanisms and instruments which, in a decentralised fashion, would respond to these needs, which are local but which have widespread repercussions.

Mr President, although the Barcelona Process raised hopes and expectations, today we must register disappointment.

What yesterday were laudable ambitions, such as calls for an area of shared prosperity, for a balancing of North and South, a commitment to enhancing peace and stability, are now urgent issues.

While we all see the need to relaunch the partnership, there is, however, a divergence in the options we favour.

The future of the very concept of a partnership lies not in adjusting the needs of these populations to the market forces at work in the North and to our personal ambitions, but instead in ensuring their own development and resolving their urgent issues.

I believe, therefore, that Europe should adopt some approach other than simply supporting these countries in establishing the free-trade area that Europe was to set up.

Enabling cooperation agreements, particularly through public services, seeking other financial resources, by introducing a Tobin-style tax, for example, and reducing or even writing off debt would give real substance to a fair and useful partnership.

This approach would favour North-South relations without the element of domination.

The same applies to human rights.

Our associations with countries in the Mediterranean region can only be built on trust. We are, therefore, extremely concerned about human rights violations in Tunisia, for example, because the agreements signed by both parties oblige them to respect human rights.

The same applies to the European Union' s respect for the rights of all citizens.

I am thinking here of the need for a more integrated and more generous approach to migration.

It is inhuman and ineffective to advocate the free movement of goods and capital but not of people.

Experience shows that closing borders serves only to force immigrants with no identity papers and no rights into the hands of smugglers and other unscrupulous dealers.

How can we speak of managing immigration in a more humane manner, how can we hope and pray for further integration, if we do not question its foundations?

We must safeguard the freedom of movement of persons and equality in social, economic, cultural and political rights.

To sum up, in order to create an area of peace in the Middle East, the European Union needs to take much more direct and resolute action.

From now on, the United Nations resolutions must be applied in full, Israel must respect its commitments and we must recognise the Palestinians' legitimate right to their own state.

The same problem - I am about to finish - can be seen in the Western Sahara, where there is a risk that armed conflict will be resumed.

Despite all this, the European Union has everything to gain by bringing together all parties, such as associations, local authorities and unions, who are already establishing a different form of partnership.

Mr President, Mrs Muscardini' s report on Mediterranean policy, or what claims to be a report on this subject, stands out, first of all, for one simple reason but one that is always disregarded in this Chamber.

At long last, it puts the problem of common foreign policy back in its natural context, by which I mean the geographical context, i.e. physical space, the confrontation of land and sea, the grouping of nations in terms of their own areas of activity, their own bonds and their own community of interests, even if these are focused away from those of the mythical Europe, a continent so intangible that it does not have any real borders.

So this report puts foreign policy back into context.

As I mentioned, geographical position is the repository or sanctuary, if you prefer, or, in other words, the narrative which enables us to read, understand and hence respect the invariable political factors that are dictated by geography.

This shows, moreover, just how problematic, if not, as we might more accurately say, impossible, it is to implement a common foreign policy through pathetic puppets such as Solana.

Yet, the way that political Europe currently operates automatically rules out the geo-political approach since, as there is no definition of what constitutes Europe' s common interest - by which I mean a European res publica - it still favours, after all the usual free-for-alls, the law of the jungle, allowing the strongest at any given time to make the rest of the 15 support its strategic choices, even if it has to shove them down their throats.

We therefore come to understand that, in this game, the upper hand on Mediterranean policy, as well as on many other subjects, is held by northern Europe - i.e. Great Britain plus Germany and its age-old allies. That is why priority has clearly been given to enlargement to the north and to the east including the Balkans, where we are paying the price of German policy, while our friends in the Mediterranean region bear the costs of every adjustment.

Therefore, the rapporteur and my good friend, Mr Nar, are both justified in denouncing Europe' s lack of commitment to the Mediterranean region and Middle Eastern affairs.

I would just like to add that all the Latin countries may sooner or later reject, perhaps even violently reject the prospect of a future which relegates them to the sidelines of a group over which they no longer have any influence.

Even today, we believe that it is the duty of the southern European nations, or rather the northern Mediterranean nations, to work together with the southern Mediterranean countries, firstly, the three Maghreb countries, Morocco, Algeria and Tunisia, to create this area of solidarity, which is a part of our history and geography and that is, moreover, of importance to us in the century that is just beginning.

Mr President, the two reports which we are debating today have at least one thing in common: they contain a whole raft of unfulfillable wishes and desires with regard to the Mediterranean region.

Financially, we simply lack the resources to do an awful lot and what is more, the European Union' s external relations have been such that we cannot afford to be overly confident.

It is high time we established priorities, thus allowing us to do the things we do outside the Union well.

Recent statements made by Mr Solana confirm the need to prioritise.

He referred to the Union' s strategy documents, including those with regard to the Mediterranean countries, as purely bureaucratic exercises.

Ideas on paper hardly ever turn into reality in practice.

However, the endless recitals and paragraphs in the documents before us do raise expectations among our partners, expectations which we cannot possibly fulfil, because we also have other responsibilities.

Both reports are disparaging about those other responsibilities.

According to the rapporteurs, our relationship with candidate countries, in particular, has led to the neglect of the southern countries, and that must now be put right.

However, I do not agree with this line of thought.

Enlargement deserves all our attention in the near future.

If we want to do this properly, we will have our hands full.

There is therefore certainly no chance of spending as much money on our southerly neighbours, certainly not if we bear in mind how reluctant Member States are to put more money into the Union' s fund.

Additionally, both reports take an optimistic view of the Union' s influence in the political arena.

We should not be under any illusions, particularly when it comes to the role which the European Union could play in the Middle-East peace process.

I regret that both reports run the risk of not being taken seriously due to unrealistic goals.

Indeed, the European Union could very well be of significance, especially in the economic sense, but also when it comes to the problem of refugees.

We should only concern ourselves with matters where the European Union can provide added value and can really be of significance.

Being modest as to in our abilities will enhance the quality of the European Union' s external relations.

Mr President, as the representative of a country that once had direct access to the Mediterranean, I would like to convey my express support for fostering better relations between the EU and the Mediterranean region, and accordingly, for this report.

It is not just a political, but also a historical commitment we must make.

Needless to say, the EU' s activities with regard to securing peace in the Mediterranean, especially in relation to the centre of conflict in the Middle East, constitute a special responsibility, which, sadly, the representatives and members of the European Union, and particularly their foreign policy representatives, have been unequal to in the past.

However, the pursuit of an autonomous and active European peace policy must remain one of the EU' s goals.

That said, there are also other reasons besides the security aspects, as to why it is important for the EU to play a more active role in the Mediterranean region.

The EU cannot, nor should it, spare any expense in the social and cultural spheres, in supporting democratic developments, in intervening in the event of human rights violations, in promoting economic development, and in improving dialogue and cooperation in as many areas as possible, if it wants to see discernible progress.

If we are to avoid all these proposals, as detailed in the report, remaining no more than declarations of intent, we will need to work on the list of priorities, which has also been called for in this House, and which sets out in precise terms the order in which these intentions are to be carried out and the financing thereof.

Incidentally, my tone was not one of regret when I mentioned our former access to the Mediterranean.

Mr President, as we can deduce from the speeches by the rapporteurs, and at this stage it is hardly necessary to repeat it, the Mediterranean region must be one of the European Union' s highest priorities, because the problems of the southern Mediterranean - the political upheavals, the economic stagnation, the population growth - affect us, directly or indirectly, as Europeans.

Examples of this are the migration flows in our direction, the deterioration of our environment and the dangers presented to our society by radical fundamentalism.

In summary, balance on our southern border is essential to our stability.

It is therefore important that we share the view that the Union' s natural desire for enlargement towards Central and Eastern Europe must not lead to a deterioration of its policy towards the Mediterranean.

Therefore, while in 1995 my group supported and strongly promoted the open process in Barcelona which, at last, after almost 40 years, drew up a global strategy for the Community countries in relation to the Mediterranean countries, it now supports the objective contained in the reports which we are debating today to strengthen the Barcelona Process.

In particular, in relation to Mr Nar' s report, we have tried to improve it in committee by means of various contributions and I would like to thank the rapporteur for being receptive towards them.

We have insisted on the importance of strengthening interparliamentary dialogue, which must be consolidated as one of the key elements in boosting the Barcelona Process.

We would like to point out that we should promote the liberalisation of the economic systems of our Mediterranean partners and carry out the structural changes necessary to compete in more open markets.

We have proposed the creation of a monitoring centre for migration flows, responsible amongst other things for creating mechanisms to combat, in a coordinated fashion, the mafias which profit from illegal immigration.

We would like to point out that relations between the European Union and the Mediterranean countries are based on a global strategy, one of the elements of which is undoubtedly fishing, and therefore we trust that the Moroccan Government will adopt an attitude which reflects the current urgency in the negotiations which are taking place.

Finally we would like to point out to the Commission that, within the framework of the reforms taking place in its external service, the human resources dedicated to the Mediterranean association need to be reinforced, a specific structure needs to be established in the Commission, and progress needs to be made on the devolution and decentralisation of aid.

In summary, my group is in favour of the European Union playing a broader role in the Mediterranean and we hope that human and material resources are provided that are a match for the challenges facing us.

Mr President, the idea that the Mediterranean is the number one priority of European Union external policy stems from the conviction that, although the Mediterranean is no longer the centre of the world, each and every one of the great contradictions and challenges of the twenty-first century are concentrated there.

The Mediterranean provides a dramatic example of the issue of war and peace.

The issue of North-South relations is spectacularly alive in the Mediterranean.

The very fashionable issue of the clash of cultures or dialogue between cultures is symbolised by the Mediterranean.

The emergence of xenophobia and racism, or tolerance and multiculturalism, is most intensely illustrated in the Mediterranean.

The question of democracy and human rights or authoritarianism is alive in the Mediterranean and will continue to be so in the coming years.

The issue of regional responses to the challenges of globalisation is being raised in the Mediterranean.

The issue of women' s emancipation or repression is also at its most intense in the Mediterranean region.

There is no need to insist therefore that this is our fundamental priority, because the prospects for its future remain completely open, while enlargement will take time, it will have its costs and its problems, but the only reasonable outcome that anyone can imagine is that it will eventually take place.

In the Mediterranean, a 'sandbelt' or a 'slumbelt' may be created in the twenty-first century, and both issues are dramatically highlighted.

The two contributions presented here today, in the European Parliament, are contributions to the relaunch of the Euro-Mediterranean policy.

I believe that Mr Patten and Mr Solana would do very well to read these reports, and in particular, the report by my friend and teacher, Sami Nar, because it makes a very coherent and well put together list of themes, which calls for a political proposal.

This policy was well defined in Barcelona five years ago but today it needs not only a new expression of will but also the ability to implement initiatives.

We must achieve - above all in the Mediterranean, and we Mediterraneans know this - something very important: things need to be explained.

Nevertheless, if anything is lacking today, it is symbolic specific action, a strong signal that the Union, the Council, the Commission and Parliament, are truly interested in this relaunch, which goes beyond words and speeches.

In this regard, I would like to draw attention to an aspect of Sami Nar' s report: the need to create strong initiatives in the fields of South-South trade and for subregional integration or integration in the southern Mediterranean region.

We need something strong. I do not know exactly what it may be, but it must truly win over public opinion in the South so that people can see that the European Union clearly has, as well as a well drawn-up policy, the will to create banking and financial instruments, railways that lead to subregional integration in the South or networks of roads and motorways.

This message must make a genuine contribution to this renewal of the will for integration which, above all in the Maghreb, is a cause for hope at the moment and which must count on an ambitious and also generous contribution from the Union.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I certainly endorse the line taken by Mrs Muscardini and Mr Nar's reports, and their content, but there is a need to focus on certain factors which are not dealt with.

It is important to start from this consideration: the European Union's strategy for the Mediterranean, developed at Feira, in addition to failing to provide practical recommendations, does not take into account certain developments which have taken place in recent years in the Mediterranean Basin. After centuries of struggling and marginalisation it has resumed a key position in world trade again, which, after the discovery of America, had been dominated by the Atlantic routes.

Thanks also to the new production boost in Asia, Europe now trades more with Asia than with America.

For these trade routes between America and Asia, the Mediterranean provides a valuable centre for unloading goods for northern Europe, which means that carriers do not have to make detours.

This is thus a new development which the European Union cannot ignore and which has already yielded the first, astonishing results.

And it is towards this integrated, well-structured system that we must endeavour to direct our funds, a system which is already equipped with transport intermodality in the form of aircraft, railways and motorways.

Without this practical step, the funds will frequently not be exploited, as is the case at present.

Mr President, I believe that the great merit of these reports is that they tone down the optimism of the Commission' s communication regarding what it calls the progress made since Barcelona, and that they open the way to ambitious and fairer paths for the partnership to take.

What were the objectives of that partnership? They are, once again, the creation of an area of peace, the improvement of mutual understanding amongst the peoples of the region and the creation of an area of shared prosperity.

The first two goals have not been achieved, as Mr Nar has said.

We have not created an area of shared prosperity either, only the very beginnings of a free-trade area involving some of the countries, established on European terms, because the main beneficiaries of these are the industrial products in which we have a competitive advantage.

I am continually surprised, moreover, that those who are the quickest to call for an extension of a free-trade area, imposing the liberal model on terms that are extremely unfavourable for the countries of the South, are also the first to speak of interference, even neo-colonialism, with regard to human rights issues.

In Barcelona, the vital contribution of civil society to the development of partnerships was recognised for the first time in a text to which the European Union and 15 countries of the southern Mediterranean subscribed.

We must admit that we have failed spectacularly on this issue.

We have been unable to support the dynamic efforts of citizens and democratic projects, in the face of the hard line adopted by most governments, but is this from lack of any real will to do so?

How can we use the association agreements and the MEDA programme to support them?

What sort of effective strategy and what set of relevant measures can we create in order to avoid this schizoid situation where what we say and what we do are two quite different things?

Do we really wish to reinvigorate the Barcelona Process, or would we rather condemn ourselves to the Europe of the Fifteen' s continuing to pursue relations in the same traditional mould as some self-styled 'realistic' states?

Mr President, the European Union's policy towards the countries of the Mediterranean is a far cry from the Barcelona Process and an even farther cry from the real needs of the people in these countries.

As Mr Nar rightly said, the European Union only appears to be interested in the Mediterranean for reasons of security and only intervenes economically in order to gain a foothold on the markets in the southern countries.

The new common strategy goes even further in the same direction; it even tries to involve the Mediterranean countries in the aggressive CFSP.

Euro-Mediterranean collaboration is the main vehicle for interference in the internal affairs of the Mediterranean countries, and, ostensibly, all this is being done in the name of common prosperity, democracy, the rule of law and human rights.

At the same time, the European Union remains resolutely indifferent to the tragedy of the Palestinian people and the murder of Palestinians by the state of Israel on a daily basis.

The Communist Party of Greece defends collaboration between people on equal terms and without one country's interfering in the internal affairs of another.

In particular, we would point out that it is the developed capitalist countries which are responsible for the current state of the underdeveloped countries.

That is yet another reason why the developed countries are duty bound to help these countries develop their productive base and raise the standard of living of their inhabitants.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I certainly greatly welcomed Mr Nar's report, which does not contain any fabrication but gives an unbiased description of a problem which needs to be resolved, first and foremost at political level, and also Mrs Muscardini's report, which is in-depth and gives just as true a picture.

It is, of course, no longer necessary to remind the House of the role, the function and the importance of the Mediterranean in the very origins of European culture and the way that it is both the cradle and the vehicle of our civilisation.

However, we cannot ignore the fact that, thus far, our joint action in this major geographical area has not been effective and has certainly not been exhaustive.

Poorly managed programmes, maladministration, even a certain lack of clear thinking and political timeliness have prevented us from making what is - I am sure - the will of our institutions a practical reality, that is from achieving the three objectives focused on at Barcelona: an area of peace and stability, an area of shared prosperity through free trade and greater understanding between peoples.

As a Member of the Committee on Budgets, I can only hope that the Commission will be willing to change the way it runs the MEDA programme and the very structure of the programme, in the manner indicated by Mr Bourlanges, that is, basing its approach on radical streamlining of the cycle of procedures, greater recourse to macrofinancial support, and less complex commitology.

The Commission, which is already presenting the initial draft budget, also needs to endeavour to be more transparent by producing an annual document highlighting the expenditure commitments which can be made for each country.

This is an area we must tackle if we genuinely want to implement our policy.

Mr President, the Barcelona Process is a splendid idea, only strictly speaking it is 2000 years overdue.

A system based on partnership with the same rights and obligations is supposed to emerge from a colonial and a post-colonial system.

Seen from a historical perspective, the ruling structures were always constructed in such a way as to produce a North-South divide, and now it is only right that Europe, whose countries - or rather, certain European States from within this system - were almost always the beneficiaries, should also take responsibility for rapprochement and parity, and should promote these aspects too.

The goal of the Barcelona Process is undisputed.

Its success depends not only on formal negotiated outcomes, but also on the extent to which we are able to dispel the prejudices we ourselves harbour towards the Mediterranean States and their inhabitants.

There can be no doubt that the realisation of the Barcelona objectives will prove decisive to a peace strategy of the twenty-first century.

Equally, it is important to ensure that no Mediterranean country is excluded.

Libya, the country that lies almost exactly at the heart of the Mediterranean States, goes unmentioned in the Barcelona paper.

The process of rapprochement will not work unless the EU endeavours to invite Libya to take part in it.

Mr President, Commissioner, we are all familiar with the catalogue of problems affecting the Euro-Mediterranean region and their causes: they are basically the same as in 1995 when the Barcelona Process was launched.

They have already been mentioned in the debate: from illegal immigration to droughts, from external debt to the failure to respect human rights, and terrorism, which ruthlessly destroys the lives of innocent human beings and families, as we are seeing in Spain, in Algeria and in the Middle East itself.

Today more than ever we must make the statement that only cooperation, dialogue, economic and cultural exchanges, solidarity and mutual understanding can turn the two sides of the Mediterranean into a prosperous and peaceful area.

Neither the European Union nor the Maghreb or Mashreq countries can afford not to take advantage of the human and cultural resources that enrich the region.

The problem is that we are not doing that properly.

The association agreements are dead letters in many respects.

The financial instruments are not being used as they should and the political, economic and social development of those countries is not keeping up with the pace of horizontal cooperation, which is very necessary, nor with the modernity required today by a world which, technologically speaking, is taking giant steps forward.

It is time to move from contemplation to action, to demand performance and effectiveness in the efforts to implement the strategy which has been drawn up and, in this respect, I would like to emphasise the demand for human resources to be strengthened, as indicated by Mr Galeote.

Mr President, today we are debating two reports which are political reports par excellence and with which I fully concur.

That being the case, instead of elaborating on these two reports, I should like to say a few words to corroborate the arguments behind them.

A few months ago, we had a entire debate because the President of the Commission, Mr Prodi, said that European history dates from the time of Charlemagne.

The very name Europe which, as Europeans, we all bear, derives from the name Europa, the daughter of Libya and Poseidon, the God of the Sea.

Europa was Zeus's wife, the mother of Minos, Sarpedon and Radamanthe.

Why am I telling you all this?

Because mythology itself, which is a narrative record of history, highlights the relations which exist between Europe and North Africa.

The Mediterranean is, to all intents and purposes, the only European sea, and as long as we, in our plans and policies, look down on the other side of the Mediterranean from on high, then we shall get nowhere.

We need to get a few things straight.

If, in the twenty-first century, we try and base policies on the attempt by certain European countries to find traces of the recent colonialism to lean on then, politically, Europe will get nowhere.

We must realise that the starting point for today's debate, based on the two reports, based on the decisions taken in Barcelona, is to see the other side of the Mediterranean as part of Europe.

The European Union itself must take initiatives - development, cultural and, most importantly, peace initiatives - so that the two sides of Europe can stand opposite each other without our again hearing echoes of "Hannibal ante portas" or "Delenda est Carthago" or a modern version of Scipio.

There are Europeans on the other side of the Mediterranean and we would do well to remember that.

Mr President, the Barcelona Process was not lacking in good intentions or financial resources.

Despite this, the outcome was meagre, which is very disappointing.

There was too much gesture politics going on and too little capacity to carry out the plans.

Three quarters of the committed funding never left the kitty.

Instead of a reduction in the means, this will now lead to an increase, which is a little bizarre, to say the least.

It makes no sense to budget for even higher amounts if the absorption capacity remains restricted and the Commission delegations are understaffed.

It would be far more preferable if the European Union were to show its solidarity with the Mediterranean countries by opening up its markets more, not only for products from industry, but also for those from agriculture and horticulture.

We have a very long way to go before a free-trade area is established.

The economies of the partner countries are still very vulnerable.

Their mutual trade is still being restricted and has protectionism written all over it.

Additionally, the political distrust which exists between the partners must first be dispelled.

The Barcelona Process can only succeed if the Mediterranean partners continue to work on democratisation.

The human rights clauses in the Association Agreements should not remain hollow phrases.

Any violations should be penalised by a drop in financial support.

But if we reduce the amounts which cannot be spent anyway, then this will not make any impact whatsoever.

We must bring our ambitions into line with the degree to which they can be implemented.

The question is whether the report' s many sound wishes can all be realised at the same time.

It is better to do one thing which is slightly inferior than to do a great deal of things which are downright inferior.

Fine words and fine budgets are not enough to guarantee stability and welfare.

It is about the willingness to carry out true political reform, and this is what the Barcelona Process still lacks.

Mr President, the Mediterranean is the cradle of European civilisation.

The legacy of ancient Egypt, Greece and Rome shaped our culture, our literature, our very understanding of the common European heritage.

Around the Mediterranean the three monotheistic religions - Judaism, Christianity, Islam - were founded and fostered and spread throughout the known world.

Our debt to the Mediterranean is not only historical and cultural, it informs our common interest today in enlargement.

It is true that covers mainly countries from Central and Eastern Europe, but the candidate countries include the two famous Mediterranean island peoples: the Maltese and the Cypriots.

I very much hope that the Mediterranean programme and the enlargement process may be seen as complementary and not conflicting.

It is suitable that today the presidency should be manned by Mr Danielsson from Nordic Europe.

An example of North-South solidarity was when Prime Minister Aznar attended the Gdansk commemoration celebrating the foundation of the Solidarnosc movement.

I hope that improved relations between the EU and North Africa may result from the Mediterranean programme.

Today we wait for the outcome of the Lockerbie trial from a Scottish court in the Netherlands, but I understand it is the intention of the British to foster, in future, better diplomatic and other relations with, for example, Libya.

I have a question for the Council.

Could Mr Danielsson confirm that the EU' s Mediterranean programme is coordinated with the enlargement process to which the presidency attaches so much importance?

I wonder if it might be possible for the Commissioner in his reply to dwell on the criticisms of underspending sometimes levelled at the MEDA programme.

Is it the case that the Commission stands ready when necessary to give administrative support in the formulation of suitable programmes, as they did in the past when I wrote a report on the Alfama and Mouraria areas of Lisbon?

Is it the case that, if there were to be underspending, the money could be relocated?

Finally, concerning paragraph 54 of the Nar report, could the Commissioner also confirm that the two Mediterranean candidate countries might be able to participate in the Euromed Heritage programme.

Commissioner, last November, you yourself said in the French press that the objective of the Barcelona Process was both simple and ambitious, i.e. an area at peace, enjoying shared prosperity, promoting the emergence of civil society while respecting human rights and ensuring the mutual understanding of different civilisations.

These three points should guide us in our relations with our Mediterranean partners.

It was in this spirit that the Group of the Party of European Socialists collaborated with the rapporteurs, Mrs Morgantini and our friend, Mr Nar.

For we must now set priorities that have genuine measurable objectives and we must allocate adequate resources to achieving them.

We know that these priorities are, first of all, to make progress along the difficult road that is the Charter for Peace and Stability.

The French Presidency tried to do this against an extremely complicated background and the Swedish Presidency, I am sure, will continue along this route.

We would hope so and we shall all keep an eye on this.

The Barcelona Process should not be held hostage to the Middle East peace process.

Quite the opposite; the continuing tensions and the state of war between the Israeli and Palestinian people serve only to highlight the current need to improve dialogue between the countries bordering the Mediterranean.

We should also step up the negotiation, ratification and implementation of the association agreements, since this contract formalises the commitments of both parties and ensures an effective partnership. We are delighted to learn that an agreement has just been signed with Egypt.

Furthermore, we cannot continue investing just one euro in the South for every 10 we invest in the East.

This imbalance becomes more explosive with every passing day.

Firstly, of course, we must bring the reform of the MEDA financial instrument to a successful conclusion so as to improve the quality and speed of its implementation.

Finally, we call for decentralised cooperation to be relaunched on new bases, so that we can fulfil the hopes and respond to the profusion of initiatives from civil society, both European and Mediterranean, because the partnership will be worth nothing if it is not a partnership of peoples.

Indeed, I was interested to note that the Swedish Presidency intends to focus on the cultural, social and human aspects of the Mediterranean partnership.

Commissioner, our relationship with the South needs the input of more than just words and political symbols.

Our partners are expecting practical steps to be taken, as Mr Nar stressed in his report, which I thought was particularly valuable.

Mr President, only a year ago, the eastwards enlargement policy was considered to be a possible line of development for Europe.

Today, it is undeniably a fundamental part of European policy.

I hope that the same will become true of Mediterranean policy as of today, not only because the Middle East is one of the most insecure areas on our borders or because the southern side of the Mediterranean is the greatest source of migration towards Europe, but also, I am glad to say, because, as President Prodi recently stated, having already discovered America we have now discovered Asia, and the Mediterranean has resumed its key position in world trade and exchange which must be exploited on both northern and southern sides.

In my opinion, if this is true the performance of the MEDA programme cannot be taken as the benchmark, although I am convinced that careful evaluation of its results would shed a different light on things, but there are three lines to be explored: firstly, increasing mutual understanding through decentralised cooperation, which can be strongly encouraged; secondly, a training programme for the ruling classes of the Mediterranean, which Europe must involve in order to guarantee itself a better future; thirdly, defining sustainable sea transport policies in the Mediterranean, which will become a central point either of danger or of major development for both northern and southern sides of the Basin.

Mr President, we all stressed, both today and yesterday, the importance that we attach to Mediterranean policy and to the need to urgently reinvigorate the Barcelona Process, which is all too often disregarded.

The past year has not lived up to these expectations.

Admittedly, it was possible to hold another Euro-Mediterranean conference during the French Presidency, but this meeting produced few decisions and, above all, no genuine strategy.

Furthermore, I believe that it is time to give our Mediterranean strategy a firm foundation and to dissociate it from the vicissitudes of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.

I sincerely hope that the European Union will achieve its goal of strengthening economic, political and cultural ties with the countries of the Mediterranean Basin.

We shall soon be discussing the partnership agreement between the European Union and Egypt. I am delighted that this agreement was finally signed last week.

As the rapporteur on Egypt, I sincerely hope that we can take this opportunity to encourage the other partners who have not yet signed up to an agreement to do so as soon as possible.

It is also worth considering the European Parliament' s role in this process, which is still too limited. Then perhaps we might be able to shape the Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Forum on the model of the ACP-EU Joint Assembly, which meets twice yearly and can set up working parties and initiate fact-finding missions.

We could also, perhaps, improve the organisation of Parliament' s regular participation in ministerial meetings between the Barcelona Process members.

To sum up, Mr President, I would like to ask the Council and the Commission to explicitly recognise the role of towns and large cities, and I should like to thank Mr Nar, the rapporteur, for agreeing to table an amendment that I made to his excellent report.

The Mediterranean countries should be encouraged to develop their relations and to share their experiences on specific urban issues.

The problems of modern times are most serious within towns and large cities.

Mr President, this joint debate is tackling issues which will shortly be at the centre of the Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Forum.

We are all convinced that the future of the Union's Mediterranean strategy depends largely on the success of the Middle East peace policy, which we must be more zealous in supporting even though it is the United States which is at the forefront of this political initiative.

The success of the Euro-Mediterranean project and the concrete results of economic cooperation between the European Union and the countries of the area should benefit the peace policy.

Moreover, eastwards enlargement, which received fresh impetus from the Nice Summit, must go hand in hand with an equally strong boost for the Mediterranean strategy, which has to evolve.

Another boost, including financial support, is therefore needed for the Barcelona Process and the MEDA programmes, particularly the programmes targeting professional training, university exchanges, projects promoting cooperation with the Union's research centres and technology parks, and especially with the cities and regions of Mediterranean Europe.

Economic and social progress must also lead to the consolidation of the areas of democracy, but, as has already been stressed, we must not lose sight of the fact that full respect for human rights is essential if the partnership is genuinely to succeed.

Mr President, I would firstly like to congratulate the rapporteurs, Mrs Muscardini and Mr Nar, on the excellent work they have done on an issue as sensitive as the conflict in this part of the world.

I would also like to start my speech by informing Parliament - I believe this is good news - about the MEDA programme, with which perhaps some of you are already familiar.

On 12 December the Council approved a budgetary contribution in this regard, which represents an increase of 10% on the annual investment for the MEDA programme.

This means that, compared to the EUR 684 million used during the previous period, that annual contribution will now total EUR 764 million per year.

I believe that this demonstrates the goodwill that dominates relations between Parliament, the Commission and the Council in this field.

On the other hand - and unfortunately - we must note, however, that sufficient means are not being made available to find an appropriate destination for this aid, since, in the period 1995-1999, almost 30% of the budgeted aid was not implemented.

I do not know what the problem is, but there is a problem.

Furthermore, I would like to refer to the social, cultural and human dimension of these 15 North African countries, to which our various societies must move closer, and with whom we must promote comprehension and improve mutual understanding.

It also requires a special effort in terms of the teaching and training of young people, which must be based on tolerance, since young people are the future of these nations.

Neither must we forget dialogue, as well as the promotion of fundamental rights.

Finally, I would like to say one thing: we have an obligation to do this well, because if we do not do it out of love, we will have to do it out of fear, because what is at stake is the security of southern Europe.

Mr President, it is very appropriate that we are debating these two very good reports only a few days before the Euro-Med Forum, which is due to sit next week.

Various speakers have mentioned the importance of that forum, which must be raised over the coming years if we are to get the Barcelona Process back on track and expanding.

I would like to speak mainly on the funding for the Euro-Med programme, for MEDA, and say I am disappointed at the very low take-up.

The report mentions that is due to poor administration and procedures within the Commission.

A former colleague of mine, Mr Patten, is doing his best to make sure that we do get spending in the right sort of areas - efficiently, effectively, and to meet the needs of the various countries.

I am first Vice-Chairman of the delegation for Malta.

They are not allowed to bid for as much work as they want.

We need more transparency in the spending that is agreed upon.

We need to know where the money is going and - very importantly indeed - we need a better audit trail of where the money has gone because a lot of talk in the media is about misuse and money going down the wrong avenues for the wrong reasons.

That is an abuse of the position that we hold here.

I expect to see a better relationship between Parliament and the Commission in the interest of all the countries in the southern Mediterranean area.

There is a great deal of work to be done, it can be done and, indeed, it must be done.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, Mediterranean cooperation has been exposed to critical and constructive examination in today' s debate, as well as in the two reports that have been submitted.

I have listened carefully to the points of view presented and noted that the criticisms made on a number of points are justified.

I think that dialogue with the partner countries is extremely important.

The real potential of the Barcelona Process can only be realised if all participants feel that they really own the process and that they are responsible for its different parts.

Allow me to comment briefly on some of the interesting contributions to this debate.

Mr Beazley discusses the issue of whether the enlargement process and Mediterranean cooperation are coordinated processes.

The obvious answer from the presidency is yes; they must be coordinated.

Just like Mr Esteve, we too, as holders of the presidency, see no conflict between, on the one hand, enlargement and, on the other hand, Mediterranean cooperation.

We shall, and must, be able to devote all our energies to these two areas.

I am very pleased that a number of MEPs, particularly Mrs Carlotti and Mr Martin, discuss the importance of association agreements between the EU and the partner countries.

We see these agreements as necessary building blocks for establishing a free-trade area in the region.

The aim is for these agreements to be ready by 2010.

That is why, in the Council' s view, it is important for this process to be speeded up.

I note with satisfaction that it was possible to countersign the association agreement with Egypt a few days ago.

We hope that, during the Swedish Presidency, we shall be able to hold an initial association council with Jordan.

It is also promising that the association negotiations with Algeria, Syria and Lebanon are proceeding at a good pace.

We believe, then, that these association agreements are not only of great importance to trade and economic integration but are also an important political platform.

They form the basis for a regular, deeper and extended political dialogue.

In today' s debate, quite a lot of criticism has been directed against the EU' s aid to the Mediterranean.

The Council hopes that the revised mediation arrangement adopted last autumn may provide the opportunity for a more efficient and more strategic method of working.

Mr Martin spoke of the importance of the cities' role in Mediterranean cooperation.

I can only concur with what Mr Martin said.

It is important to give due weight to the significance of the urban regions and their potential in Mediterranean cooperation.

The Council therefore sees this as an aspect we should like to try to cultivate further.

Mr Gemelli spoke about what I think is a very important issue, namely the dialogue with Islamic society.

At the social and cultural level, the presidency sees just such a dialogue between cultures and civilisations as one of our most important priorities - an area in which, as luck would have it, Sweden has been able to play quite a leading role for a long time.

Mention might be made, for example, of the so-called Euro-Islam project and the so-called Stockholm Conclusions from 1998, which provide guidelines for continued work in a long list of areas within this dialogue.

Mrs Napoletano discussed the incredibly important cooperation taking place in the legal sphere.

The Swedish Presidency wishes to promote cooperation in this area.

We shall be organising a high-level meeting and a seminar.

Both will be designed to contribute to the Commission' s new regional programmes in the legal and domestic policy areas.

Questions relating to migration, to which several MEPs have referred in today' s debate, are an important part of this complex of issues.

I think it is important for these migration issues to be seen in an overall perspective in which we have to take account of social, economic and cultural aspects.

The phase we are now entering into must be focused upon implementing what everyone within the Barcelona Process has already agreed about.

I believe it was Mr Obiols I Germ who talked about the lack of symbolic specific action.

Mrs Carlotti touched upon the same subject.

I now believe that the EU, together with the partner countries around the Mediterranean, must ensure that the intentions and commitments of the Barcelona Declaration are 'clothed' in action for, like any other activity, the Barcelona Process will be judged not according to what it promises but according to what it achieves.

Mr President, it gives me very great pleasure to participate in this debate on the Mediterranean today.

I am particularly grateful to the two rapporteurs, Mrs Muscardini and Mr Nar, for the excellent work that they have done in preparing their two reports.

It has been an extremely good debate.

It is personally rather a disappointment that many of those who were able to find time in their busy diaries to take part in the debate were not able to find time to hear very much of the debate or even to wait until the end to hear the responses.

It is, I guess, a sort of discourtesy on my part to reply to people who ask serious questions but who are not able to stay to hear the response, so I will not do that.

I will just respond to people who have been able to stay until the end, which in fact gives the debate some meaning.

The Mediterranean is our near abroad, on our southern flank, so it should enjoy a very special place in our external relations.

The objectives agreed at Barcelona remain fundamentally valid and they are increasingly relevant: working together for peace and stability, creating shared prosperity through establishing free trade, providing the economic and financial assistance to meet the challenges which that implies, and helping to improve mutual understanding and tolerance among peoples of different cultures and different traditions.

As the House will know, I had long believed that the time had come to see how we could improve the delivery of the Barcelona objectives.

We therefore worked very hard on a Commission communication on reinvigorating the Barcelona Process, which in turn provided the main input for the Euro-Mediterranean Foreign Ministers' meeting in Marseilles last November where our ideas were overwhelmingly endorsed.

That document was on the table, that document was the principle agenda for that meeting.

I should like now to give you my assessment of where we stand and where we should go from here.

With the permission of the House, I will address points arising from both reports in this context rather than dealing with each report separately.

First, let me look at the political situation in the region, which we are going to debate in a few moments' time.

Both reports note the considerable significance of the Middle East peace process for European Union policy in the Mediterranean.

I note the calls in both reports for the European Union to play a more active role in the peace process.

Let us not underestimate our contribution.

We are, for example, and it is not an unreasonable point to make, the major donor to the Palestinian Authority.

Last year EUR 155.6 million was earmarked from the Community budget, which included EUR 90 million for a special cash facility that I made available at the end of the year to help preserve the institutional framework of the Palestinian Authority, which we have helped to create and fund.

I would like, without reservation, to thank the House - to thank this part of the budgetary authority - and also to thank the Council for their assistance in ensuring that we could make that cash facility available before Christmas.

As events have sadly proved, it is going to be all too necessary.

At the meeting in Marseilles, ministers decided, rightly in my view, not to seek agreement on the proposed Charter for Peace and Stability.

This was clearly not the right moment.

Nevertheless, in substance a good deal of progress had been made towards agreement on this instrument.

We should make sure that we can capitalise on that progress when the time is right, so that it becomes a genuinely meaningful document, reflecting the European Union' s active commitment to maintaining regional peace and stability.

In the meantime - and here I also echo comments made in both the reports that we are considering - we should not wait for the charter to be in force to make more efforts to promote respect for human rights and democratic freedoms in the region.

Our communication is unequivocal on this subject.

The European Union should use all appropriate fora to press for progress on these issues.

The MEDA democracy programme should continue to be used to fund positive actions and MEDA allocations themselves should be more dependent on adequate progress.

I very much welcome Parliament' s backing on this and I hope that the Council will also react positively.

Economic and financial matters are, of course, at the heart of the partnership though they are not, as several speakers pointed out, anything like the whole of that partnership.

In Marseilles there was a high level of consensus on our proposals for reinvigorating it and I would like to highlight the following: we must speed up the negotiation, signature and ratification of the association agreements.

I am happy to confirm that we are achieving considerable progress on this.

On Friday last week we managed, at last, to initial the agreement with Egypt and we are encouraged by the progress we are making with Algeria, with Lebanon and with Syria.

I want to see negotiations with Algeria, Lebanon and Syria pursued vigorously this year, however the ratification process in the Member States is lamentably slow.

The agreement with Jordan was signed three years ago, but it is still not in force.

Help from the European Parliament in this respect would be most welcome.

I do hope that, as well as making speeches in the Chamber, honourable Members will get on to their own parliaments and governments to ensure that when we reach agreement on one of these associations agreements it can be ratified rapidly.

There are two states which still have not ratified the Jordan agreement - no names, as they say, no pack drill - but I very much hope that Belgian and French MEPs - I hope I have not given the game away - will get on to their parliaments to press for ratification as soon as possible.

In due course we also need to tackle the issue of agricultural trade.

The credibility of our partnership lies in being able to deal with sensitive matters like that and we need to have a genuine discussion.

We must develop South-South trade and cooperation, including on a subregional basis.

We want all countries signing an association agreement with us to conclude free-trade agreements among themselves within five years.

This is the only manner to prepare our already agreed objective of an overall European-Union-Mediterranean free-trade area by 2010.

The development of subregional trade needs to be accompanied by greater subregional cooperation.

Trading opportunities will not be used unless the infrastructure is there.

We must introduce accumulation of origin for all partners establishing free trade between themselves and adopting the harmonised protocol on rules of origin.

We must harmonise measures relating to the single market.

We want a timetable to be in place by next year for priority sectors - such as rules of origin, customs, norms and standards, and intellectual property protection - for implementation starting in 2004, both between the partners and the Union and among the partners themselves.

All this, together with the support we give to our partners under MEDA, will increase the attractiveness of the region to investors.

A decompartmentalised and open market with a sound and predictable legal and administrative environment is the best way to ensure that the very low levels of local, European and world-wide investment will increase.

Both reports rightly pay much attention to the need to improve MEDA, which one or two of the speakers who are still present in the Chamber mentioned during their remarks.

Indeed, MEDA has an excellent record on commitments but is much less good on payments.

Last year the record on commitments was maintained: the provisional figures show that EUR 879 million or 98% of available commitments were executed and the record on payments improved to EUR 335 million or 95% of available appropriations.

I am happy to say that the control of the overhang of payments required to execute the commitments has begun to improve.

As an average over the last five years, we have now paid 30% of existing commitments, compared to 26% one year ago, but there is still a long way to go.

We are in the process of implementing two reforms, the revised MEDA regulation and the internal Commission reform.

Taken together, I am confident that they will bring about serious improvements in the years to come.

Mr honourable friend, Mr Beazley, who I am delighted to say is still in his place, spoke about that and asked a specific question about Cyprus and Malta and their participation in regional programmes.

I am delighted to answer "yes" - in the affirmative.

It is a positive "yes" rather than negative or equivocal "yes" .

I note the opinion that the amount made available for the period 2000 to 2006 is insufficient.

I was not surprised to see that mentioned in the report.

It is certainly true that the EUR 5.35 billion agreed by the Council - I give away no secrets - is less than the Commission had proposed.

Nevertheless, together with EIB lending, this means that nearly EUR 13 billion will be available over that period, which is not an insignificant amount of money.

The important thing now is to see that this money is used effectively in terms both of the quality of our actions in relation to the policy objectives and of actual payments on the ground.

The Commission has proposed that, for the future, MEDA allocation should be more closely linked to the association process and the implementation of economic reforms.

I make no apology for this and I am glad to note support for this line in one of the reports.

I have noted the calls to increase the numbers of Commission staff available to work on this sector.

I recognise that the staff concerned are extremely hard pressed, but any decisions will have to be taken in the context of the evolution of Commission staffing levels overall and here again I would be delighted for concrete help from Parliament.

We will also be working this year on a programme to take account of the social effects of economic transition.

This will promote education and training, the enhancement of the role of women and social security systems as well as actions on health.

I was not surprised that both reports called for increased support for civil society.

The question is how best to go about it.

I fear that financing micro-projects is not the answer.

These are not cost-effective and they are wasteful of staff resources.

Decentralised cooperation is to be welcomed, but not in the sense of relaunching the old Mediterranean decentralised cooperation programmes.

However worthy their objectives, they were seriously criticised by the Court of Auditors and indeed they were seriously criticised by this Parliament.

Rather we need to explain more clearly to civil society - whether NGOs, local authorities or other groups - that our programmes are open to their participation and they only need to organise themselves to respond to our calls for proposals.

Good examples of this already exist in our sectoral regional cooperation programmes, for example on the environment, the cultural heritage and MEDA democracy.

I propose to make a concerted effort in this sense and to try to generalise the approach.

In the longer term, we could look at other ways of supporting civil society and I should certainly be prepared to consider any concrete proposals which Parliament may put forward.

Finally, I am glad to note the agreement all round on the need to raise the visibility of the partnership.

I warmly welcome Parliament' s activities in this respect through international contacts at all levels.

I am only sorry that I will not be able to attend the forum on 8 and 9 February, but I am on a troika visit on those two days.

We shall be supplementing our existing activities through the introduction of a dedicated programme using all the modern techniques at our disposal to ensure that the value of what we are doing is appreciated as widely as possible both in the European Union and among the Mediterranean partners.

One speaker, Mr Obiols i Germ, who I am delighted to see in his place, said that we must not just give lip service to our objectives in the Barcelona Process.

Someone else, who I am afraid is not here, said we should give evidence of tangible action.

That is what we are trying to do.

That is what the document that we put on the table in Marseilles attempts to do: a serious effort to reinvigorate the Barcelona Process with concrete proposals for action.

So, as far as we are concerned in the Commission, we do not want to make the same old speeches, we do not want to go on the same old roundabouts of meetings and summits and conferences and bilateral agreements.

We want to complete all the association agreements and get them ratified and we have a good chance of completing at least another two association agreements this year; I would hope for the lot.

We must deal with issues like South-South trade and accumulation, we must deal with regional cooperation, we have to speed up delivery under MEDA.

This is not a virtual policy.

It is a real policy that we want to make work in real time.

I hope that in future debates in Parliament - as well attended from beginning to end as this one has been, at least in part - we will be able to chart our progress in what must be one of the priorities for the external actions of the European Union.

The next item is the Council and Commission statements on the situation in the Middle East.

I would like to welcome Mr Danielsson, President-in-Office of the Council, and, without further ado, I shall give him the floor on behalf of the Council.

Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, in view of the Israeli election for prime minister on 6 February, the peace process in the Middle East is at an uncertain stage.

During the negotiations in Taba, the parties came closer than ever before to a negotiated solution.

At the same time, the violence in the Palestinian areas and the large number of dead and injured has meant a serious reduction in trust between the negotiating parties.

The Israeli Government faces change, irrespective of the outcome of the election for prime minister on 6 February but, at the same time, there should hopefully be a strong desire for peace on the part of both the Israeli and Palestinian populations.

The Israeli election for prime minister and the forthcoming formation of a government will be important factors in determining the future direction of the peace process.

Despite the difficulties, the parties have not wanted to forfeit the progress achieved in spite of everything.

In Taba, the parties negotiated directly with each other and without any third party present.

The atmosphere on that occasion was serious and results-oriented, and both parties declared themselves optimistic about the opportunities for achieving a final settlement.

However, time did not permit any such final settlement to be reached in Taba, but the parties agreed upon a joint concluding statement on 28 January which may constitute a platform to build upon further whenever the negotiations for a final settlement are resumed.

I would draw the honourable Members' and Parliament' s attention to the fact that this statement particularly emphasises the European Union' s role in the continued work for peace.

The presidency is not alone in receiving requests from many quarters to see a strengthening of the European Union' s already major commitment to the whole Middle East issue.

The EU has an important role to play in as much as we are the most important trading partner of practically all the countries in the area, as well as the largest donor of public aid to the Palestinian areas.

Through its Special Envoy, Mr Moratinos, who has been present the whole time, the EU has of course been able to follow the negotiations in Taba.

The very fact that Mr Moratinos has been able to participate and show the European Union' s support for the negotiations and its readiness to assist the parties has been of great value to the Union.

I also want to emphasise that, in recent weeks, the presidency has had regular contacts at the highest level with both the Israeli and Palestinian leaderships.

A recurrent theme for the presidency in these contacts has been the European Union' s desire to assist the parties in whatever way they wish.

Throughout, these contacts have taken place in close collaboration with the High Representative and the General Secretary of the UN.

I also want to emphasise the significance of the fact that the High Representative for the Common Foreign and Security Policy, Mr Solana, is part of the international commission under the leadership of Senator Mitchell which is investigating the current violence in the Palestinian areas and which, hopefully, will eventually submit proposals to prevent a recurrence of this violence.

The ever lengthening crisis has presented the Palestinian population with severe economic and humanitarian problems.

The Palestinian Authority has also been grappling with major budgetary problems since the Israeli Government stopped the transfers of tax funds it is obliged to make in accordance with the 'Paris Protocol' .

In a statement of 22 January, the General Affairs Council called upon Israel to resume these transfers.

On the initiative of Commissioner Patten, the European Union has also used extra appropriations in order to make funds temporarily available to the Palestinian Authority.

The human rights situation continues to give cause for concern.

The European Union has intervened with the Palestinian Authority in connection with the death sentences recently carried out.

The Union has also intervened in Israel to condemn the extra-judicial executions of Palestinians, corroborated by military sources.

We shall continue to monitor these issues.

Unfortunately, there is no new information about initiatives or progress in the peace negotiations between Israel and Syria and between Israel and Lebanon.

In dialogue with the parties and also in close collaboration with the new American administration, the European Union will continue to do what it can to bring all aspects of the peace process to a successful conclusion.

Madam President, I would like very briefly to try to add some more specific elements, from a political point of view, to the speech which the presidency has just made.

I believe that today' s debate is crucial given the time at which it is taking place.

I believe that we should focus the debate on at least three questions.

The first is what will the political scene in Israel be like after the elections on 6 February?

The second, which the presidency also mentioned, is how can this cycle of violence that we have witnessed over recent months be brought to an end?

And the third, and perhaps most important, is what direction must we give to the peace process in 2001?

The year 2000 was a year of hope. It began with the idea that a definitive solution could perhaps be reached.

Certain significant measures were adopted in relation to Syria.

Unfortunately, however, 2000 ended without us being able to achieve peace.

Let us do everything possible so that 2001 might truly be the year in which we do achieve it.

The current situation is, of course, still very fluid.

I must tell you that I spent this very morning in Stockholm holding a meeting with the Swedish prime minister and President-in-Office of the Council and the Secretary-General of the United Nations.

We were talking practically until lunchtime when I took the plane to come here and be with you this afternoon.

Many initiatives are taking place at the moment; initiatives which we hope will bring success, with the possibility of a final and definitive summit before the elections of 6 February.

I believe that there is still the possibility that this summit will take place, and also the possibility that it may take place in Europe.

As the presidency has clearly pointed out, we have seen some truly significant activity since 23 December of last year, and we have all been involved in an enormously active sense.

So much so that, if you will allow me, Madam President, I will tell you that I spent the first day of the year in Israel, together with Mr Barak and Mr Arafat, and we made significant progress.

I believe that the meetings which took place in Taba, as the presidency has said, have been without doubt - according to all the participants - the most substantial negotiations we have ever had.

Progress has been made in all areas.

On the issue of land, we are very close to potentially reaching an agreement - if there is actual time to conclude it - on very nearly a hundred per cent of the land, involving some land exchanges.

From the security point of view, I believe that a good agreement can be reached, accepting that there can be three early warning stations and that, along the Jordan Valley, international forces can be deployed to guarantee stability.

On the issue of Jerusalem, as you know, talks are continuing, with some progress, on the problem of how to define the Wailing Wall and the Western Wall.

There has still been no precise decision on this.

However, there is still a desire to make progress and to reach a definitive solution on Jerusalem.

At the Taba meetings, progress has also been made on the issue of the refugees, and progress has been made on specific and practical issues.

The sub-committee set up for this purpose has made considerable progress on all issues relating to the refugees, although it has had to postpone, for the time being, the crucial aspect of the right to return.

They have postponed that issue in order to find specific and practical solutions to specific and practical problems, such as international committees, how to find resources in the different countries to help in that direction, etc.

Therefore, ladies and gentlemen, there is still reason to be hopeful that we may either reach a definitive agreement - a faint hope, to be honest, since there is little chance of reaching a definitive agreement by Sunday - or that we may gain an explicit commitment from both sides on a range of parameters so that, whatever the situation in Israel and the territories after 6 February, there will always be a range of commitments that have been agreed on, accepted by both sides, which means that we will not have to start the next negotiations practically from scratch.

I can tell you that, on the part of the European Union, all the successive Presidencies, with no doubt whatsoever, are going to maintain a commitment which is not only political but also personal.

Prime Minister Gran Persson is personally completely committed - and I have witnessed this during the hours we have spent together on the telephone holding the negotiations necessary to reach a solution - and, on our part, please do not have the slightest doubt that we will remain physically, psychologically and politically involved in it, because, as you know, a resolution to this conflict in the Middle East is in our interests, very much in our interests.

It is also important to highlight the constructive behaviour of the countries in the region.

Both Jordan and Egypt continue to maintain a firm and determined commitment to trying to find a negotiated and definitive solution.

There are going to be difficult moments, without doubt, after the elections; there will be uncertainties and we will need to continue to have - as we Europeans have always had - the determination to continue supporting this peace process.

From other points of view - from the economic point of view - the presidency has already explained what we are doing.

I am sure the Commission will also do so.

We will continue the generosity that the European Union has always shown.

I would like to say a few words also about the committee of enquiry, the committee which arose from the Sharm el-Sheikh meeting.

The committee has worked well for some time but, as of a week ago, the Israeli Government decided to break contact with it until after the elections.

Therefore, although there is still a team from the committee still deployed on the ground, we members of the committee as such will not go to the territories until 16 February.

That is what I can tell you at the moment.

Finally, I would like to repeat that we will continue to work over the remaining days with energy and determination and, if eventually a summit is held, the European representation will attend it and will do everything possible to push this process in the right direction.

Madam President, I am very grateful for this opportunity to speak briefly in this debate.

I do not intend to repeat any of the things I said in the last debate nor do I intend to repeat what the President and the High Representative have just said, not because it is not important, but because repetition would insult the intelligence of the House.

Naturally, we all hope for progress in the peace talks.

Naturally, we all believe it would be foolish to speculate on the post-election scenario in Israel.

It is for the people of Israel to make their democratic choice and then for the rest of us to deal with the consequences.

Naturally, we are all seriously concerned about the loss of life on both sides.

There have already been a high number of victims because of an excessive use of force and we are deeply worried about the extra-judicial killings perpetrated by Israeli security forces.

Not only does this undermine the prospects of achieving a negotiated settlement, it is also unacceptable for a democratic nation to resort to such means in grave violation of human rights and the rule of law.

Let me be equally clear, we are also deeply concerned by the killing of Israeli civilians by Palestinians and by the recent executions of Palestinians.

This too is unacceptable, especially given the Palestinian authorities' earlier commitment to a moratorium on the death penalty.

We also remain concerned about the humanitarian situation in the West Bank and Gaza.

The remaining closures by Israel are having devastating effects on the Palestinian economy and therefore, not surprisingly, on political stability.

They are even affecting the import of humanitarian aid to the Palestinian territories.

For example, the Palestinian Authority has notified the Commission' s representative in Jerusalem that the official inauguration of the Gaza Hospital - a hospital with which this Parliament is perhaps all too familiar - originally foreseen for mid-January, has had to be postponed until further notice.

The situation has deteriorated further, and staff and patients are prevented from even reaching the hospital.

Similarly equipment and supplies, such as oxygen, medicines and fuel, cannot reach the hospital and further building work has had to be suspended.

In its preliminary implementation report following the December emergency appeal, UNWRA also raises concern about serious difficulties in the delivery of food, the delivery of construction material, medical items and other essential supplies.

The security of staff engaged in humanitarian assistance has been severely compromised.

I very much regret that the situation has continued to deteriorate.

However, we have continued to make our position crystal clear.

We have demanded that the remaining closures on the Palestinian economy should be lifted.

We have asked Israel to end immediately the withholding of revenue payments due to the Palestinian Authority and we have reacted promptly to the crisis by addressing both the humanitarian situation and the precarious budgetary situation of the Palestinian Authority.

In December the Commission provided EUR 15 million in emergency aid, EUR 14.5 million alone to UNWRA in response to its emergency appeal.

In addition, we disbursed a EUR 27.5 million special cash facility in the belief that it was in the interest of both sides not to undermine the Palestinian Authority' s ability to pay salaries.

In the same spirit, the Commission set up the new cash facility of EUR 90 million which the presidency referred to.

I am very grateful to Parliament and the Council for making that prudential transfer possible before Christmas.

Last week I dispersed a first tranche of EUR 30 million to the Palestinian Authority.

We need to look at the likely situation for the rest of this year.

As our resources are limited, we need to examine carefully how to proceed further.

If we continue drawing monthly payments from the special cash facility in order to meet the current administrative needs of the Palestinian Authority, including payment of civil servants' salaries, education, health and other public services, funds will very soon run out.

The Palestinian Authority is now facing an ongoing fall in revenue and a rising deficit.

They will need to adjust their policies.

Instead of just baling out month-to-month we need to look at how to help over the longer term.

Indeed the European Union and the wider international community have an interest in preserving the economic and institutional framework of the Palestinian Authority, which we have helped to create and which we have helped to fund more generously than any one else.

If the Palestinian Authority collapsed, it would be a very severe blow to prospects for peace in the region, Israeli security would be threatened and our efforts to promote cooperation and stability in the Middle East would be undermined.

That is why both the Palestinian Authority and the international community at large must look beyond the immediate crisis and consider how to deal with the steadily widening gap in Palestinian finances.

There is one other point I should make and I make it with all due delicacy, but I do not think that it is contrary to the experience of honourable Members of this House who have recently been in the region.

Whatever the appalling problems faced by the Palestinian Authority, with which I strongly sympathise, nothing would justify practices that fall below the level of probity that we have the right to expect from any recipient of our funds and that citizens in any community have every right to expect from their governing agencies.

I believe I am right in saying, as I mentioned a moment or two ago, that some honourable Members who have recently been in the area have strong views on this subject.

We wish to play our part in sustaining the Palestinian Authority, but if we are to do that then we have to be able to assure the budgetary authority of the European Union, which has to answer to Europe' s taxpayers, that the money we make available is being well spent and properly spent.

I repeat what I said just now, that we want to do what we can to assist the Palestinian Authority.

I hope very much that the authorities in Israel will end the economic and financial blockade of Palestinian areas because, in the short, the medium and the long term, this will increase instability and sustain the violence.

Mr President, I would like to begin by thanking both the Council and the Commission for their information and comments and by saying that my group is also moderately optimistic - let us hope furthermore that the data indicated by the High Representative proves to be right - at this very sensitive time just a few days before the elections in Israel, and in the midst of a transfer of government in the United States, which will have to rebuild its policy in the region.

However, we must not forget that, up until today, there have been more than 400 deaths as a result of the Intifada, which has taken us back to a situation which we thought we would never see again.

My group also sees the increased European presence in the region over recent months as something to be greatly welcomed.

As the presidency mentioned, it is true that the participation of Mr Solana in Sharm el-Sheikh and the committee of enquiry, and the presence of the European Union in Taba through its permanent representative, Ambassador Moratinos, have enabled us to make effective contributions to the peace process.

We believe that we have to intensify this quest for political presence in the region on the part of the European Union, which we believe is compatible with the fundamental role which the United States Government must continue to play in this whole process.

In Taba, both sides acknowledged that they have never been so close to a final agreement, but we must be aware that the apparent euphoria must not make us blind to the real situation.

The Israelis and the Palestinians must be aware that they share a common enemy, the extremism to which fundamentalism of one kind or another leads, which is the main danger to the peace process and to stability and prosperity in the region, and which also poses an undeniable threat to the whole of the Mediterranean region.

On the other hand, I believe that we must be aware that we are faced with a national conflict, handed down from history, which has impregnated the education systems of some countries and has promoted hate amongst the younger generations, which means that we clearly cannot expect a magic solution and that we must confront the problem with perseverance.

I think it is highly appropriate to link the debates on the Middle East peace process to the new impetus which the European Union is endeavouring to give to the Barcelona Process, as we are doing this afternoon and as Commissioner Patten has done, because surely the greatest contribution Europe can make at the moment to the peace process is to keep alive the spirit of Euro-Mediterranean cooperation, strengthening its vitality and maintaining its development in the face of political pressures.

Both Israelis and Palestinians have come to realise recently that it is crucial to end the violence and re-establish a climate of security in the region, but they have also worked together on the development of creative formulas to solve the problems dividing them: Jerusalem, the definitive mapping of borders, the refugees and the settlements which Mr Solana referred to.

The European Union has the particular responsibility of consolidating these foundations despite the internal political changes of recent days.

We must support both sides in their journey towards a solution to the conflict, based on the peaceful resolution of differences, on tolerance, on respect for human rights and the consolidation of peace.

Thank you very much, Mr Sakellariou.

Parliament is amazed at how elegantly you surf between languages, so much so all we can hear is the wash!

Mr President, the EU is the key donor to the Palestinian territories.

According to the UN, since the closures, more than one million Palestinians have been living under the poverty line of two dollars a day.

The human effect of the closures is possibly even worse.

Commissioner Patten stated it a moment ago: sick people cannot even get to the European hospital in Gaza because even ambulances cannot get through the barricades.

It is therefore of key importance that we continue providing aid.

I am delighted that the Council and Commission share our view.

I returned from the Palestinian territories last Sunday together with a delegation from Parliament.

We are all agreed on one thing: it is important to give money, but we are not giving enough.

The Union must also assume its political responsibility.

It is only managing to play a valuable role in the peace process in very small steps.

That is due not least to the dissension within the Union.

I would therefore like to hear from Mr Solana what he intends to do in order to bring the Union to sing from the same songsheet.

Once detailed maps of Jerusalem are available, as well as plans for the settlements, and a scheme for the return of and compensation for refugees, I wonder whether the Union will have the in-house expertise it takes to adopt an intelligent position of its own, or will we leave this to the Americans?

We must make sure this discussion does not become black and white.

By maintaining a certain degree of neutrality, Europe could, in fact, make a valuable contribution.

Both sides of this conflict are violating agreements.

We must call them both to task about this.

Killing people is unacceptable under any circumstances, whether this is in the form of executions carried out by the Palestinian Authority or the Israeli army' s assassination policy.

But, Mr Danielsson, Europe will lay itself open to the criticism that it is applying double standards if it takes four and a half months to call the Israelis to account, whilst this is done promptly in the case of Palestinians.

This Parliament too, with its secondary delegations, one for Israel and one for the Palestinian territories, is running the risk of sending out the wrong message.

We must now work on unanimity and understanding of the legitimate concerns on both sides.

Mr President, if nothing else, last week' s visit of the parliamentary delegation to the Palestinian territories illustrated that over the past four months, the situation has taken a bad turn for the worse.

During my most recent visit at the start of the Intifada, it was evident that economically, there was a future for a separate Palestinian state.

If you now walk around in Bethlehem or Jerusalem, it is painful to see that the economy has completely bottomed out. This is as a result of the tourist trade drying up completely and of the policy of closures by the Israeli government, which is preventing tens of thousands of workers from commuting into work.

The political situation too has deteriorated dramatically due to the no-compromise rhetoric. This is now prevalent on the Palestinian side, and given the liquidations carried out by the Israeli government, this is a very understandable reaction.

The European Union was right to condemn this policy, all be it a little belatedly.

In short, my impression after last week' s visit, if I am being honest, is a very negative one.

In all truthfulness, I am not holding out too much hope for the future either.

In that sense, I share the view of Mr Sakellariou.

My expectation is that the peace process will grind to a halt as a result of the wait-and-see attitude of the Bush administration and the fact that I think that the Sharon government - which I am certain will soon be a reality - will initially keep reasonably calm in the face of international pressure.

But this standstill could be a blessing in disguise if the European Union were to use that time to its own advantage.

This is possible and would be possible if it were to use its role as key donor to the Palestinians and as Israel' s key trading partner in an effective manner.

With regard to the Palestinians, I believe that the European Union should act as follows.

It should use its role as key donor to urge the Palestinians to end the widespread corruption, which many people protest against and are indignant about at regional level.

Additionally, the Palestinian authorities should respect human rights to a much higher degree, not only in terms of executions but also, for example, in its treatment of prisoners.

It would be unacceptable, with regard to respecting human rights, for the European Union to finance police training if in practice nothing were to change.

Finally, I would like to comment on the Palestinians.

Local elections are required in order to enhance the legitimacy of the Palestinian Authority.

As for Israel, I believe that the European Union should leave Israel in no doubt that if, after the forthcoming elections, repression increases, if the settlement policy does not change and if there is no movement in their willingness to reach an agreement, then we cannot proceed in a business-as-usual manner.

We cannot continue to deal with a partner who refuses to do what we have been asking for for years.

We should have the nerve to draw the necessary conclusions, to refer to the rules in the Association Agreement and dare to take measures.

If the European Union uses this economic position to its advantage, it could well play a political role in future, a political role which does justice to the demands of the region and the interests of the Union itself.

Mr President, in Davos, President Arafat reiterated the need for peace and gave an honest account of the shameful, tragic living conditions of the Palestinian people, who are subjected to violations of human rights by the Israeli army.

The media interpreted this as greater inflexibility on Arafat's part with regard to peace and criticised Peres for not standing up to him.

The truth of the matter is that Peres knows that what Arafat is saying is true.

The visit of our parliamentary delegation to the area also served to confirm this.

The Palestinian people are forced to live in an open-air prison, the roads leading into and out of the villages are under military occupation and closed off, countless check points on the main roads prevent the Palestinians from reaching their places of work and collective punishments are enforced.

This is just one example: Sabrine was born on 24 January at a check point. At the next check point her umbilical cord was cut.

The mother had left the village of Antis at 5 p.m. and arrived at Ramallah hospital at 8.30 p.m. The journey should have taken 40 minutes.

Her epic ordeal was recorded in the Israeli newspaper Ha' aretz.

People who are seriously ill are turned back and medical staff beaten up.

In Gaza, we saw hundreds of metres of land where enormous palm trees and olive and orange trees had been uprooted and destroyed, and houses demolished.

Was there something wrong with the trees? Only in that they could have served as cover for any Palestinian attacks against the settlers who are overrunning the country and treating it as theirs, destroying Palestinian houses and crops.

Meanwhile, the number of settlers and settlements is increasing every day in what ought to be the State of Palestine, the territories which have been occupied since 1967.

The Palestinian Legislative Council cannot function properly. The members of the different districts are unable to move about or to meet.

Arafat himself said that his movements are hampered.

Others have spoken of the tragic stifling of the economy.

Imports and exports are blocked, and the European Union is witness to that: every day, the Commission in Jerusalem receives notification of the various violations; even civil structures and schools provided by the European Union have been bombed.

These are economic disasters whose effects will be felt for years to come.

All this is well-known, and none of us, particularly those in responsible political positions, can say that they were unaware of the facts.

Our diplomats send back clear reports on the Israeli settlement policy and also clear reports - as we told all the Palestinian leaders we met - of the violations performed by the National Palestinian Authority.

But they all asked us - from Arafat to the men and women in the refugee camps - why Europe does not intervene in an active, political way.

"We have confidence in Europe," they said, "and a political partnership with the Middle and Near East would benefit Europe."

This is our view as well: Europe must be able to develop an effective foreign policy which is in line with the fundamental values which we always claim to hold: respect for international laws and human rights. In terms of Palestine, that means upholding the UN Resolutions.

There is a pragmatic strain in the Palestinians; we have witnessed it and it was evident at Taba as well: they are pragmatic in implementation but resolute when it comes to principles and rights. We, too, should have realised this, for we are always discussing it.

Mr Solana is right: Europe is now playing a larger role but it must do much more.

The United States has failed: our task is not to replace it but to become equal partners in the negotiations.

It is not enough for us to provide economic aid: what we are being asked for - and our responsibility...

(The President cut the speaker off)

Mr President, representatives of the Council Presidency and the Commission, High Representative, ladies and gentlemen, I have, of course, listened to all the speeches and I have also read the reports.

In my view, the real nature of the problem, illustrated and interpreted against the backdrop of the Treaties establishing the European Union themselves, from the Treaty of Rome onwards, and against history and European law, has been wiped from all your minds, except for the odd refrain, muttered like a prayer, of human rights and so on and so forth.

The present situation places us in the same condition of complicity with the worst of the worst, with the murderers and torturers, those that abused the right to life and attempted to destroy the law, as we witnessed from 1985 onwards in what was to become the former Yugoslavia.

There is no strategy, no awareness of the institutional objectives of our Union in our approach today, at least in terms of the abstract goals set forth in the human rights charters and in the charters of the rights of European citizens and others.

There is none of this in what the High Representative, Mr Solana, happily, courageously and, most importantly, sincerely recommended as an EU foreign policy, a bureaucratic, ineffective operation with no added value in terms of practical implementation or foresight.

This is our problem: there you are, Mrs Morgantini and company, falling over yourselves to tell us about the woes and tragedies of the Palestinians, of Palestinian men and women, of Arab men and women, of the Middle East. You are so relentless, so implacable, with such clear, diligent consciences; you only acknowledge Arab or Palestinian men and women if they are on the wrong end of an Israeli bullet, in which case you give them the honour of a burial, the honour of your recognition.

In the face of the Palestinian, Arab or Middle Eastern citizens, who die every day, assassinated by their Saudi or fundamentalist right- or left-wing regimes, assassinated by the firm, historic alliance of Sheikhs and Middle Eastern rulers, who are allied with the great oil multinationals and with you, the more or less communist left; in the face of the situation of the Kurds, which is not just a Turkish problem but also an Iraqi problem and the problem of others as well; in the face of the everyday lives of the Saudi and Palestinian men and women, you are only concerned with them if Israel is involved, and it may have done them some serious damage.

You only acknowledge the existence of the Palestinian people when they further your condemnation of your current permanent enemy, be it the United States of America, Israel or the European Union, which is acting to protect certain values, as it did in the case of Belgrade and Milosevic, as it did throughout the crisis in Yugoslavia.

Therefore, Mr President, this is the truth of the matter: the greatest threat to peace is Israel's real weakness.

Israel might be prepared to take a risk - and this is why the Israeli people appear, surprisingly, to prefer the old warrior Sharon to the wise, sensible, courageous Barak - but it feels that any concession could turn out to be excessive compared to the peace to be gained.

This is the problem: when there are 100, 150 kilometres of territory to cross, one more kilometre conceded might, in effect, represent one more trench to fight from in a war sparked off by an unfair peace agreement.

The Israeli democracy is afraid of this, but you could not care less!

What sort of Europe is this?

If anything, the right to national and personal independence is not to have 60% of your money spent on the armies of the local dictator, on consolidating corruption and class, bureaucratic, military and extreme right-wing control of men and women everywhere!

Where is it laid down that the European Union must be the guarantor of the national states, of their independence and self-determination?

Nowhere in our hearts and culture does the nineteenth century right to the national state exist today: civil, political and human rights with regard to any state, central or centralised authority do exist, and you are unaware of all this!

Israel must become part of the European Union, one of our borders.

Israel does not realise either that it cannot continue to defend itself as a national State, a small bridgehead of democracy but forced for 50 years, more so with each passing day, to risk its own life and peace and the peace of others.

Therefore this, Mr President, is our hope: we are preparing a written statement, which has already been signed by 30 Members, calling for the full inclusion of Israel in our Union. A battle will have to be fought in Brussels and in Tel Aviv but it is an urgent matter.

As radicals, this is our aim and we will make every effort to achieve it, for it is a wise course of action which will lead to freedom.

Mr President, I was interested to read the conclusions which the General Council reached early last week regarding the Middle East peace process.

The intention to work in close cooperation with the new American Bush administration within this diplomatic minefield deserves the support of the European Parliament.

This view bears witness to an understanding of the political constraints of the European Union in the Middle East.

This realism was expressed very aptly by the High Representative of the CFSP, Mr Solana, in a recent interview with the Sddeutsche Zeitung: "We can be persuasive, exert pressure, and grant financial aid, but we also know our limits.

The only country which can provide credible security guarantees for both sides is the United States."

In its conclusions, the General Council also particularly urges Israelis and Palestinians to make every effort to bring the current negotiations in Taba to a successful end.

According to spokespeople from both camps, these have now been concluded, and not without hope for the future.

However, how, in this specific context, have the Council and Commission taken the harsh accusations which the President of the Palestinian Authority, Mr Arafat, levelled at the state of Israel and its armed forces, in Davos at the beginning of this week?

Against the backdrop of the Israeli presidency elections to be held on 6 February, this verbal attack thwarted conclusively the plan for a meeting between the Israeli Prime Minister Barak and Arafat in Stockholm today.

Mr President, I would therefore like to hear the view of the Council and Commission on Mr Arafat' s international stance, which was anything but constructive.

At the end of its conclusions, the General Council lectures Israel on its economic and financial policy vis--vis the Palestinian Authority.

However, an equally critical tone on the public execution of two so-called 'collaborators' by the same Palestinian Authority is missing from this document.

After all, the Palestinian human rights organisations dared lodge a protest against a highly deficient judicial process which was challenged with good reason.

I take it that the Council and Commission are not applying their own standards of democratic rule of law on a case-by-case basis.

Mr President, the clear stance taken by the Swedish Presidency and Commissioner Patten in this debate have not betrayed my confidence.

Mr President, the European Union can no longer confine itself to observing from afar what is happening on the other side of the Mediterranean and clear its conscience by making mainly generous donations of funds, the use of which it has not always been able to regulate, as Commissioner Patten has just reminded us in so timely a fashion.

The European Union must accept its due responsibilities, alongside our American counterparts.

This is what you are striving to achieve, Mr Solana, in close collaboration with Mr Moratinos and many of us welcome the work that you have undertaken to this end.

Whilst waiting for the results of the changes taking place in Washington and those which will inevitably follow the results of the forthcoming elections in Israel, we understand that you are bound to be cautious and that it is difficult for you to make any sort of forecast at this time, Mr Solana, even if we might have detected a note of optimism in your speech, something we should be only too delighted to share.

The view of the Group of the European People' s Party, one I am sure is shared by many of the Members in other political groups, is that, through your work, the European Union should be involved, perfectly impartially, in the current Conciliation Procedure in order to enable the expected appeasement that comes before the hoped-for reconciliation to be reached.

The European Union can put itself forward as mediator only on condition that it is impartial. It cannot be neutral, as if it were not already directly involved.

Yet, unfortunately, this is not the impression that was recently given by the European Union, when it showed that it was divided in its opinion in the vote within the United Nations General Assembly of 20 October 2000.

Mr Solana, if you are to speak on behalf of the European Union, we must show a united front. So what is the state of affairs?

I direct the question to you as well as to the Council representative.

In your work with the governments of the Member States, have you noticed any commitment to harmonising our points of view?

My second question is directed to both the Council and the Commission. It is the same question that I asked you in the previous debate, Mr Solana, when you could not find the time to give an answer.

Do you not think that the time has come for the European Union to take some intelligent action on the status of Jerusalem?

As I recall, we heard the Speaker of the Knesset and his Palestinian counterpart make some courageous proposals at Strasbourg.

Mr Solana, can we count on you to make it clear to your fellow negotiators, in the necessary diplomatic and firm manner, that Jerusalem is not just a city sacred to Judaism and Islam but also to all forms of Christianity?

Mr President, this debate is one more lesson that teaches us that the word peace means nothing if it is not accompanied by a political gesture, if it is not accompanied by the willingness to take the risk of making a decision.

Peace is a dangerous word if the European Union is required to use it but is not able to follow it up with action.

The action called for is political action, the full, direct assumption of political responsibility in the Middle East peace process.

The European Union, Mr President, must be fully involved in the peace process as more than merely a trading partner or a major contributing country, or it will not be involved at all.

I would remind you of the context which a number of other Members have already illustrated clearly: on the one hand, three United Nations resolutions on territories and displaced persons, disregarded by Israel even in terms of the affirmation of the principles they contain; and, on the other hand, a permanent state of emergency in the Palestinian territories: 120 thousand workers prevented from working, three billion dollars worth of damage already done, salaries only paid to government officials and administrators thanks to the intervention of European Union ready cash, half the civilian population under 18 years old killed.

Mr President, I do not care which side fires the bullets: whether they are fired by Israelis, Iraquis or Turks, it is the duty of the European Union to condemn the killing of children.

Lastly, Mr President, I am extremely concerned about apartheid, a word which should have no place in a discussion on the Middle East or Palestinian issues but which, I regret to say, applies to the situation we have to focus on.

My impression is that a system exists in the region whereby an Arab life and an Israeli life have different values, particularly in terms of humiliation and submission to the situation.

In the face of all this, it is impossible to preserve a neutral stance.

We must uphold rules and principles, especially if the Bush government is going to prove incapable of guaranteeing the affirmation of these rules and principles or unwilling to do so.

It is true - as Mr Solana said - that the negotiations are advancing, but, alongside the negotiations, the Israeli government is also proceeding with the establishment of fresh settlements.

This is why we cannot fully share Mr Solana's optimism.

Commissioner Patten tells us that we must look beyond the immediate crisis.

Today our political duty is to achieve a peace agreement; tomorrow it will be to ensure that the agreement and international law are respected: the Middle East is relying on Europe, Mr President, because it has confidence in Europe.

If we do not believe in Europe ourselves, then their confidence will be of no avail.

Mr President, as some speakers have already said, the timing of this debate is critical, not just for the parties involved but for the European Union too.

It is critical, first of all, because the election of the Israeli prime minister is imminent.

This week, all sense of time has been suspended, pending the election results.

The talks at Taba were also suspended, at least officially, even though they did manage to make progress in terms of setting up committees on matters such as borders, Jerusalem, and Palestinian refugees.

Finally, although I picked up on Mr Solana' s optimism, the possibility of holding a summit this week in Stockholm has been put off too, following Mr Arafat' s statement made at Davos on Sunday, which was aggressive, or to put it more diplomatically, was unhelpful, to say the very least.

It is a critical time too, as I was saying, because of the transition in the United States. Bill Clinton is no longer in office.

President Clinton had made the peace process one of the priorities on his agenda.

Only time will tell how George Bush and Colin Powell now see their role in the Middle East.

At any rate, this is the first time for years, as Mr Danielsson said, that high level talks have taken place, as they did most recently at Taba, without American officials present, but with Mr Moratinos, our EU peace envoy.

This may be Europe' s opportunity to make progress and to play a more prominent political role in this matter, to gain recognition for its voice and its know-how, since we are keen to do more than just bankroll the region.

We know that our aid is vitally necessary for the Palestinians whose economic situation is desperate, but we would like to export much more than just euros.

We would like to export our values, such as democracy, respect for human rights, education and tolerance.

At this point, I welcome Mr Patten' s commitment to transparency in the use of European aid.

In the words of Albert Einstein, "Peace cannot be kept by force but can be achieved by understanding."

Let us work together from now on so that the European Union can be a factor in spreading this understanding.

Mr President, I would like to counsel, if I may, Mr Solana and my very good friend Commissioner Patten to exercise caution in relation to the Middle East at this present time.

I say that, not because I am scarcely an enthusiast for a European foreign policy, but because I believe that at this present time in Israel we are in a very difficult situation.

We have an election and I must remind the House that the State of Israel is the only democracy that exists in the region and that is something that is worth noting.

We have an election for a prime minister which will be crucial in relation to the future of the peace process so we must take care not to be seen as interventionist or interfering.

I remind the House, because I gather there is much fear that Mr Sharon may be elected prime minister, that the peace process in the Middle East, from the Israeli point of view, has always advanced under the Israeli right and it was Menachem Begin who started the rapprochement with Egypt.

I ask the House and I ask the Commission and the Council to proceed with caution.

I ask the European Union to do what it does best.

It has an influence over the Palestinians and it should exercise that influence.

It should be asking Chairman Arafat, for example, why the Palestinians permit in their textbooks the sort of anti-semitism which I hoped we had long put to one side in this world.

We should be asking Chairman Arafat to ensure that the aid that goes to the Palestinians goes to those who really need it.

So, in small measures and not in large - because the United States must take the lead in these matters - the European Union can play a role, but it should not exaggerate its importance.

The role is with the parties themselves, assisted by the great republic across the Atlantic.

Mr President, in this long peace process in the Middle East, we feel as if we are on a kind of roller coaster.

Time and time again we feel as if we are slowly and painfully climbing a slope and then, when it seems as if we are about to touch the sky, we plummet sharply back to square one.

This is a hellish and never-ending rise and fall - and it is also a bit like the legend of Sisyphus - which threatens to sap the strength and even the hope of almost everyone.

At the current time - and despite having heard optimistic words - one has the impression that we are once again at the bottom of the curve, with an Oslo Process which has been forsaken by many, with the conflict on the ground at an impasse and with elections in Israel which promise to offer an outcome which is far from favourable to peace.

Nevertheless, it is now that we have to recharge the batteries of our confidence and increase our efforts.

Today this process can be summed up in two affirmations: firstly, we cannot lose sight of our inescapable objective, which is peace in the region, a peace which must be established and consolidated on the basis of an acceptance by all sides of the rules of international law and decisions of the UN Security Council: and, secondly, Europe must once and for all, in attempting to resolve this conflict, assume the responsibility that befits our political influence, our values and our interests.

It is neither dignified nor coherent to continue to renounce the leading role which we should play, restricting ourselves to being, rather than negotiators, mere spectators to what the United States does or does not do.

We are, unfortunately, still in the old situation of 'paying but not playing' .

The actions of Ambassador Moratinos have been magnificent but, in order to be more effective, he needs political support which, unfortunately, he is not being given.

I believe that the Union should no longer delay in taking a leading role, and it is not enough to make statements but it should be precisely defined and filled with content including firm economic and political commitments.

Mr President, we have reached yet another crossroads in the peace process.

A great deal will depend on the forthcoming elections in Israel.

Whatever the outcome, we must call for the new government - whoever the winner may be - to continue the peace negotiations without delay and to do so with renewed energy and, if possible, intensify these negotiations.

It is a unique moment for the European Union to gain influence and importance during these talks, given the current situation in the United States, where the new administration has probably not been fully established.

It is our duty as the European Union to reinforce our position in the peace talks, in view of the exceptional interests - mainly humanitarian - which are at stake, in view of our geo-strategic position vis--vis that region and in view of our important mutual trade relations.

The most recent wave of violence and terror must be condemned in any event.

The demand for repatriation of the 3.7 million migrants will definitely not make the peace talks easier, nor will the distribution by the Palestinian authorities of schoolbooks which, instead of preaching the language of reconciliation, preach the language of hatred and animosity, or Arafat' s tough stance in Davos, for that matter.

Despite this, I would express the hope that peace and stability in that region can as yet be achieved in the relatively short term, but I would add at the same time that it would be extremely regrettable if the European Union had not contributed to this in a major way.

It is a test of our credibility at international level.

Mr President, I spent last week with a delegation from the European Parliament seeing the situation on the ground at the flash points of the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, i.e. in Jerusalem, Bethlehem, Hebron, Ramallah, Gaza and in refugee camps.

I am still reeling from the shock.

I travelled there believing myself to be well prepared through radio, TV, press and Commission documents as well as personal conversations I had had beforehand, but the reality was altogether different.

The living conditions were dreadful and shocking.

The situation was explosive to an unimaginable degree.

The concept of a state of war best describes the situation.

The situation of the people in the occupied areas, particularly in the refugee camps, some of which have existed for over thirty years, can be described as unfit for human habitation.

Neither human rights nor fundamental values such as dignity, freedom or democracy, not even the rights to freedom from bodily harm and hygiene are guaranteed and observed.

In the country I come from, people tread extremely carefully when it comes to criticising Israel.

There, it is far easier to portray the terrorism and executions committed by Palestinians, along with the claim that Palestinian children are sent into battle.

But consider this: those who have lived for over 35 years in a refugee camp of tin sheds, with sacking over windows and doors and no form of infrastructure, will have little faith in negotiations, especially when these same negotiations have dragged on for seven years now to no avail, and not even UN resolutions are recognised.

Incidentally, gatherings of people are dispersed by Israeli soldiers often enough.

We experienced this at first hand because our group came under fire.

What we found was an explosive atmosphere generated by fanatical people who are incapable of reaching compromises and for whom principles rule the day. They are there on both sides, I might add, although there appear to be more of them amongst the fundamentalist settlers, many of whom are still fairly new to the country.

Mr President, we often use the word 'tragedy' as if we were talking about a natural disaster, such as an earthquake.

To use the word 'tragedy' for situations such as the spread of mad cow disease - which is certainly heading towards disastrous proportions - or for the situation in Palestine is, in my view, inappropriate because, in both cases, specific people are responsible.

The horrific earthquakes that have struck El Salvador or India cannot be compared with the situation of frustration and humiliation suffered by the Palestinians at the moment.

This situation was absurdly aggravated by specific and identifiable people on 29 September on the terraces of the mosques in Jerusalem.

I am a friend of Palestine and I am not an enemy of Israel.

I believe that the provocation by Ariel Sharon in September, which was permitted by the people who could have prevented it, and the hundreds of Palestinian deaths since then, have created a climate in Palestinian society which makes it difficult for President Arafat to accept late - although maybe reasonable - peace proposals which, had they been presented earlier, would, in my view, have lead to an agreement.

Hence, a thorny issue, such as the right to return of the Palestinian refugees, could have been presented by the Palestinian Authority to its own constituents as an issue involving sensitive details which had to be dealt with in conjunction with the Israeli Government on the proviso, of course, that that government agreed, in time, to Palestinian demands that were easier to accept.

It remains to be seen whether, on the international stage, the new United States administration will adopt more of an isolationist approach than the previous one.

However, I believe that the departure of Clinton has meant that, for the moment, United States diplomacy in the region will be less active.

With all due respect and consideration for our American friends, I believe that this is an additional reason for the European Union to make an even greater effort to truly promote its role in the region.

Finally, I would like to make a couple of points.

Firstly, let us hope that the High Representative, Mr Solana, is right to predict that an agreement may be possible before 6 February - Inshallah - but let us not forget that Sharon is still casting his shadow.

Secondly, I have just returned from a visit by the European Parliament delegation for relations with the Palestinian Legislative Council and I would like to encourage all of those who are able to do so to go to Palestine, to go to Gaza and the West Bank, to go there, to have meetings, to look people in the eye and listen.

Perhaps they would come to understand better.

Mr President, Members who have been elected to this House have been elected by people of Europe to speak for Europe, to determine what role Europe can play on the international scene.

I am encouraged by the statement of Mr Danielsson, the confidence of Mr Solana and the excellent analysis of Commissioner Patten of the situation on the ground.

I was horrified to witness in the delegation last week the extent to which Palestine is a military occupation.

People of Europe have no idea of this.

It is unbelievable that there is a situation where the Palestinian Legislative Council cannot even meet.

Mayors of towns like Hebron were not able to escort us to places that our ambassador had arranged for us to see.

There is wrong on both sides, of course there is.

What I am against is the 33 years of negotiations which have led to nowhere, no solution, no peace.

Therefore, I believe that we in the European Union should take a more active role: supportive - not to replace the Americans in the peace process - but to support and give confidence to both sides that we are a fair, just, impartial broker.

We should also support the United Nations and the resolutions, because if UN resolutions are to be respected by countries like Iraq and Cuba, then they must also be respected by Israel and the Palestinians.

That is something that I hope Mr Solana and the Council will impress on both sides: if there are international agreements where there is international law, then both sides should abide by them.

Mr President, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, High Representative, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, one honourable Member - he is no longer present in the Chamber - said today that he felt the "role is with the parties themselves" .

If that were to be the case, and it was solely down to the warring parties, then I ask myself where is peace to be found?

Where have they managed to secure peace, and maintain it too?

No, I believe there is a need for mediation - and I would agree with all those who have made this point - especially with robust European participation.

Because unfortunately, hatred, coercion and attempts to put the partner under pressure using these methods, have regained the upper hand.

I do not feel, as has been said here, that we can expect to see the situation improve after the elections in Israel, particularly if Sharon takes over, bearing in mind what happened under Menachem Begin.

The point being that Mr Sharon has done nothing recently that could lead us to conclude that he is prepared to agree a peace deal.

On the contrary, his road to power is paved with various measures that prove the opposite to be true.

I completely agree with Commissioner Patten.

During all attempts to engage in talks - with both parties, of course - and indeed, that is the only way to perform a mediation role, we must make it crystal clear that we cannot tolerate a situation where the resources we deploy in the Middle East cannot be used productively because Israel, in particular, is putting Palestine under such pressure and cutting it off.

I have already come across this several times before in Parliament - the more Israel endeavours to cut off Palestine' s lifeline, the more aid Europe will send, which means that Israel can save on financial input to the peace process to a certain extent, and Europe alone then has to pick up the tab.

If we must shoulder this financial burden - and I, for one, truly feel that we must - then obviously there must also be strong political engagement.

Notwithstanding all the pessimism, which unfortunately, I myself share, I hope that the High Representative will ultimately prove justified in his optimism, and that he will be able to strengthen Europe' s role.

If the US were to withdraw from the process or keep more in the background, clearly this would be Europe' s big chance to play a fitting political role in the Middle East.

Mr President, the situation in the Middle East currently presents us with a paradox.

On the one hand, some of the participants in the peace talks believe that both parties have never been so close to reaching an agreement.

The High Representative also seems to share this optimistic point of view.

On the other hand, one of the candidates in the Israeli elections declared the Oslo peace process to be dead in the water.

The fact is that we are, once again, at a crossroads where the European Union should send out a message and a warning.

I address my comments to the Council and to the Commission.

The message should be that it will not be possible to not reach a fair and lasting solution to the conflict between Israel and Palestine without reference to international law, such as that laid down by the United Nations Security Council resolutions.

The requirements that Israel must evacuate the occupied territories, including East Jerusalem, Palestinian refugees must have the right of return, Israel must have the right to live in peace within secure and recognised borders and Palestinians must have the right to their own sovereign, viable and undivided state, whose international borders are open and which is not under military control, are inextricably linked and all these rights must be fulfilled at the same time.

Jerusalem is an historic city and, as it were, part of the heritage of the entire human race. It must again become an open city again, to which everyone has access.

The world community, particularly the European Union, would not allow the fair balance to be upset, putting either party at an advantage or at a disadvantage.

Under these circumstances, the warning could be formulated thus: that the European Union formally calls for an end to violence and for talks to go ahead but, at the same time, as commercial partner and financial sponsor, it will take the necessary action against any parties who believe they can pull out of the talks and abandon the attempt to find a global and definitive compromise that is universally acceptable.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I should like just briefly to comment following this very interesting debate on the important and difficult issue of the situation in the Middle East.

The recurrent theme of the contributions from the majority of the honourable Members is that the European Union must play a greater political role.

The major role we already play in terms of economic cooperation with this conflict-stricken region must be supplemented by a greater political role.

In all humility, I should like to state that, right now, the European Union is playing a greater political role than it has ever done before.

Partly in response to Mr Morillon.

I believe there is today a greater desire than in the past for what Mr Morillon calls a harmonisation of policy vis--vis the Middle East.

True enough, there may still be differences of degree in the way this is felt.

Nonetheless, there is a very strong common desire, noted by the presidency in its contacts with all the other Member States, to work together for a peaceful solution.

I should like to say that, during the first 30 days of the Swedish Presidency of the European Union' s Council, no issue has occupied the Swedish prime minister, as President of the Council, more than that of the situation in the Middle East.

Nor has there been any issue that has occupied the Swedish Foreign Minister, as President of the General Affairs Council, more than the situation in the Middle East.

I believe the same applies to the High Representative, who can certainly answer that question for himself.

The European Union is, then, also engaged in the political process in the most intimate way possible, but we are still awaiting the practical results.

I share the High Representative' s, Mr Solana' s, cautious optimism, but we have to remember, of course, that what we are dealing with in the Middle East is a basically very difficult political conflict.

If we are to be able to achieve any kind of progress, it is genuinely necessary for the European Union to be closely coordinated internally, to cooperate closely with the United Nations and its General Secretary and to cooperate closely with the United States, which has been indefatigable in its attempts to solve this conflict.

If this happens, then I believe our optimism may also be rewarded with practical results.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I only wish to clarify certain issues, without getting into a great historical debate, since I do not believe that this is the moment to do so nor is it the moment for us to all to start discussing problems that are not germane.

Ladies and gentlemen, some of you have recently visited the region.

I must tell you that I have been visiting it since 1991, more or less continuously.

We have seen an enormous amount of suffering.

Those of us who have seen so much suffering want to try to reach a peaceful and lasting situation.

That is the commitment that those of us who are involved in trying to find a solution at the moment wish to achieve.

I would like to say that it is not advisable at the moment to appeal for frenzied optimism.

It would not be sensible to do so, but I honestly believe that the connotations of the problem have never been so well defined and we are therefore in a better position to move towards a solution.

We all know that, in order to find a solution to this immensely serious problem, we must define the territory and be prepared to talk about it, we must define the security conditions and be prepared to talk about them, we must define the future of Jerusalem and be prepared to negotiate it, and we must negotiate the issue of refugees and be prepared to do so.

For the first time the four or five most important parameters have now been defined, and both sides have accepted them as the important parameters to be defined and accepted, and they have begun to negotiate them seriously and in depth.

This is an historic step forward.

The problem that leads me to be less than hopeful is that, unfortunately, time has not been well managed.

If we had had a rather longer period of political calm, I sincerely believe that we could be optimistic at this time.

But now I am not so optimistic because time unfortunately depends on the electoral and political calendar and there is little we can do about it.

But anybody who wants to negotiate, in this case with the European Union, must accept the challenge of reaching agreements on the basis that there will be two states in the region, which are capable of defining the four parameters which I have mentioned: territories, security, the capital and the refugees.

The European Union has proposed possible solutions to these four issues.

Please do not imagine, ladies and gentlemen, that the people involved in the various presidencies, in this case the Swedish Presidency, have not put forward suggestions and ideas for making progress.

The problem is that the proposal does not always miraculously coincide with the exact solution necessary at any particular moment.

However, Mr Morillon, with regard to Jerusalem, you must believe me when I say that many suggestions have been put forward.

These suggestions cannot perform miracles, they cannot fall outside a particular framework with which we are all familiar, and you have clearly indicated what this must be.

I will also say that, with regard to the settlements, the European Union has taken a brilliant and generous position.

This position indicates that a policy of settlements such as the current one is not acceptable.

We have said so, we will continue to say so and I can assure you that, for my part, I will always condemn the current policy.

There will be no definitive solution without a solution also to this issue of the settlements.

We know this and anybody who has been involved in this horrific conflict knows this.

The concern which I do have and the cause of the deep sadness which I also feel is that, as some of you have said, the Oslo Process is beginning to lose the political support of both sides, which it had a few years ago.

It is true that the Oslo Process - not peace - is not accepted as intensely and in the same way by all the parties as it was a few years ago.

For some, it has not offered the security that they wanted, and for others it has not brought the change that they expected and wanted in their everyday lives.

Hence the frustration of some and the lack of security of others.

And that, to a large extent, explains why the current debate is experiencing such difficulties.

I would like to say that, on the part of the European Union, we will do everything possible, with your support, and with the support of the governments and parliaments, to continue making progress, but it is true that there is a limit to what all of us can do to promote the process.

It is the parties directly involved which have to reach an agreement, and the rest of us can only try to put in place the economic, social and political conditions for that agreement to be reached.

My own experience over recent months has shown me that the parties have never before spoken in such a devoted and generous way and have never come so close to solving the problems.

Unfortunately, you are perhaps right and it has been a vain hope.

I would be extremely sorry if that were the case.

Mr President, I hope this will not seem like an anti-climax after the excellent speech that we have just heard in response to the debate, but there is one point which has come up in a previous debate and in two speeches this evening that I would like to deal with once and for all.

At least one of the honourable Members who made the point today is in the Chamber and perhaps I can deal with it now, for the record, and we can regard it as having been sorted out.

It is the question of textbooks, which I know has been of concern to a number of honourable Members of the House.

I want to make it clear that the Commission rejects any attempt to use the educational system to promote intolerance or hatred.

It is worth noting that the main focus of the Commission' s assistance has always been to promote a culture of peace, tolerance and human rights in the Middle East.

For example, in recent years we have financed several projects, worth about EUR 4.5 million, to foster dialogue between Israeli and Palestinian youth.

I want to make this point absolutely clear.

The Commission has never allocated funds for the development of a new school curriculum nor for the printing and distribution of school textbooks.

The development of school curricula and the preparation of textbooks are the responsibility of the Palestinian Centre for Curriculum Development.

It was established in 1995 with the assistance of Member States through UNESCO.

Since then the Centre has undertaken the charge of harmonising the hitherto separate educational systems - the Egyptian for the Gaza Strip and the Jordanian for the West Bank - and of organising a new curriculum that meets the needs of the new situation.

Only last year did the Palestinian Authority issue their own textbooks for Grades 1 to 6.

No sign of anti-Semitic content has been found in these new books.

Books used prior to that were, I am advised, the official textbooks in Jordan and Egypt and were authorised by Israel for the West Bank and Gaza until 1994 at least - after they had been subject to some editorial control.

I hope that has made clear the Commission' s position on this issue.

The Commission has had nothing to do with textbooks and we deplore any promotion of intolerance particularly among young people and particularly through the education system.

It was worth making the point at this stage, because it has been raised before.

Thank you very much, Commissioner Patten.

The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 a.m.

The next item is the debate on the following oral questions:

B50002/2001 by Mr Miranda, on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation, to the Council, on the plan to build peace and prosperity and strengthen the State, known as 'Plan Colombia' .

B50003/2001 by Mr Miranda, on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation, to the Commission, on the plan to build peace and prosperity and strengthen the State, known as 'Plan Colombia' .

Mr President, I wish, first of all, to thank the Council and the Commission for the willingness they have shown today to address an issue of such importance, current relevance and seriousness as the situation in Columbia, which the Committee on Development and Cooperation is monitoring and will continue to monitor with the greatest attention and concern.

It has become clear that the European Union cannot only not remain indifferent to the current situation in that country, in the same way that it cannot - or rather must not - adopt half-hearted positions on this issue.

We are all aware of the situation in Columbia.

Indeed, there is no shortage of documentation from the most varied sources attesting to the tragedy affecting Columbia and the real risks of the conflict worsening, with serious danger, moreover, of it spreading to the rest of the region.

In this regard, I would emphasise the concerns expressed by representatives at the highest level of various Latin American countries at the meeting held on this issue in Rio de Janeiro, in the middle of last year.

The crucial factor in the current situation is undoubtedly 'Plan Columbia' , which was agreed in September 1999 between Presidents Clinton and Pastrana, and it is essential that the Council and the Commission stick to their positions and distance themselves even more vigorously from this agreement.

They must do so first of all because of its blatantly military nature, but also because it is not the result of any consultation process. Instead, it has generated widespread opposition both inside and outside the country, because it completely fails to address the grave phenomenon of paramilitary activity and, consequently, because it threatens the very negotiation process that has already been started.

Also, because this plan, which concentrates on the elimination of drug production and trafficking (by attacking producers, particularly through the use of chemical and biological fumigation), not only threatens Columbia' s rich biodiversity, but will also exacerbate the tragedy of displaced people, who might even have to become refugees in neighbouring countries.

We are familiar with the statement by the General Affairs Council of 9 October last year.

We obviously agree, in essence, with its proposals and we interpret it as moving away from 'Plan Colombia' .

In fact, we believe this to be the position of the vast majority of Member State governments.

It is also true, however, that some are attempting to read a complementarity-based approach into this Council declaration with regard to 'Plan Colombia' .

We therefore consider a clarification of the Community position to be crucial, which will prevent an interpretation of it which we believe is abusive, even if this runs counter to the opinion of any of the Member State governments, particularly from the only one that has publicly given a financial and political commitment to the plan.

As a matter of fact, I believe that the European Union, and the European Parliament itself, must not support an initiative that clearly stems from a bilateral agreement between the Colombian Government and the US administration.

I feel all the more strongly about this because I do not think it should be the European Union' s task to heal the wounds resulting from the actions of third parties.

Basically, as we stated in the motion for a resolution adopted by the Committee on Development and Cooperation, and as we have stated in a previous resolution by this Parliament, our understanding is that any action by the European Union must be accompanied by a strategy of its own which does not have a military dimension.

This is the attitude that I hope will prevail on the approach of European governments towards the Colombian Government on 30 April in Brussels.

Incidentally, it is our view that this European Union strategy should start from the premise that the armed conflict that is affecting Colombia is by no means confined to the drugs problem alone.

It actually predates that problem by a long way and is fundamentally rooted in deep-seated, pernicious political, economic and social phenomena in the country.

That is why I feel that a reform that guarantees another form of distribution of wealth and, specifically, a different form of land distribution by implementing a process of agricultural reform, is crucial and a matter of priority.

In fact, we also feel that the problem of drug production and trafficking requires a global approach on the basis of shared responsibility and international cooperation between the producer countries and the consumer countries, which, in the first instance, involves combating the laundering of money generated by trafficking.

The European Union' s strategy must also take account of the crucial importance of putting an end to the actions of the paramilitary groups and the impunity with which they operate, often in conjunction with Colombian military forces. These groups are mainly responsible for the wholesale massacres of communities and even of Europeans working with them.

By the same token, the European Union cannot brush aside the sense of trauma that pervades Colombia as a result of the persecution and massacre of countless leaders and members of the Patriotic Union, committed immediately after their participation in an electoral process.

In short, the European Union must fully commit itself to a genuine peace process, which 'Plan Columbia' cannot be taken to be and which it even thwarts.

We also need to continue to cooperate with Colombia and consolidate this cooperation, which would require, as a matter of priority, an effective commitment by the Colombian Government to implementing structural reforms and the involvement of communities and their organisations in solving the enormous problems that are affecting and overwhelming the country.

I hope that this is also the view of the Commission and the Council.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, let me begin by thanking the honourable Member, Mr Miranda, for putting his question to the Council and, in that way, giving us the opportunity to discuss the important issue of how the European Union can best contribute to peace and mutual understanding in Colombia.

Let me also begin by saying that the specific situation in Colombia and what the European Union may be able to do in that connection were matters which the Swedish Presidency had the opportunity to discuss face to face with President Pastrana during his visit to Stockholm last week.

The European Union is aware of the serious, multifaceted and interdependent problems faced by Colombia.

We believe that an integrated strategy is absolutely essential if it is to be possible to solve these problems.

On several occasions, the European Union has confirmed its intention, as far as possible and in the most appropriate way, to support the efforts to get a peace process under way in Colombia, founded upon respect for human rights and basic freedoms.

In its statement on 19 January of this year, the European Union expressed its deep concern about the fact that the armed conflict in Colombia had become more serious and at the fact that the suffering of the civilian population had increased.

The Union is convinced that the conflict can only be solved by means of a negotiated agreement and therefore calls for the peace negotiations to be resumed.

Since October 1999 when President Pastrana, here in the European Parliament, asked for the EU' s help for his plan for peace, prosperity and a strengthening of state power, the Council has had the opportunity, in response to a number of questions from honourable Members, to repeat the main features of the European Union' s position on Colombia and to inform the European Parliament of the way in which the work on this important matter has developed.

At its meeting on 9 October of last year, the Council confirmed its political support for the efforts to achieve peace that have been made by the democratically elected bodies in Colombia, as well as its desire to join the international community in actively monitoring the negotiation process - a process which, within the framework of consultation with civil society and with the agreement of all parties involved, should lead to a peace founded upon human rights, humanitarian law and basic freedoms.

Within the context of a continuation of the current peace efforts, the Council also gave notice of its intention to introduce a practical and independent European programme for socio-economic and institutional aid to the peace process in Colombia - a programme aimed at promoting and safeguarding respect for human rights, humanitarian law and basic freedoms, at improving living conditions for the local population, at encouraging the replacement of crops and the protection of bio-diversity and at supporting the programme of structural reforms in all areas which give succour to the armed conflict.

At the second meeting with the support group for the peace process in Colombia, held in Bogot on 24 October last year, the Commission stated that the Community' s support for President Pastrana' s peace efforts would amount to EUR 105 million during the period 2000-2006.

Approximately EUR 40 million of these funds would be allocated to economic and social development and the fight against poverty, approximately EUR 30 million to so-called alternative development and EUR 25 million to support for reforms of the judicial system and for the promotion of human rights.

The Commission has also stated that it is going to increase the additional support granted to disaster aid projects through ECHO.

The Member States are still studying how much is to be set aside for a European aid package for Colombia, but the majority have already communicated their intentions on this matter.

The Commission has undertaken to coordinate the efforts to set up an aid package of this kind.

When it comes to the fight against drugs - discussed under paragraph 8 of Parliament' s resolution of 7 September of last year, to which the honourable Member refers - the European Union has also emphasised the crucial importance of combating this scourge which directly affects all European states and their citizens.

The EU has set up a mechanism for cooperating with Latin American and Caribbean countries on drug issues, a mechanism whose action plan was approved in April 1999 and received considerable political support from Heads of State and Government at the 1999 Rio de Janeiro Summit between the European Union and Latin American and Caribbean countries.

To facilitate the changeover to other products for export, Colombia is also covered by the Generalised System of Preference, or GSP, and, since 1990, also by the Occasional Extra System of Preference.

A number of chemical precursors were signed in 1995 between the European Union and the Andean countries and have now come into force.

The Council has not expressed an opinion on the United States' s contribution to Plan Colombia, a significant part of which is intended to be used in the fight against the drugs trade, because this is an issue affecting bilateral relations between Colombia and the United States.

In conclusion, I should like to remind the honourable Member of the guidelines - adopted as part of the orientation debate at the meeting of the General Affairs Council on 22 and 23 January of this year - for reinforced operational coordination between the Community, represented by the Commission, and the Member States in the area of external aid.

Hopefully, this will help us in the future to adopt an integrated approach to situations such as that in Colombia.

The EU has offered both political and financial support to the peace initiative of President Pastrana of Colombia.

We are well aware of the concerns that the military component of Plan Colombia has created especially among representatives of civil society both in Colombia and in Europe.

The EU reservations about some aspects of Plan Colombia are well known to President Pastrana and to his government.

The Commission does not intend to take part in any initiative with a military dimension.

In terms of the fight against drugs we will continue to subscribe to the global and balanced approach endorsed by the United Nations General Assembly special session on drugs of June 1998.

Thus in Bogota last October the EU stressed the need not to put alternative development projects at risk by non-selective operation of illicit crop eradication.

Within this context we continue to focus on positive measures such as demand reduction, promoting new crops, offering market opportunities in Europe and strengthening the rule of law.

As honourable Members may know, the EU decided last October to establish a European support package for the peace process in Colombia whose overall amounts should be decided at the next donors' meeting.

This package of European support covers contributions both from EU Member States and the EU itself.

All EU Member States indicated their willingness to provide financial contributions to this package and the majority of them have already put forward their pledges.

As the Swedish Presidency just announced, EUR 105 million of programmable aid will be made available by the Commission over the period 2000-2006.

These funds will be dedicated to modernising administration, strengthening democracy and the rule of law, respect for human rights, protecting the environment and developing alternative crops.

Emphasis will also be put on tackling a series of structural problems in the country and, in particular, political, social and economic reforms.

The Commission will also continue to provide humanitarian aid to assist the all too many displaced people in Colombia.

This non-programmable aid has amounted to EUR 24 million since 1997.

This year it is envisaged that about EUR 10 million will be made available for these kinds of interventions.

These areas of cooperation are also priority areas for the government.

The EU intends to make its contribution effective as soon as possible.

For this reason a mission including experts supplied by the Commission and the Member States is at this moment in Colombia in order to identify a project in an area called the Magdalena Medio, for which the Commission could earmark around EUR 20 million.

In this region, violence is at its highest level and the EU initiative will target the promotion of dialogue between the parties in conflict.

This will constitute effective implementation of the concept of a peace laboratory.

The conclusions of these experts' mission should be available by the end of February.

Apart from our financial commitment, Europe is also increasing its political role in the conflict.

I shall mention the presence of several Member States in the Group of Friends which secured the meeting area with the National Liberation Army agreed on 26 January as well as the meeting promoted by the presidency with the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia in Paris on 15 December.

One last word about the risk of an extension of the Colombian conflict to neighbouring countries.

Many have raised their concerns, notably Ecuador and Brazil.

There has been, indeed, an increased flow of refugees crossing the border in the affected areas.

For this reason the EU emphasised the need for a regional approach to the drug problem and more specifically to the Colombian conflict.

This will be one of the major topics of the next EU-Andean Community meeting on drugs scheduled for the second quarter of this year.

The objective will be to put more emphasis on an overall strategy in order to counter the phenomenon of the transfer of illicit crops from one country to another.

Summing up, we very much welcome this debate and we very much support the line expressed by Mr Miranda.

Mr President, there is no doubt that the conflict which has been going on in Colombia for more than thirty years cannot be resolved by military means.

We agree, Commissioner, that violence can only create more violence.

That is why the PPE Group takes a positive view, not only of what strictly constitutes the Colombia Plan to put an end to the production and trafficking in drugs, but also of the concerted efforts of President Pastrana to hold dialogue with the guerrilla movement and his proposed strategy to deal with the problem at its roots and attack its causes, because the objectives of this strategy are to create alternatives which will facilitate the economic and social recovery of Colombia, the resolution of the armed conflict with the guerrilla movement, the strengthening of the democratic institutions, social development and finally the fight against drug trafficking.

In fact, unless the violence is not brought to an end through dialogue, unless rural workers are offered alternatives which will enable them to lead dignified lives, unless the serious problem of displaced people is resolved, unless human rights are respected, unless the foundations on which the rule of law is based are strengthened and impunity is brought to an end, unless drug trafficking is brought to an end, peace in Colombia will be nothing more than a fantasy.

It therefore seems to us to be essential - and we are delighted about it - that the European Union should support President Pastrana' s peace efforts in the way that the President-in-Office of the Council has just announced and also in the way that the Commission, through Commissioners Patten and Nielson, had announced previously and which it has just reiterated.

Thanks to this aid, we are making a contribution to resolving the situations of social justice and to improving the living conditions of the local population, as well as strengthening the democratic institutions.

It also seems essential to us that FARC' s leaders return to the negotiating table and that the time period for the peace zone be extended beyond the weekend which President Pastrana has just proposed, so that the peace talks may continue and reach a successful conclusion.

But this is also why, since we are determined to find peace and well-being for the people of Colombia, we ask that President Pastrana intensify his fight against the paramilitaries and armed groups which violate human rights and spread pain and death amongst the civil population, and we also ask him to apply the United Nations resolutions on human rights. This is the only way, with the concerted effort of all of us, with a truly intense and decisive fight for peace, that it will be possible for hope to return to the people of Colombia.

Mr President, the violence in Colombia is a matter of great concern to Parliament. We have already passed a series of resolutions in support of the peace process in recent years.

We hope for a genuine peace process, based on a consensus amongst the various parties to the conflict and civil society, including NGOs, farmers' organisations and local communities. That is quite different from a plan amounting to financing fumigation and likely to exclude dialogue with the main players involved in the peace process.

Europe' s external action in Latin America has proved successful when Europe has conducted its own independent policy, promoting solutions and imbuing its cooperation programmes with its own political values regarding human rights, democracy and social cohesion.

It is worth recalling events in Central America leading to the San Jos dialogue. On that occasion, the European Community as it then was supported a regional solution instead of taking sides in the East-West conflict.

The European Union must adopt this distinctive approach and promote it at international level.

To this end, as I understand it, the Council and the Commission are prepared to support an independent autonomous approach and to fight against drugs.

However, the fight against drugs goes beyond crop-spraying. Furthermore, collusion with the United States' military plans is out of the question as far as we are concerned.

Crop replacement has to be preceded by a dialogue with the peasant farmers, who must be offered other possibilities for development.

A commitment to sustainable development is also called for: we are already aware that fumigation using Fusarium oxysporum is harmful to the environment.

Government cooperation is required to facilitate redistribution of the land so as to guarantee the farmers' survival and put an end to mass migration.

In short, a different plan is needed, one based on negotiation.

As regards Community cooperation, we are somewhat concerned that the EUR 105 million of aid planned may not be allocated to specific projects to combat poverty and promote human rights. We should like to receive more details concerning these various funds.

In particular, we would like some guarantee that NGOs will cofinance the projects for which the funds are intended and will therefore be involved in their management This would also represent a guarantee for the future of Colombia and of this Plan Colombia.

According to the information available to me at present, there are currently no NGO cooperation programmes cofinanced by the Commission in Colombia.

If indeed there are some, I would like details on them.

What type of programmes are they?

In short, we believe that the European Union must pursue its own policy in Colombia. This policy should involve genuine peace, dialogue, the elimination of poverty and prospects for sustainable development.

No other route can lead to peace, especially not unpredictable military moves by the United States. The latter are certainly not acceptable to this House, and after what I have heard today, I trust they are not acceptable to the Council or to the Commission either.

I believe it is important to make this clear. If we succeed in drawing up a sound peace plan for Colombia with the European Union acting independently, today will have been a good day.

Mr President, the population of Colombia is suffering under a regime of poverty, violence and drugs.

These three problems can only be solved in interrelation to one another.

Many Columbians live in dead-end situations.

More than half the population earns less than two dollars a day.

Three percent of Columbians own 70% of the land.

Many farmers rely on growing coca and poppy as their only means of existence.

Social inequality, violent traditions and the lack of state power give guerrilla fighters and paramilitary units free reign to sustain their unscrupulous acts of terror.

Their fight for power is essentially a fight for drugs.

Lawlessness reigns supreme, and human rights violations are legion.

Needless to say, the world drugs problem must mainly be tackled at root level, that is to say also in the producing countries themselves.

That is why it is essential for farmers in Columbia to be offered a reasonable alternative to producing drugs.

This should also be the focal point of the European contribution.

In addition, Europe and America must, of course, also open up their markets to alternative products from Columbia.

A unilateral military approach will not offer any solace as long as the deeper causes are not addressed.

So far, the contamination of plantations has resulted in serious environmental damage and horrific disorders in people, as well as in a shift of production.

However, we should at the same time not be nave.

We need to realise that a hard-line approach is sometimes required vis--vis the drugs mafia.

It is not always possible to win over big-time villains by negotiation alone.

Europe should mainly focus on the outcome.

The world must be set free from drugs and the Columbian population from poverty and violence.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, exactly which Plan Colombia are we discussing here?

Is it the first version which was sent straight to us, in English, from the United States before being submitted to the Colombian Congress or the second version, intended for Europe, which stresses the social aspect but certainly does nothing to conceal the basically military nature of the plan.

This programme of aid to the Colombian Government aims to combat drug production and trafficking.

How is it going to do this?

By providing the Colombian Government with weapons.

This military equipment is apparently going to be used to destroy cocaine plantations.

You will forgive me if I am somewhat dubious about the use of these weapons in a country which, since 1948, has been devastated by a war sparked off by socio-economic reasons that are valid today, but which is increasingly becoming a war between the military-paramilitary alliance and the people.

Exactly who does Plan Colombia see as the opposing forces?

Officially, it is the Colombian State combating drug traffickers.

In reality, the drug barons are protected by paramilitary groups, who are in turn trained by the Colombian army.

These are the groups that are killing peasant farmers, the coca growers, and driving out the people living in areas valued highly by the oil companies.

That is without even mentioning the pressure exerted on the supporters of the 'Nunca Ms' project who are fighting to keep the memory of these atrocities alive.

On the pretext of combating drugs, a war is being waged against the civilian population,.

This plan provides direct support to the murderers, by which I mean the paramilitary groups, that have already killed over 150 people since the start of the year and whose close links with the army are obvious.

Moreover, on no account can the European Union sanction the lack of democracy or legitimacy evident at the signing of this agreement between the American and Colombian Governments.

The European Union and the Member States should not cooperate with this plan; they should oppose it, as do the NGOs and local social movements.

There is no question of sharing the responsibility with America.

I support the view of the Committee on Development and Cooperation.

We shall, therefore, vote in favour of this resolution which, far from recommending arms donations, proposes quite the opposite approach, i.e. to encourage scaling down armed conflict, to fight the association of the military and paramilitary groups, to show respect for those working in defence of human rights and to improve the living conditions of the population in conjunction with social movements, rather than against them.

Holding talks is the way to achieve peace, not waging war.

Mr President, although the whole of Latin America suffers from inequalities which ultimately lead to violence, Colombia is where these tragic dynamics are manifested in their crudest and most dramatic form. Indeed, as a doctor and teacher of medicine, I can tell you that a branch of epidemiology known as the 'epidemiology of violence' has come into being in Colombia.

The European Union has made conflict prevention and the peaceful and negotiated resolution of conflicts a fundamental principle of its international role.

Plan Colombia, drawn up between the United States and President Pastrana with no involvement by the Colombian Congress, is diametrically opposed to that principle.

Consequently, I returned yesterday from the World Social Forum in Porto Alegre bearing a specific undertaking I am prepared to defend in this House. A group of parliamentarians drawn from Latin America, Europe and other parts of the world gave this undertaking to make it quite clear that we should say no to Plan Colombia and yes to a negotiated and peaceful solution to the conflict.

Herein lies the difference between the European Union and others who have intervened.

Arguably, the best way to combat drug trafficking is to dismantle the international networks for the distribution and laundering of dirty money.

The best solution to violence is to persevere with peaceful efforts to achieve democracy, negotiating with and dismantling the paramilitary networks linked to the army and to the state apparatus.

The best solution to poverty and inequality is to push ahead with social reform to ensure rights for all.

The opportunity before us is there for all to see.

Mr President, some confusion has arisen over the current dramatic situation in Colombia. It might be useful to recall that just a few days after his election victory - which incidentally was the greatest and most significant victory by a Colombian President in recent years - President Pastrana met with the top leadership of the FARC, the largest and most long-standing guerrilla group in the Americas.

It was the first time in thirty years of conflict that a President-elect came face to face with the leaders of a guerrilla movement on Colombian soil.

Three weeks after his investiture, the leadership of the ELN, the second largest guerrilla group in the country and representatives of civil society reached an agreement in the German town of Mainz.

Negotiating tables were set up, and a demilitarised zone the size of Switzerland was established under guerrilla control.

Unfortunately however, this whole period has been characterised by a conspicuous absence of peace.

Furthermore, violence, murders, extortion, kidnaps and sabotage by left and right-wing armed groups have become more widespread than ever.

Combined with the widespread climate of violence the country is enduring this situation has given rise to considerable scepticism regarding resolution of the conflict.

What can the European Union do, faced with such a situation?

As stated by the Commission and the Council, the only possible way forward is to support a specific European Union response aimed at promoting the strengthening of institutions, respect for human rights, alternative development, humanitarian aid and social development.

Commissioner, Representative of the Council, let me put it to you: do you really believe that at this critical juncture Colombia can allow itself the luxury of foregoing the aid and resources being assembled thanks to international solidarity?

An effort is clearly called for. It is also clear, Mr President, that moderation becomes reprehensible when it shies away from commitment.

The European Union cannot and must not enter into any commitment other than a firm commitment to offer strong support for peace.

For peace to be possible, three conditions must be met: cessation of criminal violence, a return to the negotiating table on the part of the guerrillas - President Pastrana has issued an appeal for them to do so and we hope it will be heeded-, and a firm commitment by the government to ensure that all the players in the peace process - every single one of them - reap the benefits of peace, along with civil society.

Mr President, I am convinced that generosity, realism, and bold and imaginative proposals are the way forward. Above all, good will is the key to a solution to the Colombian problem which the European Union is able to endorse, as the Council and Commission representatives have stated here today.

Mr President, the European Union should combat the illegal drugs trade and support a genuine peace process in Colombia but it cannot, must not, should not, do so by cooperating with Plan Colombia.

This is a barely disguised military strategy, sponsored by the US, whose effect will simply be to escalate the conflict, to aggravate the abuse of human rights and at best displace drug production.

Three quarters of the US contribution to the package is military assistance; only 6% will focus on human rights and only 4% will be put towards helping displaced people.

How anyone can argue that this is a plan that will support the peace process is baffling when only 1% of the US contribution is set aside for this specific purpose.

Plan Colombia was not a product of consultation with civil society at a local, national or international level; it was never approved by the Colombian Congress.

It has been the object of opposition in every sector of society, local communities, democratically elected governors, the Catholic Church, non-governmental organisations.

Support for it would therefore damage the trust and credibility the EU has earned with its projects and in its relations with local communities.

As for aerial spraying, what is proposed is no less than the use of biological weapons.

The toxic fungus spray used to kill the coca has been found to have caused fever in local people, to kill cattle and fish and it has been shown to attack the immune system of humans with effects up to and including death.

Dr Mondragon, giving evidence in this Parliament earlier this month, showed that the fumigation of 22,000 hectares of illegal crops last year in Colombia did not prevent 38,000 hectares of new cultivation because the problem is one of no alternative for the peasant farmers.

I welcome tonight, Mr Danielsson' s statement that European support will be independent.

This Parliament must support his efforts with Swedish NGOs behind the scenes to promote the peace process for all parties involved that was started in Costa Rica.

I am very glad that he was representing the Council and not Mr Solana, who scuttled out before the start of the debate, and who so badly misrepresented the EU when at the Madrid meeting last July he made a pre-emptive statement in support of Plan Colombia.

I very much welcome Commissioner Nielson' s commitment tonight to have nothing to do with the military strategy.

That is what this Parliament calls for, but he should disown the Commission press statement of September last year which expressed support for the plan.

Mr Salafranca says there is confusion.

It is not an expression of bad faith in President Pastrana and his attempts to pursue the peace process to point out at the same time that he has failed so far to disband the paramilitary groups, to end the abuses by the Colombian Army or to offer proper protection to human rights defenders, 25 of whom have lost their lives in the last three years.

Mr Salafranca condemns abuses by left-wing and right-wing groups.

He is right to do so but we do not give any succour to the guerrillas, whose abuse of human rights we condemn, when we say that over 75% of human rights abuses are caused by the paramilitaries and the army.

This Plan Colombia is a plan for war not a plan for peace and tonight Europe rejects it completely.

Mr President, I would just like to endorse everything that Mr Howitt has said.

Plan Colombia is promoted as a means of combating of drug production and trafficking, but since drug eradication and crop spraying started six years ago, the actual coca plantations have almost trebled, which shows that this is not an effective method.

It does not work and it is also an ecological disaster.

Since the drug wars started in the 80s, violence has increased in a terrible way in Colombia.

Seventy-five to eighty per cent of the killings are committed by the paramilitary forces to protect big farmers and oil companies.

The Colombian Government pretends that it is trying to combat paramilitarianism but in fact it is turning a blind an eye to it.

It knows very well that there are clear links between the paramilitaries and the armed forces.

If military equipment is increased in accordance with what Plan Colombia is proposing, it will clearly reach the paramilitaries.

It will increase the massacres; it will increase the disappearances; it will increase the violations committed against ordinary innocent people.

Any plan which includes a military element is not a solution for Colombia.

Many Member States have a major problem with the military component and it is very cynical to say that we want to help the social area when clearly this plan is a military plan.

Mr President, the European Union is finally realising that there are serious social problems underlying the tragic situation in Columbia, specifically the need for the fair redistribution of wealth and land between the few who have everything and the many who have nothing.

Clinton and Pastrana's 'Plan Columbia' , which reinforces military structures for combating drug trafficking, has the effect of preserving this social imbalance, just as the paramilitaries, loyal allies of the Pastrana army and drug traffickers, preserve it.

It is no coincidence that Carlos Castao is friendly with the government and is head of the drug traffickers and paramilitaries.

It is no coincidence, while the paramilitaries are murdering peasant farmers and political and democratic representatives, that, under the pretence of fighting drug trafficking, American spray planes are destroying the harvests with fumigation and forcing peasant farmers to leave their villages.

If the European Union genuinely believes in the provisions of its Treaties and its recent Charter on justice and human rights, it must support the social claims of the Colombian people and oppose 'Plan Columbia' , for it is a plan for war, not for peace.

Ladies and gentlemen of the European Union, if no genuine redistribution of land is carried out in Columbia, even European Union aid will end up lining the pockets of the drug traffickers, of the large land owners and multinationals.

This tragedy is about the redistribution of land and fair social justice.

Mr President, as many Members have said, speaking on 'Plan Columbia' , this United States military plan, the European Union must intervene autonomously and independently, pursuing a non-military strategy, promoting and safeguarding respect for human rights, humanitarian law and fundamental freedoms and, most importantly, doing something to improve the standard of living of the local communities.

On several occasions, including in recent months, we have drawn up resolutions on human rights in Columbia, resolutions adopted in this Chamber.

Well then, I would like to take the opportunity afforded by this debate to condemn another incident: since 15 September 2000, three Italian citizens, engineers employed by a company which makes sweet-making machines, have been in the hands of the National Liberation Army.

Together with these three Italian citizens, there are three other Europeans and thousands of Colombians.

Not only have they been held prisoner for four months, it has not been possible to communicate with them at all.

The Italian authorities are doing everything in their power but there is a certain unwillingness, even on the part of the Colombian Government, to undertake serious negotiations with the National Liberation Army in order to reach a solution.

Now, I feel that we must make human rights our priority, and I would therefore like to take this opportunity to ask the President of Parliament to send a letter to the Colombian authorities calling for respect for human rights and urging the government to make every endeavour to ensure, since it says that it is negotiating with the Liberation Army and the other forces, that any agreement reached will, without fail, include the immediate liberation of all the European and Colombian citizens - both Europeans and non-Europeans - who are deprived of their freedom and are prisoners of the militaries.

Mrs Ghilardotti, the Bureau takes note of your suggestion concerning the letter you wish the President of the European Parliament to send, and will inform her of your request.

Mr President, in my capacity as a Member of the European Parliament and Secretary-General of my party, Eusko Alkartasuna, and because of all it stands for in the Basque country, I want to support a peace process in Colombia. I will not, however, support just any kind of peace process but only one based, in the words of one of the NGOs most closely involved in helping Colombia, on respect for human rights and aimed at genuine sustainable development and social justice for Colombia and the surrounding region.

Endorsing a programme as ill conceived as Plan Colombia will not resolve the conflicts, because it does not deal with their roots. Furthermore, it places us in the ridiculous position of having to draw on funds to cushion the effects of that very plan.

Aside from my serious misgivings about plans such as Plan Colombia, I am bound to point out that parties such as Spain' s Partido Popular and the Spanish Socialist Party are totally inconsistent in their attitude. They are putting forward an anti-terrorist approach here today, which is quite contrary to that required to reach a negotiated end to conflicts.

However, on the other side of the Atlantic they advocate precisely the opposite approach.

Our Spanish neighbours -or at least those who are seeking solutions in Colombia whilst denying them on European soil - certainly seem to be adopting the 'do as I say and not as I do' approach.

Mr President, the discussion we are having this evening in plenary is evocative of the hearing of the Committee on Development and Cooperation that took place back in September of last year.

There is widespread agreement as to the fact that Plan Colombia and these pronouncedly military components pose a threat to the peace negotiations now under way, and will engender an escalation of the conflict in Colombia after more than three decades of civil war, over 300 000 dead, and when we had hoped that it would be possible to engage in dialogue once President Pastrana took office, and resolve the country' s problems, i.e. the conflict.

The point has been made repeatedly today that the world drugs problem must be tackled at its roots.

Naturally I agree with this, but the problem of the conflict in Colombia must also be tackled at the roots, and Europe cannot afford to make the same mistakes as the USA, by believing that the drugs trade is at the root of the intensifying violence and conflict, and at the same time, closing its eyes to the unjust social system and difficult political system in Colombia.

Commissioner, Representative of the Council, last September, Parliament called upon the Union to develop an independent strategy for tackling the drugs problem.

A month later, in October, the Council declared that the Union supports the peace moves and also wants to attend the negotiations.

What we have heard you say today sounds very promising and I believe the Union must continue its work along these lines.

It is farcical to believe that we can resolve the conflict in Colombia by deploying military means in order to fight the drugs trade, whilst forgetting the social and political problems facing this country, and it is also a betrayal of the Colombian people, who have already waited so long for peace and stability in their country.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, how many times has this Parliament condemned the murder and war taking place in Colombia?

How many resolutions have we adopted?

That is why I was delighted to hear the kind of statements the Council and the Commission made so eloquently today.

But anyone who believes that Plan Colombia - negotiated by the USA with Pastrana, Mr Salafranca Snchez-Neyra take note - represents another step in the direction of peace, ought to reflect once again on the fact that it will intensify the war and give succour to the military conflict in neighbouring regions, in other states.

I do not recall President Cardoso of Brazil consenting to this plan or greeting it with enthusiasm.

The role of the European Union here must be to continue to support the peace process and drive it forward, but also to encourage the government in Colombia to restore the rule of law, which is conspicuous by its absence.

There is no real separation of powers, there is corruption - we know all that is there - and it is not the task of the European Union - and I am very grateful to you for making this point - to add fuel to the fire, but rather to play a positive and committed role in this peace process.

Mr President, pursuant to Rule 122 of the Rules of Procedure and following the personal criticisms levelled against me, I should like to reply to the remarks made by Mr Kreissl-Drfler and Mr Howitt.

I think I made myself quite clear, even though I always make every effort to put my ideas forward as courteously as possible and with every consideration for my colleagues. I always try to refrain from personal criticism.

Mr Kreissl-Drfler, I challenge you to tell me at which point in my speech I supported the military dimension of Plan Colombia. Please do so.

At no time have supported it and I wish to make it abundantly clear that I am totally opposed to it. Indeed, as Mrs Ferrer stated, my political group totally condemns this plan' s military dimension.

Mr Howitt, I maintain my belief and my statement that President Pastrana acted in the best of faith.

If you feel he acted in bad faith, you should have made that clear before Parliament' s plenary session.

I only need to respond to a few of the speeches.

To Mr Howitt I would say, referring to a press statement half a year ago, that the position of the Commission is the one I have stated tonight.

We have our own philosophy and we will cooperate with all parts of society in Colombia to strengthen the role of peace.

We do not need to relate to Plan Colombia.

What we are doing forms no part of it.

To Mrs Sauquillo I would clarify what the planning is on an indicative basis and how we hope be able to spend the EUR 105 million from the Commission: EUR 40 million to projects in the sphere of social and economic development and combating poverty.

This includes a series of decentralised initiatives in the areas of health, education, development of agricultural and traditional production, and coastal fishing.

EUR 30 million in support of alternative development, EUR 25 million in support of administrative and judicial reform and EUR 10 million in actions to support the promotion and defence of human rights.

Over and above this we are envisaging a level of around EUR 10 million per year, part of which we expect to be ECHO activities.

I mentioned the displaced persons whose numbers keep growing, so we have a clear commitment to continue ECHO' s presence there.

We are expecting to stay at the level we have been at in recent years as far as NGO cofinancing is concerned.

This has been at a level of EUR 2.4 million; it could be a little more or a little less.

We have activities amounting to EUR 1.3 million over recent years for programmes to protect the environment and tropical forests.

Many of these activities will be carried out in cooperation with or through different NGOs.

It is essential for us to do this if possible with Colombian NGOs and I will be asking European NGOs when they engage in these tasks to find partners in Colombia as in other cases and create partnerships.

This will in fact strengthen the message that we are trying to get across.

Some other activities aim to stimulate the government to do what we think is right: to concentrate more on poverty, to take more seriously the social aspects of these conflicts.

Here the government of Colombia is the partner we need in our attempts to shape a peaceful development there.

It is not just an issue of whether or not we are using NGOs.

This will depend very much on the subject and activity from case to case.

But the transformation and the strengthening of a peaceful civil society, which is part of the solution and an element in the solution, can only be stimulated by a stronger involvement of NGOs.

Thank you very much, Commissioner Nielson.

I have received the following motions for resolutions, pursuant to Rule 40(5) of the Rules of Procedure:

B5-0087/2001 by Mr Miranda, on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation, on Plan Colombia and support for the peace process in Colombia;

B5-0088/2001 by Mr Salafranca Snchez-Neyra and Mrs Ferrer, on behalf of the PPE-DE Group, on support for the peace process in Colombia.

Mr President, I wish to ask for clarification on two points.

Firstly, is it in accordance with the Rules of Procedure and acceptable to submit an alternative motion for a resolution to a motion tabled by a committee?

This is an issue I wish to see clarified.

Secondly, I wish to ask whether this second motion for a resolution stands or whether it has been withdrawn.

I would like clear information on this matter.

Mr Miranda, according to the case law - forgive my use of the term - of this House, alternative motions to the motions tabled by a committee may be submitted. This in no way contravenes our customs or practices and the political groups' rights of initiative remain inviolate; with regard to your second question, however, I am not in a position to give you an answer at the present time, but according to the information available to the Bureau, nothing has been withdrawn.

I should like to say in reply to Mr Miranda' s question that my political group is indeed considering withdrawing that proposal so as to be in a position to support the amended proposal by the Committee on Development and Cooperation.

Thank you very much, Mr Salafranca, for that clarification.

Mr President, just for the record: it is my understanding that, after a careful process of negotiation between the PSE and the PPE, the PPE will be withdrawing their resolution.

If there is any change to that, this Parliament needs to be notified far in advance of tomorrow.

Secondly, to be absolutely clear and not to extend the debate, at no point did I suggest Mr Salafranca accused President Pastrana of bad faith.

But in his attempts to mute criticism of the Colombian Government, I think he thinks we think that President Pastrana has bad faith.

He has good faith, but his government has not delivered the goods.

Mr Howitt, I am not going to reopen the debate on this issue.

The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 a.m.

(The sitting was suspended at 8.45 p.m. and resumed at 9 p.m.)

The next item is the joint debate on the following reports:

(A5-0013/2001) by Mr Jarzembowski, on behalf of the European Parliament delegation to the Conciliation Committee, on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a European Parliament and Council directive amending Council Directive 91/440/ECC on the development of the Community's railways [C5-0643/2000 - 1998/0265(COD)];

(A5-0014/2001) by Mr Swoboda, on behalf of the European Parliament delegation to the Conciliation Committee, on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a European Parliament and Council directive amending Directive 95/18/EC on the licensing of railway undertakings [C5-0644/2000 - 1998/0266(COD)] and on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a European Parliament and Council directive on the allocation of railway infrastructure capacity, the levying of charges for the use of railway infrastructure and safety certification [C5-0645/2000 - 1998/0267(COD)].

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen - who I see are rather thin on the ground - following tough, but fair, negotiations between the French Council Presidency and representatives of the European Parliament, we, Parliament that is, managed, on the evening of 22 November, to make clear progress in the Conciliation Procedure on the three fundamental directives on railway liberalisation - namely those concerning the further development of the railways, the licensing of railway undertakings and the allocation of railway infrastructure capacity - such progress being towards the further opening-up of the railway sector.

I will summarise the progress made in three points, and I would like to welcome you Madam Vice-President.

We were able to get the Council' s agreement on three points.

Firstly, it was agreed that all railway undertakings should definitively be granted rights of access to the entire rail networks of all Member States for international freight transport, by 2008 at the latest.

In so doing, we ensured that from this point onwards, all Member States will be obliged not just to open the marked-out routes of the so-called new trans-European rail freight network, but also their network in its entirety, to the railway companies from the other EU States.

Secondly, the exemption clause - originally planned by Austria - which would have enabled Member States to evade the strict European requirements emanating from the respective national regulation authority, has been dropped.

As I see it, this means that across the EU, the national railway companies or their associated agencies will be the last ones to be entrusted with the licensing of railway undertakings, the allocation of railway infrastructure capacity, or railway infrastructure charging, rather this will fall to agencies of a truly independent nature.

So these are the two crucial components: the opening-up of all networks for cross-border traffic and the establishment of an independent regulatory authority in all Member States, so as to guarantee fair competition.

Permit me just to say a few words about Mr Swoboda' s report. The third crucial component to be achieved in my view, is that we managed, by means of a new provision, to make a start on the long-term goal of applying the 'user pays principle' when it comes to the cost of railway infrastructure usage.

In this way, we have ensured that infrastructure charges can be raised in the long term with a view to cost-effectiveness, so that the construction, maintenance and also development is funded by the user, and not by the tax payer at the end of the day.

In other words, as I see it, we will still need, in the long run, to implement the separation of rail service operations from those of infrastructure management.

But in any event, we need the network to be maintained by the users.

That is why we must make it our long-term goal to cover costs through charges.

As I see it, in taking these three essential steps, we are already breaking down the national, fixed railway structures and creating new possibilities for competition between the railway undertakings.

Parliament has fought for this, in conjunction with the Commission.

The Commission was not exactly enthusiastic to begin with, but it fought alongside us in the end, in a bid to achieve this liberalisation, and I would therefore like to say a special thank you to the Vice-President for her cooperation in the Conciliation Procedure.

I believe that as a result, Parliament, together with the Council and the Commission, has established the framework for an attractive railway sector, which will offer a wider range of customer-orientated, cross-border freight services in the future.

After all, what we want is to modernise the railway sector by means of competition, so that, ultimately, more freight is transferred from road to rail. This is because it is absolutely vital, on environmental protection grounds, to get freight off the roads and onto the railways over long distances.

Incidentally, the course taken by the Conciliation Procedure has again borne out the importance of the codecision procedure, and we have only had codecision rights in the transport sector since the Treaty of Amsterdam.

Without the codecision procedure we would not have managed to break down the Council' s position.

If you recall, the French President-in-Office of the Council had believed that following the first reading of the Council' s common position, all negotiations would come to an end, and we would have to accept the situation.

But no, a fair Conciliation Procedure enabled us to make progress and achieve a single market, at least for cross-border freight traffic, with effect from the year 2008 at the latest.

Permit me just to look ahead for a moment.

It is simply not enough to only ever produce laws, directives and regulations, nor is it enough just to have them transposed into national law.

My group calls upon the existing railway undertakings - and I see one is represented up on the platform, for which I am grateful - to take the necessary precautions now, so that they are in a position to make use of the new provisions when the European law that we are now in the process of adopting has to be transposed in the year 2003.

Thus, for example, the Deutsche Bundesbahn, perhaps in conjunction with the Dutch national railways or other railways, should truly exploit the opportunity to make cross-border freight traffic a reality.

I believe this is where the traditional railways must really rise to the challenge of pushing through the opening-up of the market that we have created.

If, however, the traditional railways do not exploit the new opportunities presented by liberalisation, then many industrial enterprises will consider doing business directly with small railway companies, using European law.

They will be entitled to do so.

There are 180 licensed railway companies in Germany, and they are licensed to operate wherever they wish, even if they have only operated on a regional basis hitherto.

I therefore believe we should prevail upon all parties concerned, the railway companies and industry, to take the necessary precautionary measures without delay, and make use of the competition, so that more freight can be transferred from road to rail.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, yes, it was a difficult birth, but in the end it was a successful birth.

As with any birth, there were people to assist.

Sometimes there are also people who get in the way, but in this case I should like to mention only those who assisted, in particular Commissioner de Palacio, who, as transport commissioner, was a very great help to us in finding a good solution.

I want to stress this in particular, in recognition of her outstanding work.

The French transport minister, too, who at first perhaps tried - unsuccessfully - to intimidate us a bit, in the end reached a very good compromise with us.

I should also like to thank Vice-President Imbeni in particular, who led the parliamentary delegation very circumspectly and very precisely, and also our committee Chairman, Mr Hatzidakis, who backed us in word and deed and showed confidence in the rapporteurs.

I am also saying it was a difficult birth because it took a long time, longer than it should have.

But since it is constantly being said that Parliament is so slow and hesitant and fast track or other procedures are required, I should like to point out that we had the first reading on 10 March 1999, but did not receive the common position until 13 April, over a year later, and that despite the urgency impressed on the committees by Mr Jarzembowski and myself.

But we then quickly dealt with the common position on 5 July and adopted the corresponding amendment that same day.

After that, the Council again took a relatively long time to make its comments.

I should like to stress that Parliament works quickly when it needs to, and especially when there is close cooperation as between myself and Mr Jarzembowski.

It is the Council that always has great difficulty in reaching a common position.

So what does this railway package contain?

I believe there are some very important steps, namely the specific steps it contains, but also the forward-looking stance that goes with them.

Firstly, what I would call a bespoke liberalisation, a liberalisation that is not untrammelled, that does not go beyond what sensible and reasonable experts think, but is purposeful.

I, too, Mr Jarzembowski and a few others, would have liked to have seen something more.

Be that as it may, the first steps have been taken and they should be followed through, because I also believe that what we have in the text here can, should and, indeed, ought to be put into effect sooner than we have agreed, which for me is the minimum.

Secondly, regarding the cost structure. It is true that, on the one hand, we said, for the short term - and following the Commission' s example - that only marginal costs could be asked for, in other words what an additional train costs on a particular route.

But in the long term the aim must be to cover costs completely.

Of course, this means covering costs not only on rail, but on the road as well.

Proper account must therefore also be taken of environmental costs, which - even if Mr Jarzembowski still does not quite believe it, he is already half convinced - are certainly appreciably higher for road than for rail.

Thirdly, we have not abolished the derogation for individual Member States.

It hurts, but we can live with it, and I think we shall get over it in time.

I shall, too, and I also thank you for your support in getting a particular principle introduced, or reintroduced, namely that, to a limited extent and where there is good reason for doing so, public services can have priority, of course not to hinder the most important part of traffic, namely commercial traffic, freight traffic, which is the most important since that is what we particularly want to shift from road to rail.

We have also managed to get the duration of the framework agreements for railways to use the infrastructure set such that the investments that railway undertakings make will really pay off and actually be made.

Overall, I believe it is a well-rounded package with good provisions.

You might say we can go home content tomorrow after the votes.

We have all played our part.

Firstly, the Commissioner has helped us in as much as she has quite clearly stated that further steps will be proposed by the Commission.

As I said, I also hope that they will be bespoke and purposeful, which is very important.

The second point, which is also quite important, is that, as I have already mentioned, we must gradually arrive at a system for internalising external costs, i.e. they must be considered for road and rail side by side.

That will do away with some of the distortion that still persists, namely the unfair treatment of rail as compared to road.

Far-reaching changes will not be achieved over night.

So there is no need for hauliers to be afraid.

But the railways will and must gradually be given justice and with it, indirectly, the support that is in fact merely the creation of a situation that is fair.

But the question of labour law and working hours is also important.

Here, too, the treatment is unfair.

Here, too, the Commissioner has promised, and the Council has already decided in principle, to help us to put an end to the unfair undercutting of tariffs and prices in the Member States of the European Union - a particularly common practice by the Willi Betz company - in order to arrive at a fairer system in this particular field with regard to labour law and working hours, another area where the railways are disadvantaged compared to the legal and especially the actual circumstances on the roads.

Of course, there must be investment in the railways.

It is not enough to say OK we now have a fine system, but nobody invests.

I say that especially because of the impending enlargement.

If enlargement means having a lot more heavy lorries on our roads, there will be opposition.

If enlargement means we get a transport system that is a little fairer and also friendlier to the environment, it will meet with greater acceptance.

That is how I understand the railway package that we are proposing today - that we get a transport system that is a little kinder to the environment and a little more just.

Mr President, Mr Vice-President of the Commission, since 1994, when I was elected to the European Parliament, I have heard many a debate on the frightful problems facing the European railways and I imagine that many such debates were also held before I was elected.

Despite the fact that we have known about the problem for years, I think that the compromise now being debated as a result of the conciliation between the European Parliament and the Council is perhaps the first major decisive step towards the creation of a proper new, unified rail transport network and towards much needed liberalisation - much needed in my view, Mr President, because this is how we can support the competitiveness of the European railways, which have been on the decline for years without our being able to do anything substantial about it.

Surely, everyone involved in this issue will want to give praise where praise is due, i.e. to the European Parliament and, of course, the Commission, for the simple reason that they have been urging the Council for years to take the action which it has, I think, now been forced to take - action which will certainly benefit European citizens, consumers, rail passengers and rail freight customers.

I remember that when a compromise was reached between the 15 ministers, the Helsinki Council felt that it had come to the end of the line as far as the liberalisation of the railways and the new institutional framework are concerned.

It is significant, I think, that Parliament, with the Commission's help, has managed to change Council's mind, giving us a far better compromise than the Helsinki compromise.

I do not intend to go into the details, because the two rapporteurs, who know the subject inside out and whom I should like to congratulate on the results of the compromise, have already done so; I should merely like to reiterate how important the clause on further liberalisation of rail transport is and to point out that, generally speaking, there will be no exemptions or derogations for the Member States - unless absolutely necessary because of the nature of the Member States or their position on the map.

I should like to close, Mr President, with a wish: that from now on the Council will operate with greater transparency, that it will talk to the rapporteurs early on, that it will attend European Parliament committees not simply to strengthen the role of the European Parliament but so that faster decisions can be taken, faster than the 16 kilometres an hour which is the present average speed of the railways.

Mr President, I should like to begin by congratulating all those who made the agreement we are discussing this afternoon possible. Firstly the two rapporteurs, Mr Jarzembowski and Mr Swoboda, then the French Presidency and finally the Commission, more particularly the Commissioner, who is present this afternoon.

She is to be congratulated amongst other reasons because, thanks to her presence on the Conciliation Committee, a number of significant factors were introduced allowing Parliament to emerge with the feeling of having won a specific victory, namely the document we are debating today, and not with the sense of having lost a battle over international passenger transport and national freight transport. Rather, it felt the decision had been postponed for strategic reasons.

I therefore feel we are enjoying a very positive and constructive atmosphere, in which we can tackle tasks such as that before us today.

Undoubtedly, the agreement represents a historic step forward in line with other developments we are currently involved in or are about to embark on and are going through Parliament, such as enlargement and the final introduction of the single currency.

Mr President, this decision does indeed open up the network, and as soon as it is opened, its management and rationalisation will be within our grasp.

We need not concern ourselves about the time-scale of events, because the logic of events will allow us to move forward.

That independent authority is important in the agreement. We are of course referring to the railways, attempting to promote them.

Mr Jarzembowski said that the objective was for the user to pay the cost.

True, that is the strategic objective, but at the moment we need to promote trains and therefore we should not rush things.

At the outset, we need to offer incentives for transporting freight by train. To date, trains have not proved a viable way of transporting freight.

Our freight trains travel 50% slower than trains in the United States and we have not yet been able to make a competitive offer.

We need to improve the freight network, and the companies themselves have to be competitive as regards overcoming the difficulties of rail transport.

Companies must be enabled to find a solution to sending their products from the company to the railway and once the destination is reached, from the railway to the company.

Unless this is achieved, we shall not move forward as we ought. We are all certainly aware that the proposals before us represent a net benefit to the environment.

We must therefore express our appreciation to all those who have made this agreement possible and congratulate Parliament on its unanimity.

Mr President, Commissioner, the compromise reached in the legislative consultation between Parliament and the Council on the development of rail transport is one of the most important results to have been achieved in the transport sector during the Finnish and French presidential terms.

I would like, on behalf of my group, to thank the rapporteurs, Mr Jarzembowski and Mr Swoboda, for their reports on the railway package as well as the Conciliation Committee, for their excellent work, which can be considered to be a breakthrough in this important issue.

Our group is in favour of improved competitiveness in the railways and liberalisation.

The legislative consultation between Parliament and the Council resulted in a satisfactory package that meant the job of developing rail transport could be tackled with vigour.

The development of rail transport will remain on the agenda in the future, as the Commission is promising a second railway package to include further liberalisation and the aspect of safety.

I consider the safety aspects of railways, as with other forms of transport, to be particularly important.

The utilisation of the best technology that promotes safety, and its wider application, must become a key point of focus.

The development of rail transport is vital to solve the problems of traffic congestion.

It will ease the problem of both road and, furthermore, air traffic congestion.

At the same time, however, we have to ensure that the trans-European transport networks also extend to more sparsely populated and remote regions.

As has been stated here, environmental considerations also powerfully advocate the development of the railways.

In the future, we will have to carefully observe how this railways package will be implemented in practice, and there must be further liberalisation in the light of the experience we gain from that.

Special attention has to be paid to the coordination of different forms of transport as well as the overall functioning of the network.

A great deal of work has been done, and as you know, the Group of the Greens holds the development of rail transport dear.

That applies to both public transport and freight.

Ultimately, we have had to take measures in order to stimulate the development of rail, railway licences and railway infrastructure by, among other things, opting for liberalisation in this case.

I would point out that we have a duty, in view of some forms of liberalisation elsewhere, jointly to keep monitoring safety and the social aspects which are related to liberalisation.

We are, to a certain extent, in favour of efficient transport, but we are mainly in favour of environmentally friendly transport.

I would like to make one critical comment, and that is that the environmental advantages of rail compared to road transport are dwindling fast.

This can be put down to one simple reason.

Parliament has taken decisions on the Euro I to V standards and limit values for a truck fleet which is rapidly being rejuvenated, and it is now up to us to quickly improve the emission limit value and the energy efficiency of rail transport.

Otherwise, the advantage which we mentioned a moment ago will no longer apply.

Research has now provided adequate evidence of this.

Against this background, I believe that it is fair to say - we have asked questions and have received answers in this connection - that a great deal of fine-tuning is still required, and I would now like to see the sector make a political gesture.

We have taken the political decision, but we now want to see the sector send us a signal that it is about to launch into further development.

Mr President, my group is keen on removing unnecessary border restrictions in railway traffic.

Moreover, from the point of view of the environment, space occupation, safety and working conditions, we would like to see a great deal of freight, which is currently being transported by road, transferred to rail.

This removal can best be achieved by reaching sound agreements among the EU Member States.

This is why we consented to the agreements made by the Council in December 1999 at the end of the Finnish Presidency.

These agreements provided for through trans-national corridors and for sufficient exemption and transitional provisions in order to lift possible drawbacks in good time.

Unfortunately, the majority of Parliament believed that this arrangement was inadequate and that instead, liberalisation and privatisation should be brought more to the fore.

This opinion fits in with a fashion trend which has led to a neo-liberal stampede against public services, public companies and organised employees, especially in the sectors of postal services, rail and energy supply.

Those were companies that could prove to us that we can organise our economy in a more democratic, environmentally-friendly and less profit-orientated manner, but that are now being forced to attend to the pursuit of profit and competition.

Advocates of liberalisation consider rail as an awkward state monopoly with irritating and demanding trade unions.

But the alternative could lead to chaos and conflict of interests and to new monopolies without any democratic control.

Liberalisation could, of course, benefit private companies that can gain more freedom and more opportunities to tap into fresh income, but that does not guarantee a choice in favour of more environmentally-friendly modes of transport.

Considerable disadvantages could arise, on the other hand, within existing railway companies, for their staff and for the democratic decision-taking with regard to their future transport policy.

Consequently, in this case my group was more on the side of the Council than the majority of this Parliament.

Therefore, if it had been up to my group, this conciliation would not have taken place.

Despite this, I took part in it, taking the view that irreconcilable positions would block a positive outcome, and that it is also not a good idea for the Finnish compromise to be withdrawn.

Although I have voted against the direction previously opted for by Parliament on 22 November, I called on the parliamentary delegation to reach a compromise.

When that was achieved, I abstained from voting out of regard for this procedure, just as the majority of my group will do tomorrow at the final vote.

The outcome of this conciliation will lead to more liberalisation than we deem useful, but less than threatened to be the case initially.

Moreover, I fear that this conciliation package will soon be overtaken by liberalisation plans from the European Commission which go even further, and which my group will be unable to endorse.

Mr President, Madam Vice-President, ladies and gentlemen, a radical reform of the railways was absolutely necessary, particularly in order to reverse the current trend which is, unfortunately, to do everything by road, with, consequently, a negative impact on rail freight services.

However, beyond this reality, which is certainly used as a pretext, the final proposals in this report go far beyond what we were hoping for.

The only major issue here, though, is not the three, five or seven years that it has taken to obtain this result.

For we still have one major concern and that is the desire that some people have expressed to liberalise the sector completely. This is unacceptable to us.

We should be cautious, as this liberalisation of the transport of goods will have an adverse effect on both local planning and social cohesion, particularly if the service provision no longer has any respect for the concept of a comprehensive rail network and the idea of providing a service for the population as a whole.

Moreover, an important, if not crucial, test for the continuation of the concept of public service will be the opening up of the passenger service market, which some see as part and parcel of the same process.

In short, will this total liberalisation of rail transport services have any consideration for the concept of public service, rather like the case of the postal service?

I fear not, as the principle of profitability will then automatically come to the fore, a principle directly opposed to that of public service.

Ladies and gentlemen, the same applies to the notion of safety.

Of course, the infrastructure must be safe and must be a matter for the authorities, but operators cannot achieve a lawless and fiercely competitive market without the risk of bottlenecks or a serious accident which would compromise everything that has been done.

To sum up, whilst we recognise the need for Europe-wide investment in order to give the rail industry the boost it needs, we are still extremely concerned about this incipient liberalisation.

We hope to see proper assessment made before implementing the next stages, as we are aware there are other options which can and must be explored.

Mr President, it is to 'railway speak' that we owe numerous figures of speech.

For example 'the train has departed' is what we say when we arrive late.

Unfortunately the same can be said of our train.

The package of three proposals for directives concerning the railway infrastructures, to which we will give our assent tomorrow, is long overdue.

The ultimate outcome of the lengthy negotiations within the Conciliation Committee, has in fact come ten years too late.

The statistics bear this out, I am sorry to say.

There has been a massive decline in the amount of freight transported by rail over the last few years, and there is every reason to believe that it will be very difficult to reverse the trend in the foreseeable future.

If we call to mind that we accomplished the single market for freight in 1970, and the internal market in 1992/1993, then since this is now the year 2001, we are clearly going to reach our destination late, added to which, our train is travelling on a go-slow stretch.

Setting a deadline of 2003 for the opening-up of the trans-European rail freight network certainly sounds reasonably committed, as does a deadline of 2008 for national freight traffic, but this is surely sending out the wrong signals.

When you consider that the question of committing eastern freight traffic to the rail has not even been properly addressed then clearly this is yet another area which will set us back.

There are other, better signals too, a green light as it were.

We must not overlook what has been achieved in the way of positive results.

Thus, for example, the creation of independent regulatory authorities does at least give the go-ahead for more competition, and we can only hope that the necessary reforms do not get stuck on the sidings.

The exemption provisions for certain Member States are, after a great deal of to-ing and fro-ing - and not including the small country of Luxembourg - only really for the benefit of the truly peripheral Member States, and at least the project for improving the railways and freight transport is up and running.

Interoperability is the next item on the agenda, and we are currently setting the points for more intermodality.

At some stage it will be all systems go for Europe' s rail passengers, and not just on Europe' s roads.

We must not lose hope and with that in mind I would like to say a big thank you to both rapporteurs and to the Commissioner, whose combined efforts have already been mentioned today and for which they have rightly been commended.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, Commissioner, there is talk in this Chamber of who the winners in this conciliation are.

In my view, it is the citizens of Europe who are the winners.

Once we have successfully implemented this conciliation, we shall also have opportunities to create a better environment in Europe, and in that way we are serving all citizens.

I see the environment as one important reason why we must get to grips with the issues relating to railways.

We know, of course, that road transport is increasing at the expense of rail transport and that it has been doing so for a long time.

It is also important that we should create opportunities for combining forms of transport so that it is possible, over long distances for example, to use both road and rail transport.

Another problem, of course, has been the high rail charges which have presented obstacles to more efficient railway traffic.

The railways' organisational structure is also at fault.

I think we have achieved a good conciliation we can rightly congratulate ourselves on, even if we might sometimes wish it could have gone further.

Where the marginal cost charges are concerned, I also think this is a good conciliation.

In this way, it will be possible even for long-distance operators to compete.

This is important in Europe, where distances are long.

The regulator, who is to be appointed under the terms of the conciliation and who is to oversee the system, is also an important factor because it is important to create confidence in the railways and in the solution we have now arrived at.

I think, then, that we have a good result and I want to thank everyone involved.

Finally, I hope that we can all make sure that it is turned into a reality.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, the era of the railway in Europe is underway, and not before time.

It certainly is high time that we developed Europe' s railways properly and, more importantly, allocated resources to this task.

At last, we can be confident, we can meet the expectations of all citizens and believe that the shift from road to rail is underway.

The conciliation on what is called the 'railway package' will have allowed us to lay the foundation stone.

At the moment, we have to provide substantial investment for railways to meet our expectations and be recognised as the means of transport that produces the least pollution and helps to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.

I shall continue to remind you of the worrying predictions made by scientists regarding the climate change that is, to a great extent, caused by road transport.

Glaciers are being melted at a faster rate than steel rails are hardening in the mould.

Although we welcome the decision made at the France-Italy Summit to build a new railway between Lyons and Turin, the European Union should be far bolder in its infrastructure plans.

In some cases, the question still arises as to whether it is better to build a new motorway rather than considering rail.

I am thinking specifically about the Moselle valley freight tunnel, the so-called 'A32' project.

The European Union must lead the way to ensure that rail becomes the preferred means of transport for all citizens as well as the natural and even the only means of transporting goods.

Mr President, Commissioner, what is positive about this compromise is that obstacles to cross-border freight traffic will be dismantled in the foreseeable future, which definitely improves our chances of being able to transfer freight from the roads to the railways.

Our guiding principle must be to create a truly level playing field on the competition front, through harmonisation and by taking comparable cost components into account.

But then there is more to competition than a debate about lowest costs and highest profits, it is also about striving for sustainability, social competence, user-friendliness, quality and service.

Why should a private-sector supplier be a priori any better at this than one under public ownership?

We have a duty to explain what we understand by general public services, and whether we think they can be provided more effectively by publicly owned operators than private operators, or less so.

I believe that having equal conditions of access for all will not prove profitable in every case.

Private companies must make a profit or else face their demise.

Publicly owned companies can, in fact, sustain losses in areas where this is necessary for social reasons, on account of their redistribution potential.

It will not do for the profits to be absorbed by the private sector and the losses to be borne by society.

What we need is for the public and private suppliers of services in a European internal market to adopt an approach that is in the interests of the common good.

This will require uniform framework conditions.

Experience will show whether the nascent liberalisation of the European railways will mean better services for rail users.

Certain Member States have already implemented more far-reaching liberalisation measures, with very mixed results.

Germany - I am sorry to have to say this gentlemen from the Deutsche Bundesbahn - is a prime example of how not to go about it.

Stretches of track have been shut down en masse at regional level, there have been railway station closures, ever-increasing cycle times, repair workshop closures, and drastic cuts in staffing levels.

This has nothing to do with competing for services to the general public.

Commissioner, Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, in common with the vast majority of Members of this House, I too believe that the outcome of the Conciliation Procedure on the reports concerning the railway package has enabled us to take a big step towards opening up the market in international freight transport.

The reports by Mr Swoboda and Mr Jarzembowski set the right tone.

The separation of rail service operations from those of infrastructure management is pre-requisite to the liberalisation of the European railways.

I would like to offer my heartfelt thanks to all concerned for the difficult, but ultimately productive, work undertaken within the Conciliation Committee.

As is apparent from all the other areas that have already undergone liberalisation, competition has a positive effect on the area concerned.

In freight transport, the advantages are tangible and plain for all to see.

If the European railways can improve their competitive position vis--vis other modes of transport, especially road transport, this will have a positive impact on the environment and will also help solve the serious problems attending road transport.

In order to achieve these goals, and in fact this is logical, competition must not stop at respective national borders.

It must be able to flourish on a Community-wide basis.

Only in this way will the railways become a real alternative.

Parliament has scored a major success in achieving this goal, all be it with transitional periods.

The same conditions must apply to passenger transport as apply to freight transport.

The problems emanating from the other modes of transport - road transport for example - are not just caused by heavy goods vehicles, but also by passenger transport, of course.

The railway will only be able to win back shares in the transport market if it becomes a viable alternative, and what that means these days is an international outlook, quality of service and customer orientation.

If the railway sets itself this major challenge, it has everything to gain, and all of us with it.

Mr President, Commissioner, if we truly want to improve the environment and allow railways to take the pressure off our over-congested European roads, I believe we should pursue three objectives. Firstly, those responsible for managing the infrastructure and charged with ensuring good use of the latter must be completely separate from and independent of service operators and users.

Secondly, the railways must be integrated with other forms of transport to achieve a genuine door to door service.

Thirdly, just as there are toll-free motorways so certain sections of the railway track must be free of charge.

The cost of transporting a tonne of goods should not be prohibitive. Furthermore, if we really want to change the present situation, free up our roads and achieve genuine environmental improvements, the cost has to favour the railway.

Mr President, all of us here are aware that rail transport plays an important role in the proper development of human activities, protection of the environment and sustainable local planning.

That is why I believe that we cannot be satisfied with the results of the conciliation between the European Parliament and the Council.

This compromise perpetuates the race to open up the markets and introduce competition in rail transport services, for goods and passengers alike, in order to satisfy the economic rationale of profitability, instead of meeting the requirements of the users and employees in this sector.

The report approves the plan to liberalise rail transport, and, more particularly, the plan to make infrastructure managers independent of the State.

If this is adopted, there is a risk that rail safety will be jeopardised.

However, there could have been other options.

Even if historical and national differences exist, coordination of public rail transport services on a European level is not an insurmountable obstacle.

Besides, that is what rail workers are calling for.

We must move towards establishing public Europe-wide services within the framework of a common policy...

(The President cut the speaker off)

Mr President, Mr Jarzembowski observes in his explanatory statement that we have to strengthen rail transport, to increase the efficiency and competitiveness of railways in order to reverse the downward trend of their share in the market in the last 15 years.

He observes that little progress has been made by the Member States in implementing the separation of the rail service operations from those of infrastructure management and we do not see in most countries any effective opening-up of the rail market.

In the United Kingdom considerable credit could well be paid to the former Conservative government for effecting just that, a policy which has been continued by the current Labour government.

However, last October the Hatfield train crash took place in Hertfordshire, part of the eastern region which I represent in this Parliament.

Four people lost their lives and many were seriously injured.

The accident took place on a bend with the train travelling at 115 mph.

It appears that the infrastructure authorities were aware of the fracturing of the rail as early as November 1999 and a further report was made in January of last year. No remedial action was taken.

The British transport minister, Lord McDonald, has announced there will be no be no public inquiry.

However, named members of Railtrack, the infrastructure company, and of Balfour Beatty possibly face manslaughter charges as a result of this accident.

I turn to the Commissioner, who I am sure is aware of the details of this particular accident, which I would point out is not unique within the European Union, and I would hope that she would be able perhaps to dwell on the consequences of the crash.

In the United Kingdom there has been chaos on our railways, there has been plummeting customer confidence in the rail system, remedial work has caused huge financial investment and Railtrack has threatened a delay in work on the Euro Channel Tunnel Phase II programme which is very much part of the integrated European rail system that we all support.

I very much hope that the Commissioner may be able to give some support to the relevant authorities in the United Kingdom.

This is not merely a domestic issue.

It has European ramifications as far as the Channel Tunnel work is concerned.

It may well be that additional support can be given through the TENs programme and I look forward to my discussions with the Commissioner on this extremely serious development.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I should first like to express my satisfaction with the final outcome of the conciliation, along with all or almost all those who have already spoken.

It has to be made abundantly clear that this initiative is aimed at saving the rail network, modernising it and adapting it to the new state of affairs. We are hoping that at the dawn of the twenty-first century rail will once again become what it was at the start of the twentieth: a reliable, efficient, fast and - for those times - safe form of transport, stimulating development, and indeed offering guarantees of wealth and territorial balance.

I believe we took a significant step in that direction on 22 November last year.

The decisions we are to adopt today aim to improve the quality of the service.

Contrary to the views expressed by some honourable Members, I believe that the problem with rail transport nowadays is not whether it should be public or private, although it is generally public.

The problem is that it does not work.

Let us be clear about this.

There would certainly be scope for discussing some of the measures put forward here if we were dealing with a rail network which worked.

The trouble is that given the current situation, where a public service is guaranteed by public undertakings with a monopoly in the area of the Member States of the Union, it does not work.

It simply does not work in the present situation of compartmentalised and divided national rail networks.

What we are seeking to do is in fact to effect a change - I would go so far as to say a revolutionary change - where the railways are concerned.

Ladies and gentlemen, what we have achieved today through this debate and what I hope we will achieve tomorrow - I have no doubt that you will vote for the agreed text - is not simply opening up the network, but setting up something new and different.

We are setting up a European rail network which does not yet exist, to replace 15 national juxtaposed networks.

It is a revolutionary change, and we need to be aware of what we are seeking to achieve.

Some people have complained that we spent too much time on this, others that we rushed things.

I would like to say that we might well all have liked to move forward faster. However, it is fair to say that in the short time - just over a year - since I took over responsibility for this area, determined progress has been made and the whole process has accelerated.

Furthermore, the codecision procedure has worked very well. In particular, I would like to thank the whole Parliament for the work undertaken, especially by Mr Imbeni and the rapporteurs, Mr Swoboda and Mr Jarzembowski.

Nevertheless, I should also like to thank the Finnish Presidency for its contribution at the time, and particular thanks are due to the French Presidency. In that case, the French transport minster was a knowledgeable railway enthusiast.

It was suggested that this would make it harder for us to achieve our aim. On the contrary, it helped us to reach the point we find ourselves at today.

Concerns have been expressed regarding enlargement. Clearly, this will result in the European rail network we are currently setting up being extended beyond the current borders of the Union as they are redrawn.

The key components are opening up the whole network and separating functions, as Mr Jarzembowski has rightly pointed out. However, there is also the crucial and decisive issue of levies.

Many of you, ladies and gentlemen, have raised this issue.

The White Paper will cover the matter of non-discriminatory levies for infrastructure.

In this regard, the conclusions of the Costa report are to be included in the White Paper, and I am grateful to Parliament for this.

I should add that in addition to discussing what has already been achieved and will be completed today and tomorrow, we are going to deal with road transport and the action we need to take for the future.

I must reassure Mr Swoboda that the measures he referred to, aimed at achieving fair competition within road transport and between road transport and other types of transport have already been put forward or are about to be.

In addition, this year we intend to present the directive on rail safety some members of Parliament were concerned about.

I trust I can rely on your support regarding the adoption of the directive on interoperability. Furthermore, we plan to draw up a communication opening up national freight transport and international passenger transport to the market, as I stated when both of these directives were being processed.

The communication should even be ready before the end of the year. However, in addition to this communication we plan to present a new directive, amending 91/440/EEC, to open up access to the national freight network and international passenger transport.

Furthermore, there will be an amendment to Directive 96/48/EC concerning the interoperability of the European high-speed railway system.

As I said earlier, we will present a second rail transport package before the end of the year, and I hope it will be processed quickly.

Safety is a key factor, as is environmental improvement - both affect the citizens directly. Nonetheless, I should like to share with you some final thoughts on some of the issues that have been raised here.

There has been talk of privatisation, because liberalisation is to take place. It has been said that public services will not be guaranteed.

We must not confuse the issue, ladies and gentlemen.

What we are concerned with today is opening up a trans-European network and a trans-European railway to competition, and ensuring that properly licensed European operators may be either public or private.

Furthermore, nobody is talking about privatisation of any sort.

There is no question of privatising the operators and especially not the infrastructure.

On the contrary, investment in the infrastructure will be called for.

The situation is that in some countries not a single euro has been invested in infrastructure over the last thirty years.

Safety provisions will require that conditions be such that safety can be guaranteed. This applies not only to the rolling stock but also to the fixed infrastructure.

To reiterate my previous remarks, public service is not, unfortunately, properly assured at present, which is exactly why we are striving to improve it.

A moment ago Mr Ortuondo Larrea said that two other issues had to be dealt with: intermodal transport and balancing other forms of transport with road transport.

This very morning I read a press note from one of the employers in the road haulage sector. It complained about the White Paper, regretting that it was too rail-orientated.

This kind of thing is always happening.

The situation we have to cope with is abundantly clear: a 40% increase in demand for freight transport in the next ten years. Not all of that 40% should go to the roads.

It has to be absorbed by forms of transport other than the roads.

We must go on assuring growth, quality of life, employment and the welfare of the citizens of the European Union. This can be achieved through specific measures of this nature.

It will, of course, have to be complemented by a joint study of the various forms of transport, of competition amongst them, intermodality, interlinking, and interoperation. The end result will be a more efficient system which will benefit our economy and our citizens.

Trade relations with certain industrialised countries

The next item is the debate on the report (A5-0004/2001) by Mrs Erika Mann, on behalf of the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy, on the proposal for a Council regulation concerning "the implementation of projects promoting cooperation and commercial relations between the EU and the industrialised countries of North America, the Far East and Australasia" [COM(2000) 381 - C5-0455/2000 - 2000/0165(CNS)].

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, Commissioner and Members of the Commission, at this late hour, I would like to use the speaking time available to me to give you a brief introduction to the Commission proposal for a Council regulation concerning the implementation of projects promoting cooperation and commercial relations between the EU and the industrialised countries of North America, the Far East and Australasia, together with my report on it.

Apart from the rather misleading formulation of the title, which mentions the industrialised countries and which does not of course include all the industrialised countries in the world, but only those with which we do not have any free-trade areas, cooperation or partnership agreements, I would expressly like to thank the Commission for its proposal for a regulation.

As I see it, this is not the only area where it has done some splendid work, bearing in mind all the difficult political debates on this issue that have taken place in the Council, and also the cooperation with the European Parliament, which has perhaps not always been easy, no, it has done something else rather wonderful in that is has actually brought the many and varied, small-scale existing projects and programmes to be found in the aforementioned countries together in a single budget line, thereby creating a legal basis as well.

I would therefore like to take this opportunity to say a heartfelt thank you to the Commission for the excellent cooperation we have had.

The Commission proposal for a Council regulation under consideration seeks to create a solid legal and budgetary framework to underpin actions taken under the various bilateral agreements signed between the EU and the six industrialised countries mentioned.

These actions are currently financed from a number of different budget lines and some have to be undertaken as pilot schemes or preparatory actions due to the absence of a legal basis for the budget lines in question.

In producing this proposal for a regulation, the Commission has now created a legal basis.

In drafting the proposal, the Commission aimed to ensure that Member States retain the primary responsibility for export promotion.

Community action is thus restricted to measures that complement the endeavours of the Member States and other EU public bodies, and - as we always put it so nicely - thereby create European added value.

The proposal provides for regular reports to be made in future to the European Parliament and the Council.

We have amended it slightly in several places and we have also inserted the stipulation that the regulation is to expire at the end of December 2005.

In addition, I have tabled an amendment which I hope the Commission and Council will support, requesting the Commission to submit a new proposal as early as the year 2003, in which it might like to outline the overall framework for a new trade policy and philosophy.

This would also solve the dilemma that we are still facing, namely the fact that we have no positive definition of trade policy whatsoever in our Treaty. Instead we only define it in a negative way by excluding what it does not cover.

I would be grateful if the Commission could use this positive definition in future.

I believe the post-Nice Process lends itself extremely well to this, and in this connection I would also ask the Commission to always keep in mind that Parliament is not happy with the current wording of Article 133.

This should come as no surprise to you, Commissioner Patten, rather I assume that, naturally, you are familiar with Parliament' s view of the matter.

Incidentally, I would also be grateful if you would include your position in this new wording, i.e. your position in relation to one of the countries, namely the United States, which you have now set out - indeed you have provided a very comprehensive overview of our relations with the United States.

I would also like the ruminations that are currently taking place within the Commission, especially on the part of Commissioner Lamy - who would like a policy statement to be produced in the sphere of trade policy at some stage - to be included in a review in the year 2003.

The projects, which are now to be financed in concrete terms under this budget line, encompass cooperation projects, business-related training programmes and programmes for promoting trade relations.

These include the above-mentioned programmes concerning the United States, and especially those set up with Japan.

On a final note, I would like to say another big thank you for all the experimental projects you have tested out in relation to the various countries. It would be beneficial if you could draw conclusions from this, and summarise what you think could be passed on to programmes with other countries, what, in your opinion, may not have proved as successful or what you think does not stand a chance of surviving the post-2005 period.

If you carry out this review, then as I see it, we will have an excellent foundation on which to base a real trade policy and philosophy.

In the light of globalisation and the next world trade round, you will then have established an excellent basis to my mind. Once again, I would like to thank you warmly for this.

Mr President, a number of existing budget lines have proved useful when financing Community action involving cooperation and trade relations within the framework of the various bilateral agreements signed by the European Union and industrialised third countries.

Nevertheless, the ever-increasing challenges faced by European companies call for a more clearly defined legal framework and for a single budget line. It would then be possible to develop these operations in a more coherent and coordinated manner and bring added value to the activities undertaken by the Member States.

The regulation put forward by the Commission is therefore very timely, and Mrs Mann' s excellent report is even more so. On behalf of my group I would like to congratulate Mrs Mann on her work, thanks to which, the Commission' s proposal is now much more coherent and effective.

My group also tabled a number of amendments to this proposal.

These were aimed chiefly at making decision-making processes more transparent by involving the European Parliament in the programming and definition of the various subprogrammes to be undertaken in the partner countries. Our amendments were also intended to ensure greater transparency for the activities of those involved, both the European Union and the associated countries, in connection with programmes involving cooperation and commercial relations.

In particular, my group has requested the Commission to submit the relevant documentation after decisions have been taken concerning definition of the nature of the objectives of the various programmes and the timetable for invitations to tender. As we see it, this is the only way to improve efficiency and access to these programmes by European citizens and companies.

Lastly, I should like to refer with regret to the fact that Parliament was unable to adopt this report - the Mann report - at last December' s part-session. Had the report been adopted the programme could have entered into force quickly, as planned.

Let us hope that it will, nevertheless, serve its purpose.

Mr President, it is sometimes easier to offer congratulations at such a late hour, but when you have a report like this in your hand, you could offer them at any time of day.

I think Mrs Mann has produced an absolutely outstanding piece of work.

I would like to focus once more on two particular points.

One is the issue of transparency and the other is the problem of a trade doctrine which still endures.

On the matter of transparency, I would urge the Commission, in particular, to throw its weight behind Amendments Nos 9 to 11.

I think that is precisely the line we should be taking, in other words, not only should Parliament be kept duly informed, but since so much has been made of transparency under the European transparency initiative, a fully comprehensive array of documents should also be made available on the Internet, so that they can be called up any time, and can, in their turn, help enhance the credibility of what we all stand for, namely the development of a new Europe.

What is extremely interesting - and you certainly cannot say that of every report - is the justification part that has been appended.

This brings me to the second issue, that of the fundamental organisation of trade policy.

It certainly has not become any easier to get the message across that what trade means to us, when it is properly organised, is increased prosperity, worldwide I might add.

After Seattle and Davos, we have grown increasingly aware that we are dealing with irrational opponents of globalisation.

It is all a matter of having the right rules.

What it comes down to is fine-tuning, and to some extent, to information too.

If only all those who do not have a good word to say about globalisation could recognise, for example, how strong Europe has already become in the sphere of foreign direct investments, as is evident from this report, or indeed in all kinds of other areas.

What we need to do is set about convincing them.

It is to be hoped that the Commission, in particular, will quickly get to grips with these fundamental issues, so that we can submit corresponding programmes setting out the basic principles, well in advance of 2005 and use them to win the public over.

Mr President, I would like to thank Mrs Mann for her work, but she has managed to make a totally technical report out of what is a rather political issue.

In fact, the question of trade and trade relations between the EU and the industrialised countries, particularly the US, is a very hot topic.

So it is a pity that she missed the opportunity to address it in a more political way.

However, the proposal to establish a single budget line could simplify the work of the European Parliament as a whole and increase transparency.

I do not therefore have a problem with her technical proposals nor indeed the Commission' s proposals.

It is a pity, however, that we failed to discuss whether we needed more export promotion and, if so, what for, and to go into this whole question in more detail.

Instead she used the opportunity to expound a rather theoretical framework on trade which is her own rather than anyone else' s.

She also failed to deal with issues such as coherency with development issues and the very strong trade complex that we had.

But once again simplifying the work of Parliament and the Commission is to be welcomed and therefore we will not be opposing this report.

Mr President, Commissioner, I rise in my capacity as Vice-President of the Japan delegation and welcome the new draft regulation, which at last creates a fundamental legal basis, all be it one which will initially only run to the year 2005, for the projects on promoting cooperation and trade relations.

Firstly, I would like to echo Mrs Mann' s commendation of the Commissioner for the excellent cooperation we have had, but I would especially like to join the group of delegates present here today in praising your work, Mrs Mann, because it was no easy task and I know it has been a tripartite business, involving the Commission, the Member States and Parliament.

We must try to find a reasonable basis, because we will only make progress in this matter if we work together.

I believe that we have, in this new draft regulation, a solid basis for a political and economic debate with the industrialised states.

That is why I do not want to restrict it to trade alone.

I believe it is important to achieve a closer association with the industrialised countries of North America, the Far East and Australasia, and to step up our exchange activities.

This is necessary if we are to press home to people again- including MEPs - the significance of Asia.

I believe there are still some marked differences in this respect.

There are some excellent programmes when it comes to Japan.

I believe the Executive Training Programme in Japan is exemplary and could be adopted elsewhere, indeed there is now a similar project in Korea which is in its pilot phase.

The Gateway to Japan project is also outstanding as a trade promotion project.

Other industrialised countries could emulate it.

Conversely, I believe we delegates should consider taking our example from the relations between the legislative bodies, the American Congress for example, and Asia, because contact between the European Parliament and Asia is not firmly established enough yet.

I therefore believe we should seize on this example, in a bid to build closer relations between the two houses of the Japanese parliament and the European Parliament, and just as the Americans do, working from a legal basis, so should we use the same opportunities with regard to Asia.

Permit me to close with a brief remark.

Even though we have adopted this kind of division of responsibility, partly for reasons of experience, on account of the different legal basis, we should be aware, nonetheless, that we have very different styles of working.

Take for example my area, Asia, which keeps me extremely busy.

I believe we should underpin the ASEM Process much more firmly in political and parliamentary terms.

One thing we must be sure to do is hold a conference for parliamentarians before the next ASEM meeting.

So regardless as to what the legal situation is, Europe and Asia must grow closer together.

Mr President, I want to congratulate Mrs Mann on her carefully prepared work and have great pleasure in supporting it.

The importance, as Mrs Mann has emphasised and the Commission proposed, of a single budget line, is not just about simplifying Parliament' s work.

It is so that we can properly evaluate and vote on what money we are spending on which projects so that the Commission and Parliament can jointly consider what is best value for money and how we need to spend money in the future.

The emphasis Mrs Mann has given to the importance of clarity about the division of responsibility between the Community and the Member States in the field of export promotion is also crucial.

There is some sensitivity about this and clarity about the budget line and the legal base are not only going to help us to do our work in a more logical way but also reassure the Member States that there is a proper allocation of responsibilities.

I want to comment very briefly on two other matters.

I was very pleased as President of the delegation between this Parliament and the US Congress that the transatlantic legislators' dialogue merited a mention in the budget report.

You know, colleagues, how much emphasis this Parliament has put on the TLD.

And Mrs Mann' s report mentioned, among the many other excellent projects, the European Institute in Washington supported by the Commission.

It is just one example, but an excellent one, of how cooperation, not only financial but political, industrial and commercial, can pay very considerable dividends.

I am delighted to support Mrs Mann and as I am finishing my speech with one second to spare, I hope I will receive a bit of applause for that.

Mr President, Commissioner Patten, I too this time must depart from my usual custom and praise my colleague, Mrs Mann, for she certainly deserves it.

In these eighteen months I have been a Member of the European Parliament, I have become familiar with the fact that Mrs Mann is well versed in a number of areas and particularly transatlantic relations; and this report is an indication of that also.

I disagree with Mrs Ahern, who seems to have left the Chamber already, that the report is not sufficiently political.

There are actually very political elements contained, for example, in the explanatory statement, which I, at least, enjoyed reading.

Of course, the tone is not one of party politics.

I warmly support the targeted programme of measures to make the general commercial policy of the EU and its Member States more effective.

Closer cooperation might even be regarded as an inevitability when we take into account the amendments made at Nice to Article 133 and those many speeches which were made during the night at Nice in favour of a solution that would also go much further.

I agree with the rapporteur, too, that the post-Nice agenda should include finding a new approach to the EU' s commercial policy.

The rapporteur' s opinion on the processes of globalisation is also to be supported, and especially her opinion regarding a closer common competition policy, which concerns my own committee in particular - the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs.

The deadline set for the Commission to submit proposals to Parliament must also receive our support, as too should the use of the 'sunset' clause in this regulation.

These dates set should not, however, mean that the Commission should not have an ongoing obligation to keep Parliament up to date on the progress of the action programme.

Of all the actions covered by the proposal I would in particular like to emphasise the importance of cooperation projects with the United States of America.

For example, TABD, the TransAtlantic Business Dialogue, has, as far as I can see, worked well and succeeded in preventing trade disputes and bringing about coordinated views in areas requiring a swift reaction.

A good example is the Istanbul World Radio Conference last spring.

Transatlantic trade is still the thread of life as far as the global economy is concerned, and the importance of cooperation in this area must not be underrated.

We have to remember that there is also a strongly political element connected with this cooperation, the basis for which was created in 1995 with the signing of the New Transatlantic Agenda.

Furthermore, Parliament wants to be involved in this work and has therefore attempted to seal its relationship with the US Congress in the spirit of the transatlantic dialogue that my colleague, Mrs Read, also mentioned earlier.

Mr President, I have taken part earlier in the day in two debates on the Middle East and the Mediterranean and now we move on to slightly easier terrain, perhaps, but a very important subject indeed.

Let me begin first by thanking Parliament for the support that it has given to this Commission proposal, firstly by allocating a budget for the implementation of this regulation in line with the Commission' s request for 2001 of EUR 15.6 million.

We are extremely grateful to Parliament for that.

Secondly, I would like to thank Parliament for adopting unanimously, as I hope it will, the favourable report from the rapporteur, Ms Mann.

I take this is as a strong token of Parliament' s broad endorsement of the Commission' s proposal regarding the industrialised countries.

At this stage may I express our warm gratitude to Ms Mann, and indeed to her colleague Ms Read, for their consistent, constructive support for the development of our transatlantic relationship.

Since I am visiting the United States, Canada, Japan and Australia during the course of the next three months, I am very pleased that we have made this progress this evening.

Our relations with the industrialised countries have significantly deepened, and indeed broadened, in recent years.

We are moving away from a narrow focus on trade to comprehensive relationships encompassing everything from the Common Foreign and Security Policy, justice and home affairs, education and culture, environmental issues, science and research and, which I regard as particularly important, people-to-people exchanges.

In the case of the United States and Canada, these comprehensive relationships are already a reality, while other partners like Japan, the Republic of Korea, New Zealand and Australia are keen to develop similar relationships.

The cornerstones of these relationships are the common values and the similar interests that we share.

So while we see on the one hand an increasing demand for closer cooperation with some of our most important partners, on the other, we have lacked the legal framework to be able to follow things up.

Indeed, we currently only have legal bases for actions with Canada and Japan.

The latter is limited to market access activities and it expires at the end of this year.

For the United States, we do not have a legal basis at all, compelling us to implement projects under the new transatlantic agenda as pilot projects or preparatory actions which do not require a legal base but which are limited in time to either two or three years.

The Commission proposal under discussion aims to resolve this situation by establishing a solid and common legal base which can underpin our relations with the industrialised countries.

A common legal base is appropriate since our relations with all these countries are based on common values and shared interests.

It is also appropriate because it would enable the Commission to develop similar programmes to the extent possible with all or some of these countries.

In addition, if linked to a single budget line as we have proposed, we would have clear administrative advantages.

We would greatly improve efficiency by aiming for economies of scale and create optimal flexibility.

Improved budget transparency both for Parliament, and I must say for the Council, would also be achieved.

Finally, a common legal base linked to a single budget line is in line with the Commission' s policy of limiting the number of small legal bases and budget lines.

I would like to emphasise the importance the Commission attaches to this proposal.

The benefits of a common, legal and budgetary framework to support our relationships with the industrialised countries are clear.

I am confident that our first report to Parliament on the results of the implementation of this regulation which we present in a couple of years' time will prove that to Parliament' s satisfaction.

Let me turn to the 14 amendments adopted by Parliament.

I am delighted to say that the Commission can accept 11 of them.

Ms Mann and Mr Ferrer, referred in particular to Amendment No 5.

Amendments Nos 4 and 5 refer to the division of responsibility between the Community and Member States on market access and export promotion.

Ms Read pointed out that the Member States are very sensitive to this issue.

Accepting these two amendments would result in a substantial shift away from Member States, well beyond what we agreed for the Japan market access regulation a few years ago.

Although I am not afraid of having occasional disagreements with the Council, I would advise against the adoption of these two amendments.

Amendment No 14 of the Budget Committee would be a derogation from the 1999 comitology decision and therefore is not acceptable either.

At any rate, on that amendment, I do not believe that it is the number of participants in committee meetings that should really matter to us or to Parliament, it is how many of them are reimbursed by Community funds.

This is a horizontal issue which should find a general solution instead of being addressed in every regulation and I hope we can proceed on that basis.

Again, I would like to thank the rapporteur very warmly for her constructive and intelligent help in developing our relationship with some of our closest friends around the world.

We are, in this particular instance, correcting an anomaly and filling an important gap as Mr Jarzembowski pointed out a few moments ago.

So I thank Parliament for their understanding and I trust that it will not take too violent exception to the fact that there are three of the 14 amendments which I would advise against.

Thank you very much, Mr Patten.

The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 a.m.

The next item is the debate on the report (A5-0006/2001) by Mrs McNally, on behalf of the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy on the proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on a Community Energy Efficiency Labelling Programme for Office and Communication Technology Equipment [COM(2000) 18 - C5-0061/2000 - 2000/0033(COD)].

Mr President, this report concerns the proposed adoption by the European Union of the United States' energy star programme as it applies to office and communication technology equipment.

This, colleagues, is not the sexiest title on this week' s agenda, perhaps, but it is directly linked to the future of our planet and to the possibility of even more devastating weather events, mass movements of people and crop failure.

Our irresponsible and profligate use of energy, with its consequential emissions of C02 and other environmental hazards must stop.

Ironically enough, it is in the United States, where the energy star scheme originated, that we have recently seen the absurd spectacle of power cuts in California, largely because of the incredible increase in the use of computers and other office equipment with the accompanying need for air-conditioning within a framework of quite bizarre and unwise deregulation.

Things would have been even worse without the energy star programme.

This scheme, which is voluntary, was introduced in 1992 and is now very widespread.

It has been officially adopted in Australia and Japan for example.

Members may in fact have seen the energy star logo on computers bought in the EU, although this means nothing yet since the technology has to be specially activated, which is done only in the United States.

This evening we are discussing the draft regulation which will implement the US/EU agreement on which we shall vote in the next session.

It is a voluntary scheme and it is hoped that between now and 2015 savings of 10 terawatt hours and 5 million tonnes of C02 emissions will be achieved in the EU through this scheme.

I now enter the world of science fiction and explain that to be energy-efficient, computers must go to sleep, but they must wake up instantly when they are required to do so.

When they are asleep their electricity consumption is cut on average from 100 watts to 5 watts.

Given the number of computers in homes, schools, workplaces, etc., you can see how the savings mount up from the good sleeping habits of those machines.

Until now, the European Union has produced its own energy efficient standards, often mandatory and the European Parliament has taken seriously its responsibility as a co-legislator to see that such standards are sufficiently stringent.

That is why there would be very serious reservations from Parliament about adopting this US energy star scheme if that were to be our only measure and especially if there were no provisions in the agreement for regular review of the results, with the objective, of course, of always being at the leading edge of the relevant technologies.

Luckily that is not the case however, and the Commission is to be given powers to negotiate improvements in the technical specifications.

And it has been made quite clear to the US authorities in a side letter to the agreement that the European Parliament, which would have been a co-legislator with the Council for similar measures at European level, will be consulted by the Commission on matters concerning technical specifications.

In the amendments to my report, we make it clear that further measures are certainly needed, including the glaringly obvious one of switching the machines off sometimes and withdrawing particularly inefficient machines from the market, either voluntarily or, if necessary, with legislation.

I am quite sure that the Council will see the wisdom of these amendments and of the regular and earlier monitoring of the energy star scheme as one, but only one, component of our energy efficient action plan.

We believe the current legal base is the correct one and we join the Commission in their suggestions.

As rapporteur, I would like to thank the Commission for their cooperation and help and of course thank my colleagues, especially Mrs Mller, who drafted a very useful opinion from the Environment Committee.

We all hope that the energy star scheme is a success and we look forward to watching computers throughout Europe going to sleep at the correct time.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, in general, the Commission' s proposal for a regulation on a voluntary labelling programme is to be welcomed, and Mrs McNally has produced an excellent report on it.

Consumption labelling is, in my view, an important free-market instrument for promoting the use of energy-efficient equipment.

The energy-star label should help to promote energy efficient standby equipment.

The energy-saving potential of this equipment cannot be underestimated, and by introducing such a label the European Union will be providing the impetus needed to encourage people to use energy more sparingly.

Saving energy goes hand in hand with reducing carbon dioxide emissions, as agreed under the Climate Protection Agreement.

I think it is all the more likely to succeed if applied just about globally to office equipment.

This would give us a joint labelling scheme, not only with the USA but also, indirectly, with Japan and some other countries.

In this way, we would be taking account of the global market, which would help remove barriers to trade.

The fields of telecommunications and information technology would seem to be particularly important in this respect.

I think it is of the utmost importance for national experts on energy policy, as well as other interested parties, to be involved in setting up the European Union Energy Star Board, so that national interests can be properly represented.

The Energy Star Board will be required to draw up a report on the market penetration of products bearing the Energy Star logo.

Given the rapid pace of technological development in office and telecommunications equipment, I think yearly intervals would be appropriate.

That is the only way to ensure that the label is only used to distinguish those products which consume markedly less energy than the average for all similar equipment on the market.

Against this background, I urge you to support my opinion, which is appended to this report and which was adopted in the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I would like to echo the thanks extended to the rapporteur, Mrs McNally, but also to Mrs Emilia Mller, the rapporteur of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy.

Saving energy and reducing greenhouse gases such as carbon dioxide are important EU goals.

It is not always possible to achieve these goals without effort and without sacrificing certain comforts, but sometimes it is quite a simple matter.

Sometimes, all it takes is to deploy the technical means, which are already in existence, yet people do not always have the political will to do this with any vigour.

Eleven per cent of electricity consumption in private households in the country I come from, Germany, is caused by standby losses.

Add to that the private and public spheres and the losses total 20 TWh per year, which corresponds to the output of two large power stations that we are simply running for no purpose.

So although no demands are made on the capacity of the piece of equipment, it still consumes energy.

Now of course the easiest thing to do - as Mrs McNally has already said - would be to switch the piece of equipment off when it is not in use.

That would be one way of resolving the problem in many spheres, for example, we should simply do more to encourage the public to get into this habit with their television sets.

But in quite a few spheres, it is no longer possible to switch equipment off at all, and it is particularly important for computers, by their very nature, to quickly fall into 'sleep mode' , as Mrs McNally puts it, and also 'wake up' instantaneously, because you sometimes need to be able to log onto a computer straightaway, and do not want to have to slowly coax it into life.

There are technical problems to be dealt with, but they can in fact be solved by technical means, without wasting energy.

There are new and innovative techniques designed to reduce the no-load losses almost to zero; they just have to be incorporated.

None of this is problematic from a technical viewpoint any longer.

That is why it is a positive thing to be discussing the Energy Star scheme and to label equipment that incorporates these new technical possibilities and is highly energy-efficient.

It is the right way to go, which is why the PPE-DE Group supports the Commission' s proposal, as well as the report by Mrs McNally.

However, I feel we need to go further still.

When I took on the responsibility as shadow rapporteur for the PPE-DE Group, I made enquiries of experts in the various organisations, non-governmental organisations, Ministries and in the Commission, but I also asked people who are confronted with this issue on a daily basis, for example a computer dealer who is a friend of mine.

I asked him what he thought of Energy Star and he replied that he thought it was a good thing.

He said there were technical problems to begin with, because the computers went into 'sleep mode' alright, but failed to 'wake up' again quickly enough.

He felt that although we have now solved all the technical problems, no one is interested in whether or not a computer has an Energy Star, and he did not think it was a selling point.

That is why I think we should consider whether or not we should just apply the principle we are advocating here, i.e. giving highly efficient equipment a positive label, or whether we should also aim to rid the market of the worst offending products, which are highly inefficient, and simply refuse to allow them access to the market after a transitional period.

I feel that is something else to think about - Mrs McNally' s report makes the same point - and then we would have a comprehensive energy efficiency programme in this sphere.

Hence my appeal to you to adopt these amendments.

Mr President, I would like to thank Mrs McNally sincerely for her excellent work, as this issue is a very important one. We are all agreed on this matter.

The present trend in matters of energy efficiency is not always the best possible alternative, however.

For example, the aim for household appliances should be that all power-consuming circuits should be switched off.

But this is not possible in all cases: modern equipment often lacks an on/off button, as was mentioned here earlier on, making it utterly impossible to switch it off, even if the consumer wants to.

Many machines have a small red lamp that glows constantly to show that the equipment is still on and that it is consuming energy to some extent.

If we imagine the infinitesimally small amount of one watt per hour per appliance in a household this volume of energy consumption is multiplied very quickly.

With just a thousand appliances the figure reaches one kilowatt per hour, and with a million, one megawatt per hour, at which point we are talking about much larger volumes of energy consumption.

On the other hand, a quiescent current has its positive side, when, for example, the air in the room has to be heated.

In the northern regions of the Union, rooms, houses and buildings are heated and the heat produced from appliances and bulbs cuts heating costs.

But then again, in warm conditions, especially in the southernmost countries of the Union, where rooms must be kept cool with air-conditioning, the costs resulting from quiescent currents are doubled.

The general aim must be to promote the use of technology that consumes less energy; for example, the use of glow bulbs in equipment should always be avoided when they can be replaced with LEDs.

Furthermore, there must be more focus on consumer information than is the case at present.

It is difficult for the consumer to appreciate that equipment that is cheap to buy but an 'energy guzzler' will prove expensive in the course of time.

Energy efficiency labelling must be standardised in such a way that all consumers of any age, including children and the elderly, understand how much energy a piece of equipment consumes.

The information must be easily intelligible to all.

Merely to mention wattage means nothing to many people.

The manufacturers of equipment must explain, for example, in the instructions for use, how to save energy using the equipment in question.

Mr President, I must first thank Mrs McNally for her excellent report.

I would also like to thank Parliament for its broad support for this proposal. In the Commission' s view this proposal will make a significant contribution to improving energy efficiency and therefore to controlling demand, which the Green Paper identifies as crucial to assuring a reliable supply.

We are also called upon to reduce consumption and spend less, making better use of what we have available.

In addition, I should like to thank Mrs Mller for her opinion on behalf of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy.

A substantial improvement in the efficiency of end use of electricity is required if we are to meet the European Union' s commitment to reduce CO2 emissions by the year 2010.

Office technology equipment represents a significant percentage of energy consumption in the service sector and offers wide scope for energy saving.

The Commission has therefore put forward the Energy Star Programme as a key measure to reduce the consumption of energy by office technology equipment. It completes the measures adopted by other end use sectors such as domestic electrical appliances and lighting.

Since 1994 the Commission has been working on the introduction of this programme with the full support of Community industry and independent experts.

The Energy Star Programme is voluntary and makes use of a marketing device: a quality label enabling buyers to identify products which consume energy most efficiently.

Furthermore, thanks to the adoption of the programme the Community will be doing more than introducing a programme for labelling office equipment - which has proved very successful where it has been implemented - and putting in place a viable measure to reduce CO2 emissions. We shall be able to seize the opportunity of applying a standard which is in practice acquiring international significance.

What we are engaged in is important not only for us but because of its impact in other parts of the world.

In this context, I believe it is essential for us to become joint leaders at international level together with the United States.

Mr President, I am aware that Parliament was not very happy with the procedures followed in connection with the conclusion and signature of this agreement.

However, we were bound by the procedures laid down in Article 300 of the Treaty, and I am delighted to note that Parliament feels that the advantages of the agreement outweigh such differences of opinion.

Furthermore, at Parliament' s request, in a letter annexed to the agreement, we have informed the other party, namely the United States.

We shall ensure that Parliament is kept informed of the review of the technical specifications, a point raised by Mrs McNally and with which we totally agree.

As regards the amendments, I am in a position to say that we can accept all the amendments tabled by Parliament, with the exception of Amendment No 9.

The Commission agrees that the energy efficiency of office equipment must be monitored, but it does not feel that we should call for a special unit to be set up, as stated in the aforementioned amendment, if only because the necessary resources will not be forthcoming. I therefore ask you to reconsider the matter, ladies and gentlemen.

If this amendment were omitted, I think we could adopt the proposal at first reading and make faster progress. The final decision rests with Parliament of course.

I can assure you that no further resources will be made available, so in the end it will not serve any useful purpose.

On the other hand, we do in principle accept Amendments Nos 5, 11, and 15.

Concerning Amendments Nos 11 and 15, we accept that the Commission should present a report to the Council and to Parliament. However, the Commission feels that the best time to do so would be after three years had elapsed, as was the case for the first assessment of the Energy Star Programme

That concludes my summary of our position.

Once again, I should like to express my thanks to the honourable Members who have taken the floor, and especially to Mrs McNally for her splendid work. I trust we shall all reach agreement at the earliest opportunity, if possible at first reading.

The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 a.m.

The next item is the debate on the report (A5-0012/2001) by Mr Wieland, on behalf of the Parliamentary Delegation to the Conciliation Committee on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a European Parliament and Council directive amending Directives 89/48/EEC and 92/51/EEC on the general system for the recognition of professional qualifications and supplementing Directives 77/452/EEC, 77/453/EEC, 78/686/EEC, 78/687/EEC, 78/1026/EEC, 78/1027/EEC, 80/154/EEC, 80/155/EEC, 85/384/EEC, 85/432/EEC, 85/433/EEC and 93/16/EEC concerning the professions of nurse responsible for general care, dental practitioner, veterinary surgeon, midwife, architect, pharmacist and doctor [C5-0680/2000 - 1997/0345(COD)].

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, as Mrs McNally said earlier, her report was not a particularly sexy matter.

I think reports grow less sexy the later it gets, but I do not want to offend Mr Ferri, whose turn it is next.

This draft directive amends and supplements a total of 10 directives, some of which date back to 1977.

The President has saved me some time by already enumerating the professions concerned.

Why did this report require so much care, including a time- and energy-consuming Conciliation Procedure, even though many may perhaps say the honourable Members are acting as though the world is being turned upside down, when it is basically just a matter of detail?

Why did the vast majority of us insist on this Conciliation Procedure?

Firstly, apart from architects and, in some respects, veterinary surgeons, they are all health-care professions in the widest sense. In everyday life, you can seek restitution for loss or damage suffered, but a human being is not a Golf, a Skoda or a Citron that you can take to a professional or even an amateur mechanic to tinker about with.

In such cases you can make a claim to make good the loss.

But when it comes to health, the damage cannot normally be made good.

That is why we have compensation for pain and suffering.

From my own practice as a lawyer, I know of no one who would not gladly have repaid such compensation if the damage to his health could in that way have been reversed.

If I may digress slightly, I think the whole procedure is a good example of why the Council ought in future to meet in public. From Greece to Ireland and from Italy to Finland, our citizens would have been very interested in much of what was said there and would have thought, "What are our governments proposing here?

There is therefore a lot of interest in these matters.

Secondly, and this brings me to my second concern, we have the internal market.

Wherever a diploma has been obtained, we want it to be used in the context of the free movement of people and services.

Of course, the Member State on the other side and the citizen is interested first of all in asking anyone who wants to pack his bags and go to another Member State straight after his exams about the training he has received.

Likewise, if somebody decides to go to another Member State 10 or even 30 years after taking his exams, the citizens and the host Member States want to know what the person has been doing in the last years since his exams.

Has he kept himself abreast of developments?

This brings me to my third reason.

Parliament is keen that we should produce readable texts.

I have already mentioned that I am a lawyer. When I was reading up on this matter, I have to say it was like going from one disaster to another.

What we produce here is basically rubbish so far as the interested public is concerned.

We must produce consolidated texts more quickly in future.

For these various reasons, Parliament accepted 11 amendments with a large majority, and my only regret on going to conciliation was that I did not ask for that majority to be checked, because that would have shown that well over 400 of us were in favour.

I must therefore also thank Mrs Gebhardt, with whom I worked closely to achieve that large majority, and who had confidence even though the conciliation delegation had three EVP members, that being how things turned out by the rules of the House.

I will not bore you with the details - deadlines for transposition, the matter of qualifications obtained in third countries, replacement of the word "similar" by the word "equivalent" and the conclusion of Italian pharmacist studies.

Firstly, the Commission has said that it will produce consolidated texts in future.

I can only urge all rapporteurs to call for this soon to be done in their own fields, too.

We must not just keep on talking about it, we must make it a requirement.

I believe we have reached a good compromise.

For reasons of subsidiarity, we have not produced any legislation, but we had our way with the preamble.

Thirdly and lastly, the specialised training course for general practitioners was extended to three years.

France was persuaded to increase it from two and a half to three years, while we have conceded to Member States Belgium and Finland that this special type can also be accepted with a longer basic training.

I can therefore say that conciliation produced a good outcome, and I would ask you to vote in favour.

But I should also like to say that we very much regret that the Commission was unfortunately not on our side from the outset on the points we were calling for and on which the Council finally gave way.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen of the late shift, anyone who wants to do good work in politics must find the willpower and the patience to persevere.

Mr Wieland possesses both qualities in good measure.

With him as rapporteur, it was therefore almost a pleasure for myself and my colleagues to work towards the outcome that is now before us.

We can be slightly proud of that.

We have managed for the first time to get something that is normally only talked about enshrined in European law.

I mean the necessity for lifelong learning.

In the field of medicine, we shall in future not only have rules and criteria for the recognition of diplomas, examination certificates and other attestations of competence.

We are now saying for the first time that passing the final professional examination is not enough, but that training must continue, in the interests of patients in particular, but also in the interests of doctors and nursing staff.

Given the very rapid pace of technological and scientific progress in medicine, lifelong learning in one' s chosen profession is particularly important.

But we must not be content that it now appears in this recognition directive.

Rather, our legislation should be a contribution to making this initial success and with it lifelong learning into one of the mainstays of working life for everyone in Europe.

I should like to mention another point that has always concerned me in connection with the recognition of professional qualifications.

I will dress it up in a question that has still not been answered by this directive: why are we so reluctant to recognise qualifications obtained outside the European Union?

This question troubles me when I see how markets are becoming globalised and how easily we allow capital to move around.

Our citizens are able to bring goods and money with them from every corner of the world, but very personal assets in the form of professional knowledge and skills are not freely transferable.

There is something wrong there. We must put it right quickly.

I therefore ask the Commission to abandon two arguments when preparing future recognition directives.

First, that it affects only a small number of EU citizens.

Second, that the Treaty provides only a limited basis in law.

Things will go a lot better then, you will see.

Mr President, I would like to join with my colleagues in thanking the rapporteur for his ongoing and diligent work on this issue which may not grab the headlines, but is of extreme importance to each and every one of the people that we represent here in this Parliament.

In particular, the areas that we are talking about in this present raft of recognition of qualifications, are areas where we have experienced huge shortages within the EU in the recent past.

Also there have been cases highlighted where barriers were put in place and people who wanted to move from one Member State to the other could not have the qualifications recognised.

One of the important issues raised within the discussions at conciliation and also within the report itself is in clearing up some of the wording used.

In particular there is the question of replacing the word "similar" with the word "equivalent" .

I am presently dealing with a case in Ireland where someone who has trained as a physiotherapist in one Member State cannot get their qualification recognised in Ireland because of the formal academic aspect even though in every other country in the European Union work experience is recognised as the equivalent of the academic qualifications.

On top of that, there is also a necessity for us to make sure, once the legislation is passed at a European level, that the Member States strictly enforce the legislation and open up the opportunities that are available.

Too often we have seen hidden barriers put in place to prevent people from one profession or another moving to a country to operate.

If we are truly to bring about the idea of the single market, and if we are truly to live up to the principles of the freedom of movement of persons, than we must dismantle these barriers, which we can see are not so much at a European Union institution level but are actually at Member State level and indeed in some Member States at the level of certain individual professions.

We need rigorous enforcement of all legislation so any complaints can be dealt with quickly.

I would commend this report to the House and ask it to support it.

Mr President, on behalf of the Commission, I would like to extend warm thanks to the Members of your Parliament who have taken part in the debate, for all the sound work they have done.

In particular, I would like to single out Mr Wieland as the person who drafted the report and who has managed to bring the entire process to a successful end.

The Commission is delighted that the Council and the European Parliament have reached agreement.

The Commission can identify with the result which, after all, aims to facilitate the recognition of qualifications and to improve legal certainty.

With this, Parliament has reached a result with the Council which is in the interest of all those clutching qualifications and looking for jobs elsewhere in Europe.

It will be of great benefit to the mobility of employees, and that is important.

As I already stated, I would particularly like to thank Mr Wieland, but also other Members who have worked with him, for all the sound work they have done in order to reach this agreement.

Mr President, I would like to extend general thanks to your Parliament for the fruitful cooperation with both the Council and the Commission.

Thank you for your kind words, Mr Bolkestein.

The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 a.m.

The next item is the report (A5-0398/2000) by Mr Ferri, on behalf of the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs on the report of the Multidisciplinary Group on Organised Crime - Joint Action on mutual evaluations [10972/2/1999 - C5-0039/2000 - 1999/0916(COS)]

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, Mr Wieland, this resolution of mine may not be as sexy as it could be, for justice is usually naked, or at least, attempts are made to strip it of its effectiveness.

In reality, I see this motion for a resolution as being quite an effective, substantial initial step in that it is practical.

In any case, I would like to start by making the point that the Member States, often out of a misconstrued sense of power, attempt to block what can appear to be a renunciation of sovereignty, particularly in the field of criminal justice.

Therefore, combining Community sovereignty and the sovereignty of the Member States in this area is not easy.

The mechanism for mutual evaluation by the Member States set forth in the 1997 Amsterdam Joint Action Plan, which - albeit somewhat behind schedule - has become operative, allows us to carry out the first stage.

The first five countries have been selected: Denmark, Ireland, Greece, Luxembourg and the Netherlands, and a Committee of three experts has been set up.

The group evaluating a country may not contain members who are nationals of that country and so the action is, so to speak, quite unrestricted.

These initial assessments have revealed, first and foremost, that there is often a lot of political involvement in legal matters, particularly as regards requests for judicial cooperation on urgent measures, confiscation of property and searches, and this takes different forms, either involving the Ministry of Justice or different judicial authorities from that requesting assistance, etc.

Of course, certain positive elements have also been noted, such as a computer system from the Netherlands known as KRIS, which has been used as a model.

We are, of course, fighting extremely sophisticated organised criminal networks which use advanced technology.

Methods change and so we also have to learn to deal with crime in different ways.

The reports from Italy, Belgium, Spain and Finland are also ready, but as yet unofficially.

However, we hope that there will be a monitoring system for the evaluation mechanism, to be the responsibility, in the long run, of the Court of Justice. Parliament has advocated this on several occasions too.

In actual fact, in this regard, it is most important to stress that a number of approximation rules need to be proposed.

I refer, for example, to dual criminality, which often holds up the ordinary, quicker passage of justice; I refer to the situation where a crime has been committed which is not a crime in the other Member States.

For example, Luxembourg once refused to comply with the requests made by the judicial authority of another country because the act was not a crime under Luxemburgish law.

There are therefore various impediments, and if we do not succeed in eliminating them, judicial cooperation will, in effect, be nothing but a word.

Therefore, in order to make it effective, another resolution has already been prepared on the mutual recognition of final decisions.

I have referred to it in this motion for a resolution as well in order to provide a mosaic, a complete raft of actions intended precisely to make this judicial cooperation more effective.

We all realise the urgent need for an electronic register, a centralised documentation instrument recording at least the final decisions, at least within the Community framework.

Clearly, it would be extremely useful to be able to quickly have the confirmation of final rulings against defendants or criminals who have already been convicted, at a wider level within Europe, but computerisation would already be a good basis - not necessarily on a huge scale - since information technology should now make it possible for us to achieve significant results quickly.

The motion for a resolution calls for relatively rapid intervention by Eurojust - we have verified it on several occasions - and particularly by the so-called European Public Prosecutor who, at least on matters of serious crime - organised crime, telematic crime, white collar crime, Mafia crime, etc. can effectively take the lead.

We therefore call for cooperation from the judicial authorities, public prosecutors and judges of the different Member States as well, which will then become part of the European Public Prosecutor as support at the level of the different States.

In short, it is a proposal supporting the European Judicial Network and what is known as 'good practice' . I would stress this because, when all is said and done, common sense and good practice in applying the various procedures calls, first and foremost, for the direct transmission of requests between judicial authorities.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, our guiding objective is the creation of a great European area of freedom, security and justice, in which it is vital that we strengthen the security of European citizens and the fight against organised crime.

Following what was agreed in Tampere, it is crucial that we harmonise national legislation on criminal offences and the applicable sanctions in the field of organised crime. In other words, it is essential that we focus our efforts on adopting common definitions, incriminations and sanctions with regard to the approximation of legislation in criminal matters.

This evaluation mechanism, which Mr Ferri has just mentioned and which forms the basis of the excellent report that he presented to the Committee on Citizens' Freedom and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs, was instituted on the basis of the action plan against organised crime approved in Amsterdam in June 1997.

This can already be considered, per se, as a significant step forward, reinforced by the establishment of the European Judicial Network and other initiatives to modernise and increase the effectiveness of systems to prevent and combat crime.

Under this evaluation system, although it is envisaged that the Council will adopt the necessary measures after one complete round of evaluations - in other words, three years, with five countries being evaluated per year - we should welcome the decisions taken by some Member States to determine in advance the reforms and improvements considered to be most urgent within their own legal systems, bearing in mind the results of these evaluations.

We are all keen to have the results of the evaluations of the remaining countries, one of which is my own country, Portugal, conveyed to us quickly.

I welcome the fact that the matter that has been chosen for the first round of evaluations is that of delays in the operation of the system for mutual legal assistance and in the treatment of urgent requests for the confiscation of property, with particular regard to procedures used in cases of organised crime.

The emphasis on the problem of delays is particularly positive.

Indeed, we are concerned to see an increase in overall delays in trials and we are fully aware of how damaging this is.

Justice which is delayed or which comes too late is, ultimately, always a negation of Justice itself.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, Commissioner, on behalf of my group, I support the analysis, conclusions and considerations presented by the rapporteur, and I also share his concern about the problems highlighted by the Multidisciplinary Group.

I thank Mr Ferri for his work.

In the EU there are 15 different penal codes, a large number of police forces, some of them competing with each other, and 15 legal systems, all deeply marked by their own mentality, tradition and culture.

Until the EU' s criminal law systems are harmonised - something which is to be desired - judicial cooperation will continue to operate through a complex and antiquated system of requests for legal assistance, an emotive term for almost all public prosecutors and judges.

But European cooperation is more urgent than ever.

For example, 77% of all cases of organised crime in Germany in 1998 had an international connection.

There is a great need for the Council to act.

In Luxembourg, for example, the Minister of Justice must give his personal authorisation whenever the banking sector is involved.

The Netherlands use their own classification of urgency instead of adopting the urgency of the requesting State.

The five countries have insufficient staff and inadequate technical and financial resources for dealing with requests for legal assistance.

On the positive side, we can mention the Netherlands' KRIS programme, the Irish system and Denmark' s experience with the Nordic countries.

Where contact points exist within the Judicial Network, there is good experience and results, but the network has no influence over formal requests for legal assistance.

The creation of contact points alone is still no guarantee of the qualitative leap needed in European cooperation.

At some contact points, the willingness to make regular exchanges also left much to be desired.

If the Council is serious about successfully fighting cross-border crime, which simply disregards democracy and the rules of the legal economy, the recommendations of the rapporteur and the committee must be translated into action.

I do not want to go over the details of what Mr Ferri has already said, but it does mean that the candidate countries need to be fully involved in the strategy for fighting organised crime at an early stage.

The Judicial Network must be further expanded, for example with internet pages about the various legal systems, with videoconferencing facilities and, finally, Eurojust should become a meaningful adjunct to EUROPOL and OLAF.

Mr President, I would like to thank the rapporteur for the work that he has done on a very difficult and complex issue.

He has brought some logic and sense to it but while giving praise, I have some criticisms and some points that I cannot agree with.

On any of these issues we must be very careful that we do not come out in a rush of Christian frenzy, thinking that we are going to solve all of the problems of all of the crime in the European Union simply by setting up another institution or another office with more staff, and coordinating and harmonising more power into a central authority.

There are already examples of where cooperation and coordination work.

We have Europol, and other institutions like this, where different agencies in different Member States working together can achieve results.

We also have the opportunity to assess other Member States and take the best practices from them and use those as a common minimum standard for all Member States.

However, we still have differences of law within the Member States.

We still have different legal systems, for instance. In Ireland and Britain we still work under the old common law system whereas on the mainland of Europe you have the civil law system.

It is very difficult, perhaps impossible, to marry these two together, so we must always work on the basis of three tenets of how things should operate.

Number one: effectiveness, number two: speed, and number three: justice; and we must not forget the word 'justice' .

People should have the right to defend themselves when they are accused or allegations made against them.

Perhaps it is only a problem of interpretation, but some of the suggestions for the fast-track approach seem to be saying we have to cut through some of the present legal impediments for instance with regard to the right of appeal.

I am particularly happy that Ireland gets honourable mention because of the Criminal Assets Bureau.

I would encourage each and every Member of this House and every Member State to look at how the Criminal Assets Bureau operates in Ireland and how successful it has been since its establishment.

One proposal which I oppose - and we have asked for a separate vote - is on the question of a European Public Prosecutor' s Office.

I am totally opposed to a European Public Prosecutor' s Office with its powers extending over the territory of all the Member States.

Finally, sanctioning Member States is a very dangerous area.

We already have experience of how it can go wrong and how difficult it is to reverse.

It is better to rely on cooperation; the carrot works a lot better than the stick.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the Commission would like to congratulate Mr Ferri on the excellent report he has presented, which contains a very astute and clear-sighted analysis of the problems we face in the field of judicial cooperation and presents an ambitious and exacting vision of the efforts required to overcome these problems.

The Commission broadly supports the analysis and the vision laid out by the rapporteur.

We agree, in particular, with the approach that consists of stating that improving judicial cooperation - or even, to use Mr Ferri' s words, "a radically new joint effort" - must never be seen as a weakening of the sovereignty of the Member States. Instead, this should be seen as a tool, and perhaps the most important tool, for making this sovereignty effective in the face of the sophistication and power of organised crime, which today poses an extremely serious threat to the structures of democratic government, to the very functioning of the rules of the legitimate economy and to respect for citizens' rights.

We are clearly on the way to achieving this, but it must be emphasised that this progress has been made not as a result of regulatory instruments - because many of these instruments are no longer in force: for example, the conventions have not been systematically ratified by the Member States - but mainly because, in the meantime, practical mechanisms have been created, such as, for example, the mechanism for mutual evaluation. This has given tangible proof of the need to find a new model and, in certain cases, has already led to Member States introducing the necessary amendments to their own legislation.

This process of professionals in the field exchanging information, whether it is carried out in the framework of mutual evaluation, in contacts within the judicial network or, quite soon, I hope, in the framework of cooperation within Eurojust, is crucial and must be pursued.

Parliament is now being consulted on the renewal of the Grotius programme, which is an important tool for enhancing cooperation between legal professionals and similarly, on the project of creating a European network for judicial training, which will facilitate the development of closer cooperation links between magistrates' colleges in the various Member States.

Of the suggestions and requests made by the rapporteur, I wish to highlight just three aspects: firstly, Mr Ferri referred to the need to amend Article 35 of the Treaty on European Union so that the Court of Justice of the European Communities is given the power to decide whether the Member States comply with their obligations.

This loophole in judicial control is, in my opinion, linked to the nature of Title VI of the Treaty on European Union itself, which remains heavily impregnated with an intergovernmental spirit.

I wish to emphasise that it would perhaps be more productive, at the appropriate time, to call for a more categorical and complete arrangement, either using the working method or the institutional framework method of the 'third pillar' , according to the Community method, which would thus ensure greater control by the Court of Justice, as well as decision-making processes that involve greater participation by the European Parliament itself.

I do, nevertheless, harbour some doubts as to the prospect of being able to adopt measures for punishing Member States that do not comply with their obligations.

One of the measures recommended by the draft resolution is the creation of a European Public Prosecutor's Office, with jurisdiction over the whole Union.

As Parliament knows, at the last Intergovernmental Conference, the Commission proposed that the Treaty should provide for an independent European Public Prosecutor, but with the specific and sole aim of safeguarding the Community' s financial interests.

This proposal was not accepted in Nice and the Commission will certainly take this decision by the Council into account, having already moved ahead with improving the arrangements and means necessary for OLAF to be able to fulfil its duties.

By the same token, we hope that the creation of the Eurojust network will also be something that contributes to this aim, which was not achieved in Nice.

As to the issue of extradition, I wish to assure Mr Ferri that I share the concerns expressed in his report with regard to the simplification and acceleration of extradition procedures, which are, in fact, the theme of the third stage of mutual evaluation.

This is why the Commission has included a specific initiative on the adoption of fast-track arrangements for extradition in its programme for 2001.

I wish to close, Mr President, by stating that I share the concern expressed by the rapporteur that, in this field, all legislative initiatives must be implemented with respect for individual rights and fundamental freedoms and that this respect for citizens' rights and freedoms is inextricably linked to the fight against organised crime.

At a time when the Union has proclaimed the Charter of Fundamental Rights, it is our duty to seek to act in such a way that the progress made in the field of judicial cooperation, the mutual recognition of judgments, the coordination of crime-fighting activities by the police and the courts and the simplification of extradition procedures accord with the principles that we advocate and that they are not achieved at the expense of the rights of individuals.

The construction of an area of freedom, security and justice cannot by achieved by using the lowest common denominator where respect for citizens' rights and freedoms is concerned.

The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 a.m.

(The sitting was closed at 11.35 p.m.)

Approval of the Minutes of the previous sitting

The Minutes of yesterday's sitting have been distributed.

Mr President, I did not rise to speak yesterday at the beginning of the sitting, but I do wish to clarify an issue concerning something said by the President of this Parliament.

With regard to the tabling of the so-called Antiterrorist Agreement in Spain, the presidency of this Parliament stated that this was signed by various associations and unions, and the Church was mentioned.

I wish to state, for the information of everyone here, that this is not the case, despite the pressure exerted by the Government and the Socialist Party.

This statement has not even been signed by organisations that support the government in Madrid and, with all due respect, I must say that this situation, which is discussed here with such frequency, the situation of the Basque country, is complex and it requires efforts to maintain dialogue. This is what was requested, for example, in the manifesto that I submitted to President Fontaine, signed by four thousand intellectuals and others involved in culture in Catalonia.

Lastly, I wish to say that the situation is so complex and is so finely shaded that even Mrs Fontaine' s own party is standing in municipal elections in France, in Bayonne, in Biarritz and in Anglet, in coalition with Basque nationalist parties, including Mr Gorostiaga' s party, which is no favourite of mine, but which I imagine is not a favourite of Mrs Fontaine' s either.

Mr President, last Saturday Marie-Jos the last Queen of Italy and daughter of King Albert of this country died.

She was a recognised democrat and historian.

Sadly she did not live to see her exiled son and grandson allowed to return to their homeland.

Thus her funeral shamefully could not take place in Italy as they would not be permitted to attend.

This Italian constitutional article has no place in modern Europe and is in clear breach of the freedom of movement provided for under the European treaties.

I have three times attempted to gain the support of this Parliament in condemning this law.

The issue is being decided at present by the Court of Human Rights and will not go away.

I call upon the Italian government to use the opportunity afforded by the sad death of Queen Marie-Jos to fulfil its legal obligations to the European Union and grant the two male princes the same rights as every other Italian citizen and let them go home.

Chairman of the Committee on Fisheries.

(ES) Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries, I wish to express our rejection of this emergency procedure, which the Council requested of Parliament on 18 January and which asks us to deliver our opinion before 14 February.

Our committee has given a commitment to process this legislative proposal as rapidly and as diligently as possible, whilst adhering to the legislative procedures that have been laid down, according to which the vote will take place on 13 February in the Strasbourg part-session, as has already been scheduled on the agenda.

I wish to take this opportunity, Mr President - because lately these last minute rushes have become a regular occurrence - to say that the Commission and the Council are given considerable notice, a whole year' s notice, of Parliament' s timetable, which should give them - and us too - sufficient time to work on processing these proposals.

We were consulted too late, on 7 December to be precise, but even so, we appointed Mr Nicholson as rapporteur and he presented his draft report immediately, the following day, which was 8 December.

As I say, we plan to vote in committee on Monday 5 February and debate the report in Parliament' s sitting of Monday 12 in Strasbourg, in order that the vote can be held on 13 February and thereby meet the deadlines that we have been set.

I simply wish to point out that we have shown nothing but good will and have shown ourselves to be completely willing, but we do not want to be asked the impossible and, even less, to do our work badly.

(Parliament rejected the request for urgent procedure)

Progress of EU and Member State measures to combat BSE

The next item is the Commission statement on the progress of anti-BSE measures taken by the EU and Member States.

I am pleased to have the opportunity to update Parliament on the most recent events in relation to BSE.

Many of you were present when I spoke to the Agriculture Committee last week.

Nonetheless, let me very briefly summarise the main events of recent weeks.

Important new measures came into effect on 1 January.

These included the ban on meat and bone meal and the testing of all animals over 30 months destined for the food chain.

The Commission wrote to Ministers for Agriculture on 4 January and asked for replies to an extensive questionnaire on the implementation of BSE-related measures.

A working document summarising the responses was circulated to the Agriculture Council on Monday last.

The opinion of the Scientific Steering Committee on a number of BSE-related questions from the Commission was published on 17 January.

This set the agenda for the Agriculture Council on Monday.

Following the usual, very lengthy discussions, Member States agreed on the following main orientations.

A ban on mechanically recovered meat.

The heat treatment of ruminant fats for inclusion in animal feed and the removal of the vertebral column, the backbone, from cattle.

All three of these orientations follow directly from the previous discussions in the Council on the measures necessary to restore consumer confidence.

They are also based on the opinion of the Scientific Committee.

I intend to present proposals within the next several days on all these issues to the Standing Veterinary Committee.

They will, of course, result in further controls and potentially very significant costs.

However Member States are prepared to accept virtually any measure to ensure that beef is now safe.

It is surely a matter of very great regret that this determination to tackle BSE has taken so long to emerge.

Only seven months ago, the Commission failed to obtain a qualified majority to ban brain and spinal cord from food for human consumption and from animal feed.

Equally, not all Member States implemented a ban on the feeding of meat and bone meal to ruminants in a satisfactory manner.

I would like now to turn to the proposals which the Commission will put to the Standing Veterinary Committee.

Firstly, the one relating to mechanically recovered meat.

The Commission will shortly consider a proposal to ban the use of mechanically recovered meat from all bones of ruminants of all ages.

There is a case that material from bones other than the skull and vertebral column or from bones of young animals is safe.

However, this involves important control problems and in the circumstances it is believed a total ban is necessary.

I might add that the use of mechanically recovered meat is increasingly repugnant to consumers.

The processed meat industry has also called for this ban.

The proposed measure should therefore be very welcome to both industry and consumers.

On the question of rendered fat, the Commission will propose that ruminant fats to be included in ruminant feed should be pressure cooked in addition to the current requirement that they be ultrafiltrated.

The Commission will equally act on the opinion that such ruminant fats should only be sourced from discrete adipose tissues when fed as milk replacers to calves.

We also need to reflect however if these changes can be properly enforced.

For example, might there be control problems in distinguishing between different fats.

If so, is there a need for a need for an outright ban on the use of ruminant fats in ruminant feed?

If so, how do we ensure that the replacement fats are safe?

One final point on the issue of ruminant fats: it is surely incredible to the public that there should be higher standards relating to the use of ruminant fats in animal feed than applies to their use in food for human consumption.

However that is the current situation and I intend to put this right.

On the vertebral column, the Commission intention is to require the removal of the vertebral column where there are doubts over the effectiveness of the ban on meat and bone meal or whenever it cannot be demonstrated that animals are highly unlikely to be incubating BSE.

This is in keeping with the opinion of the Scientific Steering Committee.

Again, however there are important issues which need to be addressed.

Where should the vertebral column be removed.

If it is done at the abattoir, the most easily controlled location, there are implications for the storage and transport of beef carcasses.

There are also risks of microbiological handling due to the increased handling involved.

If instead removal is required at the butcher or retail outlet, there will be control problems in the recovery and the destruction of the bones.

Similarly we need to be aware of the impact on consumers.

A strict implementation of the Scientific Committee recommendations would require removal of vertebral column in animals aged over twelve months, as is currently the case in France.

This will entail a ban on certain cuts of meat which are very popular - T-bone steaks and bistecca fiorentina for example.

Finally, which Member States should be exempt from the requirement?

Should for example Member States like Austria, Sweden and Finland which continue to be BSE-free be exempt?

These are all issues which the Commission is urgently considering and will address in its proposal.

I hope that these observations help to highlight the very complex issues which arise for what might appear at first sight to be a relatively simple measure.

I am aware that the issue of controls is a concern.

In this respect, the replies of Ministers to my letter of 4 January is reassuring.

All Member States now insist that they are giving top priority to the secure implementation of BSE-related measures.

The Food and Veterinary Office will continue its programme of inspections in this regard.

Finally, as a further incentive to improve compliance, I am considering a proposal in the very near future to require Member States to present monthly reports on their implementation of BSE control measures.

The UK and Portugal are already required to provide such a report under the restriction measures on their exports of beef.

I believe it has been invaluable in ensuring that controls are actively implemented.

It should therefore, I believe, be replicated at Community level.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I know, Commissioner Byrne, that serious action is being taken in a bid to make preventive consumer protection a permanent feature of EU policy.

I know that many of these very far-reaching decisions are needed because past mistakes are still catching up with us.

May I state clearly for the record here that BSE owes a great deal to government failings, to gross negligence in the United Kingdom and to multiple acts of negligence on the part of the Commission up to 1996 - I can honestly say that I know of no-one who got it right in the fight against BSE.

Government failings are the main issue; errors were noticed too late, decisions were taken too late and when decisions or bans were introduced, there were not properly controlled.

That is why the measures which you have presented, Commissioner, are without question right and proper and we call on the Member States to do their very best to implement them as quickly as possible.

However, may I also state for the record that Parliament called back in November for all animals over 18 months old to be tested and, Commissioner, I see a danger here.

If, with the removal programme today, the thrust of the resolution is test or remove in the sense of preventive consumer protection and several Member States test all their animals, while others test or remove, then by the end of the year the statistics will be meaningless and we must avoid that at all costs.

We would therefore welcome your comments on this.

I should also like to ask you to clarify the problem of third countries as quickly as possible, because here too there is a huge risk from infectious materials brought in over past years.

Here too, the question of uniform consumer protection arises.

Then we also take account of the financial aspects.

We risk destroying hundreds of thousands of jobs in Europe, which is why the Commission must also see if, as in France for example, we can spread the financial burden equally and fairly between everyone in the form of a surcharge, a meat tax or by charging value added tax on agricultural products, so that a reasonable solution can be found to the problem of disposal.

We must do everything, including under the financial programmes in the agricultural budget, in order to make it 20% or 30% cheaper to get animals to market, for example through sectoral agreements, otherwise we shall simply never get a grip on the situation.

Mr President, we are in exactly the same situation as we were six years ago.

I believe that Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf is due to speak after me; that means that all of us who have basically concentrated on little else in our work over the last six years except BSE are back again.

The European Parliament has been calling for much of what the agricultural ministers have now decided - half willingly, half unwillingly - for over six years now.

What was done then about removing risk material?

All the Member States tried to obstruct and block for as long as possible.

If, Mr Byrne, as you now say, the question of removing the vertebral column is a problem, then they are again dragging their feet.

What is the matter with them?

For the moment we must consider the vertebral column to be risk material, in all Member States.

It must be removed, it must be removed in the abattoir and it must be treated as risk material.

And there is an end to it.

Not here a little loophole, there a little loophole!

I have learned in my eleven years in the European Parliament that progress here moves at a snail's pace.

It is a fact of life.

We have moved forward at a snail's pace.

That is fine as long as we move forward.

I have nothing against that, but I would like to move a wee bit faster here, because now is our chance: we are surrounded in the Member States by jittery meat markets and, as a result, we have got jittery agricultural ministers, jittery finance ministers - everyone has got the jitters.

Unfortunately, it is also affecting farmers and the meat processing industry and the feedingstuffs industry, which I always mention in the same breath as everyone who did not exactly go out of their way to do anything about improving quality in the past.

So if we look at these compliant meat markets and see that here is our chance, the chance to push measures forward, then we must decide exactly what sort of measures we need.

They obviously include, as you have just said Mr Byrne, extending the definition of risk material, so that we can, at long last, ban all mechanically recovered meat.

Of course, we could have done this years ago, but it must all be banned, not just a bit from the skull and a bit from the vertebral column like last time.

We must get rid of it all; we no longer need it in an affluent society like ours, that is obvious.

What else do we need to do?

We need to do the same with animal fats.

We cannot differentiate between animal fats or gelatine on the basis, for example, of whether or not they reach the human food chain or whether or not they are used in cosmetics and pharmaceuticals.

That is out of the question.

Fats must be sterilised by pressure cooking. End of story!

No other method should be allowed now.

We must minimise the risks, that is obvious.

You said something quite wonderful, Mr Byrne and I should like to pick up on it.

How do we handle derogations in the Member States for the vertebral column, fats and so on?

What do we do about the Member States which are BSE-free?

That is when I lean back in my chair and think to myself: here we go again.

I have heard it all before in recent years.

Exactly which Member State is BSE-free?

And may I ask: how do they know?

Do they look inside the animals' head?

And if they can do that, perhaps they can tell us exactly what is going on.

We too want to do likewise.

Until such time as the Member States introduce comprehensive testing, and we know how slipshod testing can be, until such time as everything is tested comprehensively, including - and I agree with Mr Bge here - the animals taken from the market, then we shall never have a complete picture; until such time as there is comprehensive testing, we shall not know if Finland, Germany, Austria or Italy are BSE-free.

And until we have that information, we shall treat all Member States the same, end of story.

Then we shall see which Member States block everything again and we shall publicise the fact.

I wonder just which Member States think they can hold out now.

There is no time left to address all the points, but I must, nonetheless, touch on what has been my favourite subject for a long time: we can pass the best legislation here in the European Union, but what use is it if it is not controlled in the Member States?

I believe that there are too few veterinarians in all the Member States, too few food inspectors, too few on-site inspections.

Which is why I call on you, Mr Byrne, to force the Member States to report to you on how many veterinarians they have, how many food inspectors they have, when and what they control and what they have done in the past.

I welcome and thank you for your monthly reports!

Mr President, first I would like to state quite briefly that we are now dealing with such a colossal issue that nobody can afford to blame anyone in any event.

We must no longer blame anyone else.

Finland, Sweden and Austria did not blame anyone for BSE.

We implemented certain action as long as ten or fifteen years ago, and, probably as a result of that, any risk that we might have BSE is perhaps diminished.

We are not claiming that there is none, but we have implemented the action that everyone should now finally be implementing.

Firstly, we should specifically ensure that each Member State genuinely complies with the decisions that have now been taken, for they are not being complied with in every Member State.

For this reason, it is an excellent move on the part of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development to propose setting up a subcommittee to monitor food safety and, for example, the situation regarding BSE and other such problems, so that the dangers and risks that exist might be prevented in the future, especially when we take the matter of enlargement into consideration as that will involve some very large countries with livestock joining this Community.

Mr President, Commissioner, speaking on behalf of the Greens at the time of the parliamentary resolution on the BSE crisis, I told you that the European countries which claimed to have no cases of mad-cow disease were the countries that were not looking for it.

Alas, you will see that subsequent events have proved me right, as they often prove us right when we give timely warnings of the risks to which the earth and mankind are exposed by unbridled liberal economics, but our warnings are not heeded until the predicted disaster has come to pass.

Today I can say that the BSE crisis has been underestimated by the Commission and, more especially, by the Member States.

Everyone in this Chamber knows that Europe's main mission since 1993 has been to operate as a large market without frontiers, a market where anything can be bought and sold, even infected meat and bone meal.

Has this self-centred policy now been abandoned?

I have returned from Porto Alegre, and I can tell you that the Brazilians and Argentinians whom I met there admit that they have been doing the same thing in various places, namely feeding animal carcasses to cattle.

I very much fear that, if they started looking, they too would find cases of BSE.

Be that as it may, fifteen years after the first case of mad-cow disease, Community decisions are still lagging several steps behind the disease.

The last meeting of the Council of Agriculture Ministers was no exception to this rule.

Instead of purely and simply banning the use of animal fat in certain forms, as the Scientific Veterinary Committee had tacitly suggested, the Council preferred to take a half-measure by prescribing heat treatment of fats.

The update you have just presented to us, Commissioner Byrne, is disturbing on several counts.

We have learned, for instance, that one Member State allows the inclusion of untreated specified-risk materials in feed mixes, that others are not managing to remove the spinal column at the abattoir and that some of the approved tests have turned out to be rather ineffective in the field.

Lastly, I must ask some questions about the number of tests conducted by Member States, because some of the figures pose problems, such as those from Portugal, Greece and the United Kingdom, the country at the source of the epidemic, which conducts only 600 tests per day, as against 37 000 in Germany and 150 000 in Ireland, for example.

What do you intend to do, Commissioner, to harmonise these campaigns properly, to ensure that the same level of protection against this epidemic is finally guaranteed throughout Europe and that the consumer does not have to bear the whole cost alone?

Reorientation is necessary and must be governed by two objectives: to transform the common agricultural policy into a system of safe food production and to extend such reforms beyond cattle farming and the current crisis by addressing the issue of battery rearing in general, rather than clearing up one mistake to go on to cause another.

After beating your breast about the BSE crisis today, Commissioner, do not now go on to promote genetically modified organisms.

Mr President, the case we are now considering deserves to feature in a guide to what not to do in politics in terms of managing public affairs.

First of all, the delay in implementing these measures - measures for eradicating BSE - is deplorable. These measures are always adopted reluctantly, in the wake of panic in society and this prolongs the public' s exposure to risk.

It is now more than four years since this Parliament drafted recommendations that would have enabled us to prevent this disease.

Secondly, the lack of resources with which to implement the measures that have been proposed and to manage the crisis itself is also deplorable.

These shortcomings betray a degree of blindness and, at times, genuine breaches in European construction.

Although differences exist between Member States, it is surprising that, over time, the logistical resources for analysing and eliminating meat meal or risk-containing material have not been found.

The financial shortcomings, on the other hand, are clear, both at Community and national level.

Both the Community Treaties and national constitutions impose the obligation of protecting citizens' health.

It is therefore absurd to try to fund this crisis by taxing meat consumption or through the income of cattle farmers, which is causing small farms to go under.

At times we appear to be our own prisoners.

Within the World Trade Organisation, we have accepted limits on our production by ceding a part of our vegetable protein market to the United States.

So what are we going to do now?

Are we going to replace animal meal with genetically modified soya, imported from the United States?

Agenda 2000 laid down a reduction in aid to livestock farmers.

We were aware of the consequences of this.

How did we think that we would survive in the face of increasing costs and a drastic reduction in prices?

On the other hand, however, Agenda 2000 does not implement measures for the development of large-scale livestock breeding either.

Finally, the almost religious respect for the Financial Perspective laid down in Berlin will prevent us from being able to cope with exceptional situations.

Ladies and gentlemen, let us be realistic: this crisis requires a change in the European Union' s position towards the WTO, a review of the Berlin Financial Perspective and a review of the common agricultural policy to correct its imbalances and its general orientation.

Mr President, it is with some regret that I find myself participating again in a Parliament debate on BSE I regret that the initial steps taken by Commissioners Byrne and Fischler have not achieved their objective of controlling BSE and restoring consumer confidence in beef.

It is to say the least disappointing, that some Member States were prepared to conceal the real incidence of BSE in their national herds and equally unwilling to implement the control measures proposed by the Commission and agreed by this Parliament.

Their action or lack of action has led to an understandable but justified consumer resistance with beef consumption at one point dropping by 27%.

Our now costly emergency plan to restore consumption and consumer confidence calls for 100% participation by each Member State.

There is no place for dissidence at this critical time and those found in breach of the regulations should, in my view, be severely censured.

There were occasions in the past when farmers were found to be in breach of food regulations and deservedly condemned.

On this occasion, however, they are by and large innocent victims of a situation beyond their control.

They are the victims of animal-feed manufacturers who use meat and bone meal in bovine feed and there is some evidence, regrettably, to suggest that unscrupulous manufacturers have continued to use the product since the new regulations were introduced.

In my view we are now prepared to resort to extreme measures and I accept Commissioner Byrne' s view that in the present situation they are the minimum necessary.

Be that as it may, the harsh reality is that farmers who are guarantors of food supply and quality are devastated, their incomes eliminated and the ethos of farming desecrated through the destruction of a prime food product.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I feel that the BSE crisis is affecting me both politically and personally. The institutions - in this case the national governments - appear only to react to crises, and never take preventative action, as if history has taught us nothing.

For example, Commissioner, you have had a mandate from the Agriculture Council to apply the measures described to us.

I wish you luck because I can already imagine the merry dance you will be led when you propose these measures: some Member States will request exemption, others will request an extension, for example for the spinal cord from 12 to 20 months, and others will claim to offer consumers safe meat.

So this is all dj vu to some extent and I can only hope that you have the strength and nerve to stay on course, in the sure knowledge that this will not be easy.

What has come to the fore in recent months is a by now familiar subject, namely the monitoring by Member States of the application of Community measures.

I feel that this is the real point that should be raised with the Council because the measures to be applied are established but then the Member States either do not apply the measures - hence there are many infringement procedures, but they always take a long time - or are not in a position to implement checks.

The result is that, in the end, measures which appear severe have to be taken because the checks do not ensure guarantees or safety in any way.

This is something which gives rise to further difficulties because Member States tend to either conduct few checks or, when they do carry out checks, do not communicate the data available to other institutions.

Therefore, Commissioner, Parliament will constantly be urging you to action, but you can also count on our support in this uphill task.

If I may make an observation: it is a fact that whenever you try to solve a problem, other problems arise.

For example, what are we to do with the animal meal?

Of course, it is clear that, even today, we do not have the incineration capacity, and so it is stored.

It is also clear that there have been no studies carried out on the environmental impact of the incineration of hundreds of thousands of tonnes of animal meal.

A further question is what we should feed to cattle as a protein supplement.

Perhaps the Members already know - although it is worth reminding them - that Europe already imports 30 million tonnes of genetically-modified soya derivatives and that the elimination of meal can only increase imports as Europe is soya dependent.

So what should our approach be in the face of all this?

All that can be said is that there are no miracle cures, but we must be open to finding appropriate solutions on a case by case basis and ensure that we do so.

Mr President, by failing to take the necessary action in good time, the European Union is largely responsible for the extent of the BSE crisis.

The evidence is overwhelming: an average 27% drop in consumption and an ever-increasing number of export embargoes.

In France alone, the beef and dairy industries account for 400 000 jobs.

Victims of falling exchange rates and dwindling consumption, cattle farmers are in a desperate plight and face the threat of bankruptcy.

They can no longer afford to keep livestock on their farms.

Milk producers are exceeding their quotas.

Consumers, worried and disorientated, no longer know what to buy.

Abattoirs, condemned to inactivity, cannot stock carcasses pending the results of tests, because the results are taking too long to come through, since staff are not trained to deal with this new situation and laboratories still await official registration as test centres.

Today there are only post mortem examinations.

What has happened to the research into blood tests?

According to Commissioner Byrne, a patent application is pending.

Are we doing all we can to support research, especially public research?

The systematic slaughter of herds is expensive and ruins farmers' selective breeding programmes.

Now that screening tests are compulsory, is it necessary to go on destroying healthy animals or healthy parts of animals?

This systematic destruction also disposes of healthy carriers of the disease.

Would it not be wise to keep part of this stock - in total isolation, of course - for research purposes?

As for fighting bulls, which are considered to be at risk and are therefore subject to compulsory destruction like all other cattle that die outside abattoirs, even though there is a market for their meat, it cannot withstand being frozen for the time it takes to obtain the result of the tests and therefore ceases to be fit for consumption.

The ban on meat and bone meal was ultimately dictated by the fact that it was impossible to trace the sources of the meat and bone input.

How should the meal be stored, burned and replaced?

Sites are selected by order of the public authorities without any consultation of the local populations, environmental-impact studies or risk assessments.

In order to comply with public health requirements, burning must be carried out in special facilities, and there are not yet enough of these.

In spite of a protein deficit, the Member States dependent on imports of oil-protein crops cannot give assurances that the protein in their feed does not come from genetically modified crops.

Yet Europe continues to take farmland out of production under the set-aside scheme.

For this reason, it is becoming a matter of urgency to reopen talks within the WTO and to rethink the Blair House agreements.

Europe must not reduce its support for livestock farmers, as it seems intent upon doing, by abolishing the premium for suckling cows or reducing cattle quotas, etc.

Even though farmers are prepared to make strenuous efforts in order to guarantee traceability and high-quality produce, Europe must not demand even greater sacrifices of them, as the Agriculture Council did at its last meeting.

On the contrary, Europe must support its farmers, even if it means paying direct grant aid.

An exceptional situation calls for exceptional measures.

The price of public health is well beyond the means of the agricultural budget alone.

Part of the cost of guaranteeing food safety and restoring consumer confidence should therefore be charged to the general budget.

Mr President, Commissioner, the measures proposed by the Commission so far in order to deal with the BSE crisis are mostly too little, too late and unilateral at that.

The Commission does not act, it reacts.

It is not pro-active enough to get a real grip on the situation.

Many of the questions which bother the people affected have yet to be answered.

How do we explain the different prices for BSE tests in Europe?

What will we do to address distortions of competition?

Why is there no effective help for the innocent victims?

I refer in particular to farmers in countries which are still BSE-free and to meat product companies, abattoirs etc., all of which are struggling or fear for their existence. We are helping the wrong people.

The incineration campaign in particular is blurring the data, sweeping the problem under the carpet and, most importantly, doing nothing to help the innocent victims.

In countries which cannot incinerate, cattle are left standing in their stalls.

The people affected cannot reasonably be expected to shoulder the burden.

Seventy per cent of the supplementary budget has been earmarked for this alone.

Why are BSE tests on live animals not being promoted or imposed?

You must realise that, if we lose our farmers, then we also lose the very basis of our existence, because it is mainly the farmers, especially in our regions, and I refer here to the Alpine regions, who take care of the countryside.

If we lose the farmers, we lose our very existence.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, here we are gathered once again to talk about BSE.

May I remind you that, only a few months ago in the Chamber in Strasbourg, I denounced the excessive cautiousness of the decisions proposed by the Commission.

So we have good reason to be surprised today at this furore, at this outbreak of panic in some countries which long believed that they would escape this scourge but which have nevertheless had time to observe the measures being taken in neighbouring countries.

We must not let ourselves be engulfed in this wave of panic, because we bear political responsibility.

Today the Commission is proposing a number of measures and, when I listen to my fellow Members, it strikes me how important it is that these measures should be harmonised.

As I said, we bear political responsibility.

That is why, as I have been doing for years, we must expose the shortcomings of the common agricultural policy, which has tended to favour large-scale farmers while overlooking the real world of the small farmers who are the lifeblood of our countryside.

We shall need a great deal of courage if we are to establish a sustainable form of agriculture in which the healthiness and safety of farm produce and of the rural environment are the paramount considerations.

We shall need not only courage but also determination to explain the new measures for the redistribution of agricultural premiums and, above all, to stand up to the Council in order to ensure that the reform process goes beyond declarations of intent.

We are living through a veritable Europe-wide tragedy.

We must grasp this opportunity to redefine a European agricultural policy, without playing to the galleries in the manner of Jos Bov, but by developing a policy that fulfils the expectations of consumers and our farmers, to whom we are bound by a strong sense of solidarity.

There is no point in taking authoritarian, technocratic or restrictive decisions on the future of cattle farming.

The establishment of extensive farming practices will automatically regulate production.

Higher quality but smaller quantities, more stringent controls and the implementation of emergency measures are the order of the day.

Let us demonstrate the resolve to take these steps without delay in the general interests of the people of Europe.

This is what they rightly expect of us.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, within the space of a few weeks the BSE phenomenon has developed dramatically and is now a virtually universal problem in Europe.

The situation has become alarming, given the fall in consumption and exports and the prospect of having to administer huge stocks of beef and veal.

It is an extremely critical situation, since it has driven cattle breeders to the brink of ruin, while the amount allocated to the EU agricultural budget is almost bound to prove insufficient.

In this context, Commissioner, the first imperative is that Member States show discipline and solidarity in implementing the adopted Community measures so as not to increase the size of the collective bill.

Even though we shall have to await the February meeting of the Council, and probably other major European gatherings too, before all the consequences can be assessed, we can already highlight a few key issues.

To that end, let me point out the primacy of food safety and consumer protection, and the consequent need for tighter controls to lend credibility to the decisions that are taken as well as the need for a European food agency to be set up quickly.

Let me also emphasise the need to establish greater solidarity between the various sectors within the CAP in each Member State, particularly by applying the cross-sector rules enshrined in Agenda 2000.

I might also mention Europe' s duty to comply with international provisions and to support the development of the production of vegetable proteins to replace meat and bone meal in animal feed.

Finally, may I stress the need to take on board all the lessons we have learned from the development of agriculture which has resulted from our successive common agricultural policies and from our international commitments.

Has not our past development, rooted in a quest for maximum competitiveness and a larger share of the global market, gone too far in the direction of industrialisation and profit-seeking?

For my part, I believe it has reached its limits and that we shall have to rethink it, particularly in the context of the WTO talks and the framing of a new CAP.

Be that as it may, how could agriculture be given the promise of a new dawn if BSE were to bring about the demise of its producers?

This, Commissioner, is precisely why I also plead for genuine, serious consideration of the expectations of livestock breeders and all the other players in the agricultural production process, who must receive help to ride out this crisis.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, without for one moment minimising the problems with BSE, I want to point out that, in the prevailing climate of panic, we must not forget all the other problems and risks, and also opportunities, which exist in our food industry.

If ruminant fat is guaranteed free from proteins, it is also free from dioxins, cinolons etc.

At present, distrust of the European food industry, of agriculture and of our countryside and farmers is spreading like wildfire.

This is very dangerous not only for employment in Europe and for the countryside, but also for our environment and our cultural heritage.

But just think if we could seize this opportunity.

A wise old man once said that chaos is a neighbour of God.

Let us use the present chaos creatively, for today we have our electorate' s support for opening up and transforming the entire food sector.

Mr President, BSE is still a danger.

The danger has not been averted.

And if there is less of a chance of catching BSE now than there was a short time ago, then it is thanks to our work here in Parliament and, I freely admit Mr Byrne, it is also thanks to the work which you have done.

The new Commission and you personally are consistent in your approach, but I must nonetheless criticise certain aspects of the proposals.

One chink in the Commission' s armour at European level was that of milk replacer and the fat contaminated with protein residue.

Unfortunately it was closed too late.

What is being done now is a step in the right direction.

But fat is still being added, albeit heat-treated fat.

And, Mr Byrne, the question is, where does the mechanically recovered meat go, if not into the food chain?

Is it used for bonemeal, is it used for fat and will brain residue left behind when the skull is sucked out end up in it?

Is it sterilised enough at 133 degrees?

As we know, these prions are clearly proving to be resistant to heat treatment.

It would be better here if we said that the only fat in milk replacer must come from the milk itself.

If you really must have fat, then put the butter which has been removed back in or feed the milk straight to the animals.

The second problem is the brain.

We still have a situation in which the brain from animals under 12 months old can be used.

We can also use pigs' brains.

The proof of the sausage cannot be in the eating.

So what we need to do is to remove both cows' and pigs' brains from the whole sausage, from the whole food chain.

Mr Bge said earlier that we want to test after 18 months.

I must correct him here: Parliament's resolution states that all animals which enter the food chain must be tested, starting at 18 months.

This too must be guaranteed and we must not let up in our pursuit of this objective.

Mr Byrne, we must not allow animals which are not being tested now to be slaughtered, because we urgently need these results for diagnostic reasons - as Mr Bge has already said - in order to evaluate the overall threat of BSE in Europe.

Commissioner, albeit somewhat belatedly, we are taking stricter and stricter measures.

However, what you have said begs the most important questions about which neither you nor the Council have said anything.

I refer to coordination and control.

You have indirectly identified the shortcomings; we know that there are serious shortcomings but where are the proposals?

Legislation on inspections, for example, is making no headway whatsoever at European level.

My second point concerns alternative solutions.

Other Members have raised the same point.

What is to be done with the meat and bone meal which has to be destroyed?

What is to be done with the dangerous substances which we remove from the food chain?

I know from my own country that this is a problem.

But what I do not know is how they can be reliably destroyed or, more to the point, how the costs can be covered.

That brings me to my last point: how are the costs to be covered, even at European Union level?

As far as I know, we have about EUR 1.5 billion in our coffers.

Your lowest estimates put the cost at EUR 3.5 billion and many are saying that it might be as high as 7 or 8.

Proposals for covering the cost as the budget now stands and with the financial perspectives which you support there are none.

What are we going to do?

Mr President, I would certainly like to emphasise the fact that there is a need - and this has been repeated on several occasions - to restore consumer confidence with regard to operators in the sector.

In order to do this, I call upon the Commission, as I have done on countless occasions, to provide clarification, that is to make all data available to allow correct information to contribute to reducing this collective psychosis of which, it appears, even we have been victims in part.

I would like to stir things up by saying that if we limit ourselves to the facts, to the current state of affairs, one is much more likely to be struck by lightning than infected by BSE.

By this I do not mean that we should not adopt all necessary precautions to prevent even a single human life being put at risk, but we should take care, because the media are causing such damage and are paralysing the sector, often without any objective information to provide accurate news.

The provision of accurate information is thus an indispensable requirement if the problem is to be addressed in the proper manner and if we are to prevent psychosis being encouraged in an unjustified - I repeat - often unjustified manner.

It is important to let consumers know what they are eating: in this respect the move towards compulsory labelling to provide consumers with accurate information on the animal's characteristics, from birth to slaughter, should be speeded up.

With regard to interventions, the need to allow operators in the sector to overcome this moment of crisis should be not be forgotten.

Thus, direct economic intervention should be used: it should be remembered that many breeders have thousands of head of cattle and they don't know what to do faced with the reduction in demand for their product.

We need to create stockpiles through public intervention. This direct intervention must ensure that companies in financial crisis receive the direct State support.

Mr President, before taking part in this debate, I reread a very interesting document, the text of a complaint lodged with the Court of Justice in 1996 by the French farmers' association Syndicat agricole franais de la coordination rurale and by Philippe de Villiers against the Commission, which the plaintiffs accused of mismanaging the BSE crisis, putting the principle of the free movement of goods before public health and failing to apply the precautionary principle.

While we are on the subject of complaints, what has become of the one that the Commission lodged against France, alleging that my country was refusing to ensure the free movement of meat?

I did not hear Commissioner Byrne update us on that point in the statement he just made.

The lessons to be learned with regard to the present situation are that public health must be the prime consideration, that every potential risk must be anticipated, even if the cost is high, and that we must respect the right of a Member State to apply more stringent safeguards than its partners.

In particular, we demand measures designed to ensure maximum safety, even if they are a heavy burden on the Community budget.

The European Union and its Member States must acknowledge their mistakes.

The only way of avoiding this type of problem in the future will be to impose draconian rules enshrining caution and respect for nature. such rules will clearly entail extra costs, which in themselves will handicap European agriculture in the global marketplace.

To compensate for this handicap, it will be necessary, in the context of the forthcoming WTO talks, to secure acceptance for the idea that each region of the world should be free to choose its own agricultural model, and it will likewise be necessary to undertake a radical review of the Uruguay Round model, which tends to expose agriculture to global competition without allowing for any protective or compensatory mechanisms.

Commissioner, I speak to you not as a neutral referee but as a representative of the executive institution of the European Union.

I am concerned, and this morning's speeches confirm this feeling of unease because the BSE problem, despite your explanations and the interventions you have mentioned - which are obviously a response to an economic crisis - represents a structural crisis to which we have yet to provide a response.

BSE is a moral problem: over the decades agricultural policy has been constructed around agriculture, but now a veil of distrust is coming down over the sector that we, as institutions, cannot afford to allow.

The agricultural sector is a sector comprised of working people, families who work the land and people who, occupied with everyday commitments, are paying a price which is not theirs to pay.

It is absolutely essential that we rewrite the rules but we cannot ask working people to pay a price - which amounts to bankruptcy in many European countries - which is not theirs to pay.

The response to an earthquake is not "We'll see what we can do" ; the response to an earthquake is appropriate and, above all, immediate intervention.

European agriculture is currently experiencing one of the most critical times in its history: our dealings with the agricultural sector are not without repercussion and ultimately not only farmers will be affected but Europe itself because, in the end, the farmers and people of Europe look to us, to Europe, to the institutions, as the entity that must meet their demands.

Commissioner, you have the melancholy satisfaction of being proved right and that never makes one popular or even happy.

The very people and the very Member States who were shrugging off your warnings two years ago, who were denying you a qualified majority, as you said just a few months ago, are now clamouring for compensation and support as the beef market collapses and we face the prospect of millions of animals in store, unsellable, undisposable of over the next two years.

In the United Kingdom we see this with some sympathy.

People will say to me: Well, yes, you were first.

We were first in the whole cycle from complacency to despair and back again.

And if today the beef market is sound in Britain and beef consumption is rising, it is only because people have seen how draconian the measures need to be.

Every question I now want to ask the Commission comes from that experience.

What do the Member States themselves say?

We see reports that some countries which claimed a year ago to be BSE-free, now anticipate up 500 cases in the course of the next year.

If Europe has fallen into line with the principle of culling animals over 30 months, is that in itself enough?

What do the tests and the research findings say about the incidence of the disease in animals younger than 30 months.

Thirdly, what capacity do the Member States have for destroying the materials that are now being removed?

Which Member States have the incineration capacity?

Are some still saying that they will put this material into landfill?

These are all serious questions, which we know you will try to answer.

We think you should go further and I would just like to echo what my friend Mr Garot said which is that Europe most of all owes you its solidarity.

Mr President, I welcome the proposals to ban the production of mechanically recovered meat from all ruminant bones of all ages.

In the UK at the moment, we have a ban on MRM from beef and also we do not have any animal going to the food chain over 30 months, but the problem is MRM beef coming in from other EU countries.

As far as I know, there is no adequate test to make sure that they are BSE-free.

With regard to the removal of the vertebral column, you have brought up the question: where should it take place, abattoir or at the point of sale?

We must take into account the Scientific Steering Committee' s review, but surely if the spinal cord is removed adequately that should be enough.

Whatever happens, all these safeguards must be monitored carefully.

I am pleased that there is going to be a monthly report from other EU countries as happens in the UK at the moment, but please bring in these measures quickly.

Make sure they are properly in force and please learn from the UK' s past mistakes.

Mr President, Commissioner, the BSE crisis has simply highlighted and revealed to public opinion in Europe the fragility and lack of rigour in the way Member States' comply with and observe European rules on potentially dangerous materials used in the manufacture of animal feedingstuffs.

Despite all the debates held on the crisis itself, we still allow some potentially dangerous substances to enter the food chain, since, for example, there is still no ban on animal fat for animal consumption.

Our citizens, who are powerless in the face of political decisions taken by politicians whose criteria are above all economic, demand greater rigour and responsibility.

What responsibilities will the Member States, the Commission and Parliament itself adopt with regard to the people affected by the human form of BSE?

There is still no uniformity in the measures adopted by the Council, which means that the precautionary principle will lose its effectiveness.

Further research is required to discover the nature and the transmission mechanisms of this disease in all its forms and, lastly, we must have greater controls for plants producing animal feedingstuffs, which are a major factor in the transmission of the disease.

If codecision in agriculture truly existed, this crisis would have taken a very different direction.

Mr President, the current situation in which cases of BSE in the European Union are multiplying makes it clear that it is not enough to make declarations of intent with regard to the reform of the CAP. We need to get to the root of the problem and move rapidly towards a genuine reform of the current common agricultural policy.

Budgetary and Community constraints cannot be used as an excuse for not adopting the necessary measures to solve the problem, and, at the same time, we must support livestock breeders.

The aim of the CAP reform that we need to implement must not be to make budgetary savings but to achieve balance in the distribution of assistance amongst producing countries and productions, taking account of specific regional requirements and the situation of each Member State.

New resources must be found for new requirements and so it is becoming necessary to conduct a review of the current financial framework that was decided on in Berlin.

Finally, I wish to mention Portugal, in order to ask the Commissioner to explain the unfairness of maintaining this particular ban on exports in an area in which there has been a significant reduction in cases, whilst in other countries, they are continually increasing.

Commissioner Byrne, I am not noted usually for complimenting you on your good performance but on this occasion I wish to be fair.

It is totally wrong for Member States now to blame the Commission when you were pointing out as long as a couple of years ago the problems that were going to occur.

What Member States have done by trying to make out which beef is the safest in Europe, is to destroy European beef.

There is no doubt about that.

We need to take action now across Europe.

I am a farmer who farmed through the BSE crisis in the UK.

I saw the value of my cattle drop to virtually nothing.

It is very painful for the farming industry to see this happen and it is happening now throughout the whole of Europe, so action needs to be taken.

I do not think we want to re-invent the wheel so we should look to the measures that have been taken in Britain and have restored consumer confidence.

I would urge, and I know Commissioner Byrne agrees with this, to have one policy throughout Europe.

If we do not, the European press will take each Member State in turn, they will look at the safety measures that are in those states and they will compare and then people' s confidence in beef in general will collapse.

There is no doubt that the older cattle, however painful it is, have to be taken out of the food chain.

Not only is there incineration but there is now a sodium hydrolysis method of dissolving cattle.

I am sure you are looking at that, because that could be a better and possibly a cheaper method of disposing of these cattle.

We need also to look at imports of cattle from outside the European Union, because not only do we need to get our act together, I believe there is a lot of complacency about this in the rest of the world.

At the end of the day, we must get beef consumption up, we must convince the consumer that it is safe and let them eat European beef.

Mr President, bearing in mind how much this is going to cost all Europeans, the fact that our aim is to restore confidence and that the issue is no longer the regulations in force but the implementation and observance of these regulations, should we not be thinking about how we can restore this confidence?

Can we expect the irresponsible Minister, who insulted those who rightly warned us of this risk by calling them irresponsible, to restore this confidence?

Or the Minister for Health, who demonstrated a lazy incompetence in this matter?

Commissioner, given that these people are so discredited, will they be able to restore confidence, they, who are responsible for the current confusion, for the lack of control of banned feedingstuffs, for the environmental messes that are occurring, with illegal burials of hundreds of cows?

Are these people, as discredited as they are, going to be able to restore the confidence that we need?

Commissioner, unless we demand that these people are held responsible for their actions, we are the ones who will be held responsible.

I can assure you of that.

Mr President, I should first of all like to draw your attention to the financial implications of the BSE crisis.

Firstly, the Commission eventually adopted the Agriculture Committee' s proposal to use the scope that was left in the agricultural budget of EUR 970 million after all.

I should add straight away that this scope appeared to be a little bigger than it actually is now, given also the present state of the euro, which has already absorbed 250 million of that amount.

The second point is that the funding is therefore not complete.

I would urge the Commission to look into other funding options, especially in the face of this crisis, with regard to a proposal for a consumer levy.

We might consider a temporary levy on meat, as a result of which we would at least be able effectively to cover the cost of far-reaching measures this year.

It is in itself nothing new that we are guaranteeing safety in this way, also with regard to other products.

Just consider the environmental levy on certain products which is applied in certain EU countries.

The third point which is of significance in my opinion, is the question of how we deal with Member States which have knowingly flouted EU rules.

Let us be honest, last year, Germany' s red/green coalition claimed time and again that it did not have any problems; the problem subsequently arose and was shifted elsewhere. How do the Commission and the Council deal with this?

I have to say that in this connection, the Commission has been far more consistent over the past few years than the Council, just to quote an example.

The final point is to look for a solution.

At the end of the day, the only solution is sound chain control, sound inspections and tough measures at times.

In this connection, I believe it would be politically inappropriate to claim at this moment in time that a change in the European agricultural policy vis--vis small holdings or organic agriculture will solve the problem.

The politicians in Europe had better be careful about using this crisis for their own political ends.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, this is basically an animal health problem that has assumed the proportions of a huge crisis because it has affected food safety, even though medical specialists say that it is not highly infectious.

It is a problem that emerged in the United Kingdom more than a decade ago and which, since then, has spread to the whole of continental Europe.

At the time, the Commission probably underestimated the problem and did not adopt the necessary measures to prevent the disease spreading.

We must acknowledge that it was a mistake to wait until 27 March 1996 to adopt emergency measures, starting with the ban on animals and meat meal from the United Kingdom and to give in to pressure by then derogating this decision two years later, on 16 March 1998.

It is time that we learnt from our mistakes and adopted effective and appropriate measures, which can be complied with without trying to use a sledgehammer to crack a nut.

Most importantly, these measures must be uniform, because what is causing the greatest confusion, lack of direction and distrust is the lack of clear and concrete criteria.

You have told us what the Scientific Steering Committee thinks and what the Council intends to do, but what action is the Commission prepared to take, when is it going to act and how will it do so?

Furthermore, we must ensure that all of these rules are complied with, because controls have proved to be our greatest shortcoming.

I have always said the same thing: it is crucial that the Commission coordinates and harmonises controls and, most importantly, that it controls the controller.

Clear and practical rules are essential because there are fifteen countries, each with its own problems and in some countries - in my own, to be precise - in which responsibilities for control in this field lie with the seventeen autonomous governments.

Lastly, I would suggest to the Commission that it should make an effort to communicate risks, because the profusion of news and comment in the media is contributing to the confusion and alarm in society.

In addition to all of this, Commissioner, we need to think about the future of the CAP, because the root of this problem lies in the competitiveness that has been forced on the agricultural sector.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, Commissioner, I should like to thank the Commission for the information which it has given us on the fight against BSE and to tell Commissioner Byrne that my impression is that he has the situation in hand and that his proposals are clear and decisive.

I think this is what we need because, apart from BSE, we also have hysteria and panic to deal with in several areas.

This initial information which we have been given is without doubt most comprehensive.

But I must say, Commissioner, that I would have liked to have seen the information on the countries which you so nicely listed compared with the results of controls carried out by food and veterinary health inspectors.

I must say, in all honesty, that I only have to think of the ignorance and squirming with which the Agriculture Council has reacted to proposals over recent months, including Parliament's proposals, to lose all confidence in information provided by Member States and ministers.

Of course, there is always some cause for objection with most measures.

But we all know that the measures being decided now are the result of a failure to act, including over recent years, and we cannot afford to lower our sights.

A few speakers have already referred to tests.

The point is: if we do not test all animals, then the results are meaningless.

I have heard that the abattoirs are simply refusing to slaughter animals.

They are being clubbed without being tested.

We must intervene here, we must sort this out throughout Europe.

Mrs Roth-Behrendt said we need more and better controls and indeed we do.

But we also need clear-cut, comprehensible laws in Europe.

We shall be dealing with hygiene regulations shortly.

I say to you, in all honesty that, from what I hear from the Member States at the moment, I have no cause for optimism whatsoever.

We are back on the same old merry-go-round, it is just not on.

We need to stand together and give Europe clear-cut laws.

That is the only way to get a grip on the problem.

Mr President, I will be very brief.

All I want to say is that we are in danger, as has been emphasised, of repeating the same things.

We will be repeating the same things in ten years' time because there have been considerable delays in conducting scientific research into prions.

We have known about prions for 15 years Commissioner Byrne, but after 15 years we do not know which molecular mechanisms are responsible for neurodegeneration, we do not know if they pass through the placenta barrier, we do not know if they pass into milk, we do not have rapid tests...

(The President cut the speaker off)

Mr Nistic, your question is not a point of order.

I know that I need to be flexible, but please do not try to take advantage of this.

Mr President, may I first of all thank all the Members who made such valuable contributions to this debate, all of which have been very carefully noted.

I would like to say by way of a preliminary reply to what has been said, that those who spoke on the question of consumer confidence are putting their finger on an issue that is of particular importance, in addition to the issues that we are addressing today relating to public health.

May I draw your attention to one particular aspect of public confidence that a number of you, in particular Mr Whitehead, referred to.

Sometimes it depends to a very large extent on where Member States are in the cycle of BSE as to the effect on public confidence.

Public health issues are crucially important but I want to address the consumer confidence aspect for a moment before I go on to the public health aspects.

Mr Whitehead rightly observed that in the UK the level of consumer confidence is high.

The consumption of beef in the UK is higher than it was before 1996.

What lessons can we draw for consumer confidence from that?

I believe it is because people see that the incidence of BSE in the UK is falling despite the fact that the number of cases is still the highest in the European Union by some considerable distance.

So why are consumers relaxed about it to the extent that they are now consuming beef more than they were before 1996?

I believe it is because they realise that the scientific advice had been correct; that the lawmakers have responded correctly and put safety measures in place and that the public authorities in the UK properly implemented that legislation and the consequence is that we have a falling incidence of BSE.

So consumers have concluded from that: somebody is in charge, they are doing something about it, they appear to know what they are doing because the incidence is falling.

Therefore their confidence rises and they consume beef.

That feeling has to be achieved in the rest of Europe, but it will take time because consumers do not have that sequence of events in their minds in the rest of the European Union and we all know why: because a number of Member States who declared themselves to be free of BSE within a very short space of time after making the declaration had to then admit that there was BSE in that Member State.

That quite obviously provoked an immediate reaction in consumer confidence because it says to consumers: the people in charge do not know what they are talking about and are not protecting me.

We do not want to make microbiologists out of consumers, but they must have the feeling that there is someone in charge, who knows what they are doing and that what they are doing is effective in ensuring the protection of the consumer.

Let me now deal with some of the issues that you raised surrounding public health and the procedures that are needed.

A number of you mentioned the question of testing.

This was discussed in the Council last Monday.

Testing at 30 months remains the norm, but will be kept under review.

A huge number of tests under way will provide invaluable information within a very short period of time.

We do not yet have enough tests and have not had them long enough to draw the appropriate conclusions.

The statistical sample is not big enough, but when it is we will draw those conclusions.

This will put us in a much better position to decide if further needs to be done.

In relation third countries, I can say that the SRM decision that we made some time ago applies to third countries and to imports from third countries from 1 April next.

I have written to all third countries, alerted them to the Community measures and also advised them of the dangers of meat and bone meal.

And my services will hold a conference shortly with third countries to press this point home further.

On the question of the vertebral column, of course the spinal cord must be removed and destroyed.

Somebody mentioned earlier: Is this not enough - why do we have to remove the entire vertebral column if the danger resides in the spinal cord?

Well, of course, that fails to take into account the need to address the question of the dangers that may be posed by the dorsal root ganglia and the removal of the vertebral column is specifically directed to that particular point.

The removal of the vertebral column has been a requirement from 1 October.

The question is how and where.

As I explained there are complications and risks depending on where it is done, at the abattoir or in the butcher' s shop.

We do not have enough time to go into detail in relation to this but I repeat what I said earlier that this is an issue that we will have to give very careful consideration to.

In respect of derogations, all Member States are currently carrying out tests on fallen and at-risk animals.

This has been done on the basis of a random survey and this will help to revise the extent of the disease and give us more information.

Then appropriate decisions can be made in the light of that situation.

The specific issue of the number of inspections will be addressed in the report that I am requesting Member States to furnish me with.

You will remember that I wrote to Member States on 4 January including an annex asking for detailed information.

We have a lot of that information now in response to that letter and we will obviously be in contact with Members States all the time seeking further information and making sure that everything is kept under review.

References were made to the reform of the CAP.

This is largely a matter for my colleague Franz Fischler, but Member States are not yet fully availing of the opportunities to provide for what might loosely described as a greener CAP.

In this context I should say that Franz Fischler and I have established a joint committee with our services to look into this very issue and to see to what extent adjustments need to be made so that we can achieve a situation whereby food is produced by more natural methods.

That is not to say that we are going to abandon the idea of the industrial production of food.

(Applause from the right) That is a knee-jerk reaction that does not respond to the needs of the consumer.

We must produce a lot of food to feed people and that must be properly addressed as well.

But there is a desire from consumers that we should address the question of the natural production of food.

I am not fully convinced that has been fully addressed in the past and after my discussions with Franz Fischler we are now going to look at this more carefully.

Somebody made reference to the fact of the CAP supports being more focussed on large farmers than on small farmers.

I am not necessarily convinced that is the case, but there does seem to be some evidence to that effect and that is another issue that will obviously have to be addressed as well.

My distinguished predecessor Ms Bonino had something to say on the subject of enforcement.

Of course, enforcement of measures is a key issue.

The Food and Veterinary Office has a key role to play.

Reports of the implementation measures will also oblige Member States to be very careful.

You made very relevant comments on fats also.

It is not just a question of banning them.

Animals have to have fat in their diet.

The issue is where is this fat going to come from and are these fat sources safe.

The opinion of the Scientific Steering Committee might need clarification on this particular aspect.

There was considerable discussion in the Council last Monday on this issue.

The conclusions refer to the fact that ruminant fat will have to be pressure cooked in the manner that we are all familiar with, but in addition a view was expressed that perhaps the time had come for the removal of animal fats from ruminant feed and that is an issue that is going to be considered.

In considering that issue, you must ask what are the alternatives: vegetable fats, soyas, someone mentioned genetically modified substances.

There are many complex issues which have to be addressed but I do not want to delay bringing forward the appropriate proposal for the pressure cooking of ruminant fat in the meantime.

I should say in the context of the Blair House Agreement, my colleague, Franz Fischler is well aware of the demands of farmers to renegotiate the Blair House Agreement.

A number of you made reference to budgetary considerations and I must say that the Berlin ceilings have been reached.

Any increase in budget must now be agreed unanimously by all Member States.

Someone also made reference to the fact that some Member States are increasing their own taxation, increasing VAT to pay for this.

That is a matter for each individual Member States.

The Commission has no competence to levy VAT at the point of sale of any products, and that includes agricultural products.

Reference is also made to distortions of competition and we are faced with a crisis here.

We do not have the luxury to harmonise all national measures before putting in place essential health protection measures.

We must proceed with that and at the same time if the measures that we are putting in place require adjustment or fine-tuning to eliminate competition distortions then we must do that.

Others made reference to the need to ensure that we have harmonised measures throughout the European Union and I fully agree with that.

I have said that on a number of occasions.

I do believe that consumer confidence is undermined if consumers see different responses in different Member States to the same perceived risk.

I have said that on a number of occasions and that message has got through.

I detected a mood in the Council last Monday that ministers accepted the proposition that we have to abandon unilateral measures in individual Member States and go forward with the measures that address the problem on a Europe-wide basis.

I should have also mentioned earlier when I addressed the question of testing that live tests are not available yet.

But we are carrying out a considerable amount of research in relation to this and a considerable amount of money is being spent on this.

There is some is hope on the horizon in respect of live tests but nothing is absolutely clear as yet and I would not like to raise expectations or hopes in that regard.

Mrs Grossette made reference to the operation of the CAP and I do not disagree with anything she said about its operation and how it affects large farmers, small farmers and so on.

Can we continue for example with the situation where 45% of aids are paid for arable crops, a sector which is very intensive and which employs far fewer people than other principal sectors?

This is an issue which must also be addressed.

Mr Posselt referred to fats and dioxin and the question of dioxin is under active consideration by my services and by myself at the moment as a result of the publication of the report of the Scientific Steering Committee within the last couple of weeks on this very issue.

It is practically impossible to filter out dioxins.

They have to be tackled in other ways and we are working on this at the moment.

Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf then asked me to address the question of a total ban of ruminant fats in animal feed.

As I said earlier in this response, this is something that is being considered, was addressed by the Council last Monday and is being addressed in the context of further advice.

There are control problems which make it difficult to ensure that segregation can be effective I will be happy to keep you informed of this issue as the discussion evolves.

Someone asked the question as to how mechanically recovered meat is going to be dealt with.

Well I have say that it is going to be included in the definition of an SRM.

So we extend the definition of SRM to include mechanically recovered meat which then has to be disposed of in the way that the law requires.

That will be done in a manner consistent with the legislation as it currently stands.

Mr President, allow me to make a comment to Mr Byrne.

On the subject of animal fats, I would again propose that we leave the fat in the milk, i.e. that we use the butter.

It is perfect for the calves.

It is what nature intended: the fat is easily digested and there is no risk of infection.

You have made what is, I am sure, an interesting scientific point, but I do not think it is a point of order.

The debate on the statement by the Commission is closed.

Substances having a hormonal or thyrostatic action and of beta-agonists

The next item is the debate on the report (A5-0002/2001) by Mr Olsson, on behalf of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive, amending Council Directive 96/22/EC concerning the prohibition on the use in stockfarming of certain substances having a hormonal or thyrostatic action and of beta-agonists [COM(2000) 320 - C5-0357/2000 - 2000/0132(COD)]

Mr President, Commissioner, we have just concluded a debate on the problems involving BSE - problems connected with food production in which profit interests may be very important and drive production tremendously hard.

We must remember that, in a globalised food market, there is a requirement for political limits upon how food is produced so that other social objectives are not forgotten.

Within the European Union, we have had rules about not using hormones to promote growth.

We have had complaints about this, mainly from the United States, and a WTO panel has been set up which has said that our proofs are inadequate.

This was the background to the Commission' s having an assessment made of those hormones which have been used.

According to that assessment, there were different levels of risk factor.

All the hormones involve certain risks. Above all, they are carcinogenic.

One hormone, oestradiol 17, was worse than the others.

The Commission is therefore now proposing a change to the legislation so that oestradiol 17 in particular is completely banned - both for use in feed or as a growth promoter, and for therapeutic purposes.

Where the other five hormones are concerned, an extension is proposed to the provisional, temporary ban that applies.

I and the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy fully support the Commission' s positions.

It is extremely urgent to take this matter further.

Naturally, it is also important to continue investigating the other five hormones to see how hazardous they may be, but it is constructive that oestradiol 17 is now banned once and for all.

With this investigation, we have therefore obtained clearer arguments which hopefully mean that those who hold other views will respect our position, our ban and the import ban that at present applies.

There is something of a variety of arguments, and I should like here to discuss a number of arguments which I have contributed to the report and which have been approved by the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy.

It may be that, from a legal point of view, they do not carry much weight, but they carry a great deal of weight politically.

Firstly, there is the environmental argument.

It is dangerous to use hormones in this way.

In the United States, where they are used, it has been discovered that they are disseminated in the environment beyond the confines of animal production.

Secondly, there is the argument on the grounds of animal protection.

We must consider whether it is reasonable to give animals feed supplements which cause abnormal growth.

Does that not cause them stress of a kind which creates a conflict for us when it comes to caring for animals and our ambition to treat animals well?

In the light of such considerations, there is a general obligation to make an ethical assessment.

This will be all the more important in a society in which knowledge is increasing and in which science is discovering more and more about different production methods.

We must therefore reflect upon whether hormone use accords with the basic ethical rules we human beings have.

The issue is, of course, that of whether change as far-reaching as this means that the very conditions of life for human beings or other biological creatures are being transformed.

We should probably have no right to effect such a transformation.

I support the changes that have been made.

At the same time, I want to emphasise that there is a crucial difference between the committee' s and the Commission's proposals, for we in the committee do not wish to apply the committee procedure proposed by the Commission but want to arrange for any amendments to go back to Parliament for approval because there is so much by way of politics - and not only of science - in all of this.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, Mr Olsson has presented an excellent report on the subject of the use of hormones in stockfarming.

Food safety must take priority in all our decisions because consumers have a right to safe, risk-free food.

Substances with a hormonal or thyrostatic action and beta-agonists as growth promoters in beef production have long-term effects and may therefore have repercussions on human health.

The main persons affected by hormone residues are high-risk groups such as pre-pubertal children and pregnant women.

During the WTO dispute settlement procedure, the scientific committee came to the conclusion from its evaluation of the risks of the six hormones that oestradiol 17 clearly had a carcinogenic, tumour-initiating and genotoxic effect.

If there is the slightest suspicion that an individual substance may have harmful effects, as is the case with oestradiol 17, then we must react with a definitive ban.

We are also duty bound to be cautious with the other hormones at issue if we are to have a high level of food safety and health protection.

Compliance with the hormone ban must also be strictly controlled within the European Union.

European consumers are also extremely sensitive when it comes to imported products, which is why the monitoring system for meat imports from third countries must be reviewed.

Only if we apply the precautionary principle can we show consumers that we mean business when we talk of food safety in Europe.

That is how Parliament can send out a clear signal and pave the way forward.

Mr President, the concern of the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy stems from the legal disputes with the United States and Canada concerning the European Union' s obligations in the context of the WTO and the application of the precautionary principle, to which we attach great importance.

On the basis of the opinion delivered by the Scientific Committee on Veterinary Measures relating to Public Health, the SCVPH, we have called for moves to ban oestradiol 17, a recognised carcinogen.

In general, our amendments to the Commission' s proposals are designed to encourage the Commission to adopt a more dynamic approach by seeking and developing its own scientific information with a view to avoiding any impression that the EU is seeking only to gain time and intends to continue using the current lack of adequate scientific information to maintain its provisional measures in force indefinitely.

It is therefore important that the provisional ban on the five other identified hormones, namely testosterone, progesterone, trenbolone acetate, zeranol and melengestrol acetate, should apply until the Community finds more complete scientific information from any source - particularly by means of a research programme of its own in this field - which could shed light on the gaps in the present state of knowledge on these substances and enable the EU to take a sufficiently well-founded decision to continue or lift the ban.

As far as these substances too are concerned, we also want the Commission to accept the opinion of the Standing Veterinary Committee which was established by Article 1 of Decision 68/361/EEC and to make every effort to obtain further information in order to resolve this problem within a reasonable time.

I must emphasise that these proposals are designed to promote a European agricultural system which is respectful of the environment, of animal welfare and of human health.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, we now know that the use of certain substances in livestock can have very dangerous effects on the human organism.

Moreover, the statement made by the Commission on the state of progress in the fight against BSE clearly demonstrates that, where prevention is possible, it is always far more effective than intervention after the event; as the saying goes, prevention is better than cure.

So we must be particularly vigilant with regard to the substances that are administered to livestock.

This vigilance must be practised across the board, from veterinary treatment to husbandry practices.

Recent studies have shown that oestradiol 17 is carcinogenic.

It is therefore imperative that the use of this substance should be strictly prohibited in any livestock intended for human consumption and that all imports of meat from non-EU countries should be monitored.

Long before the BSE crisis we are now experiencing, I vigorously upheld two principles in this House: the first was the precautionary principle, as the best means of protecting consumers and preventing panic, which, as we have seen, has disastrous effects on human behaviour and on the farming sector, and the principle of supporting scientific research in order to acquire within the shortest possible time the most accurate data on which to base our decisions.

The report that the honourable Member, Mr Olsson, has presented to us focuses on these two principles, and I find that gratifying.

There are indeed doubts about five other hormones, and it is important that the scientific research in this field should be undertaken without delay.

However, in the absence of definitive findings, it is absolutely essential that the temporary ban on the use of these substances for the treatment of livestock should be renewed and that the utmost care be taken with any derogations.

Mr President, first of all a thank you to Mr Olsson for a really good report which is very much along the lines of what I think is a good proposal from the Commission.

I believe we all agree that using hormones in this way to promote animals' growth is unacceptable in itself.

As Mr Olsson said, it is unethical.

It has serious consequences for animal welfare and the environment, and the six substances we are talking about here also damage human health.

The definitive ban on using oestradiol stands to reason.

I also think it is important, however, that we now obtain a provisional ban on the use of the other five substances.

This would, in actual fact, be an example of a very proactive and commendable application of the precautionary principle, which I should very much like to support.

I should also like to support the rapporteur' s view that it ought not to be possible to lift or weaken the bans without the Council' s or Parliament' s approval.

It is important for us to retain political responsibility on this matter.

Let me also say finally that I find it quite incomprehensible that the American authorities should close their eyes to the risks involved in this production method.

If they were to look at the development of certain types of cancer in the United States and the development of obesity in the American population, the American health authorities would surely hear all the alarm bells ringing.

I therefore hope that the renewed adoption of a ban on the use of this hormone-treated meat here in Europe might capture the attention both of American consumers and of the American health authorities so that we avoid having to have further discussions of this matter under the auspices of the WTO.

Mr President, first of all I wish to thank the rapporteur Mr Olsson for his report and also the committees who gave their opinion on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive amending Council Directive 96/22 on the prohibition of the use of hormones in stock-farming.

The main purpose of the Commission proposal is to increase our level of food safety and to comply with our international obligations deriving from the sanitary and phyto-sanitary agreement of the World Trade Organisation, the so-called SPS Agreement.

This assembly is well aware that the current ban on use of hormones for growth promotion was challenged at the World Trade Organisation and that the final ruling in 1998 criticised the risk assessment on hormones used in food-producing animals presented by the European Community.

As you are aware, the Commission initiated a complementary risk assessment on these hormones in the light of the clarifications regarding risk assessment provided by the appellate body of the WTO.

In April 1999, the Scientific Committee on Veterinary Measures relating to Public Health issued an opinion on the potential adverse affects to human health arising from hormone residues in bovine meat and meat products.

This opinion was reviewed and confirmed in May 2000.

The main conclusion was that no acceptable daily intake can be established for any of the six hormones evaluated when they are administered to bovine animals for growth promotion.

As regards to the hormone oestradiol 17-B, the scientific committee found that it has to be considered a complete carcinogen insofar as it has both tumour and tumour initiating affects.

For the five other hormones under consideration, the need for further information was identified.

In the light of these conclusions the Commission proposed firstly to ban definitively all the uses of oestradiol in farm animals in the light of the finding that this substance is a complete carcinogen.

Secondly, the Commission proposed to maintain provisionally the current prohibition on the five other hormones until more complete scientific information is made available.

This measure will be kept under regular review and is thus fully compatible with our international obligations.

I am most satisfied that the report supports this approach.

With this proposal the Commission has also provided the necessary legal basis for adaptation of the lists of definitively and provisionally banned substances by the regulatory committee procedure in order to allow for rapid reaction to new evidence and thus further to enhance consumer safety.

I regret very strongly that the introduction of the regulatory committee procedure for the adaptation of the lists of substances has not been supported by the report.

Many of you here know my view on this issue.

I have discussed with you in bilateral meetings on a number of occasions the question of the use of the comitology procedure and I note that request by the Commission is not being accepted in the amendments that have been put forward.

I would ask Parliament to reconsider its view on this issue, because I believe that it is of considerable importance that the question of comitology be seriously addressed in this issue.

I believe that if Parliament insists on the adaptation of the annexes to be done by way of codecision rather than comitology, that Parliament will be guilty of not properly looking after the safety of the consumer health in this issue, an issue that Parliament has discussed in this debate earlier today, both in the BSE context and on this particular issue.

How can we possibly justify a delay of a year and a half in the adjustment and adaptation of the annexes in circumstances where a scientific committee may have advised the Commission to add for instance a further hormone to the list of annexes?

Someone said that this is a political issue.

That is the very reason why this issue was considered in the WTO.

It comes as some concern to me that there is a risk if Parliament adheres to the view that it appears to have on this issue, that we are going to have a situation whereby comitology will not be accepted in this way but rather there will be an adherence to codecision.

I have been through this before.

I have had this debate with Parliament and I know what is going to happen later in the day.

Members of this House will arrive in here to vote on this issue and they will follow the whips.

The vast majority will not know the detail that they are voting on because they are not informed on this particular issue.

It is also a major concern to me that so many people today will vote on an issue which is of considerable importance to consumer without knowing that they are putting in place a procedure which would put at risk consumer health by delaying the procedure under which I can, on the basis of clear scientific advice, put something into an annex which will protect consumer health.

I sincerely ask you ladies and gentlemen, to revise your view on this issue, give consumer health a greater priority.

Consider the question of consumer health as more important than the interinstitutional wrangling between Parliament and the Commission on the question of whether there should be a full codecision in cases such as this.

This is a scientific issue, based on scientific advice: it is an executive decision which will be taken by the Commission and put into an annex in circumstances where there is a full droit de regard by Parliament on that issue.

I have said here before when debating this issue that I will not lightly disregard the view of Parliament on any issue where comitology arises.

So I sincerely ask you, ladies and gentlemen, to give serious consideration to the rights of consumers, to the question of the proper protection of consumers and also bear in mind we are going to have a food and safety authority in operation hopefully next year.

It will have a role to play in rapid reaction.

If it identifies an emerging risk, it can advise that there should be an executive response to that risk immediately.

Sometimes that will mean a legislative response introduced by the Commission.

If that can be done by comitology we will get the kind of speedy response that the consumer requires.

But if it can only be done by codecision we will have a delay.

Now allow me to address in detail the amendments which have been proposed in this report as well as the amendment tabled by Mrs Grossette.

I will begin with the amendments the Commission cannot accept.

The Commission cannot accept Amendments Nos 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10 as far as comitology is concerned for the reasons that I have already identified.

Nor Amendments Nos 12, 13 and 14 which reject the introduction of the regulatory committee procedure for updating the lists of provisionally and definitively banned substances and which re-introduce the codecision procedure.

Amendment No 1 focuses on a well-founded decision on maintaining the ban.

The Commission cannot accept this amendment as it prejudges the outcome of any possible future research.

Under Amendment No 2, the Commission would be committed to fund research on the five provisionally banned substances.

There is no legal obligation under either Community law or the WTO framework for the Commission to finance research.

Rather the WTO requires parties to evaluate the risk on the basis of all scientific data.

Nevertheless, such studies are not excluded from the European Union' s programmes on food safety.

The Commission cannot accept Amendments Nos 3 and 11 which insist on the need to introduce effective monitoring systems to protect health.

I would like stress that monitoring systems already exist both in the Member States and at Community level.

For instance meat imports are already controlled, notably according to the directive on controls and residues, Council Directive 96/23.

Finally, the Commission proposed that the provisions in the directive concerning oestradiol would not apply to animals treated for technical or therapeutical purposes before 1 July.

Amendment No 15 by Mrs Grossette proposes that this provision be linked to the availability of suitable alternatives.

The Commission cannot accept this amendment on health grounds given the clear scientific evidence as regards oestradiol.

In addition, a recent study indicated that there is no lack of alternatives to oestradiol for therapeutical or zootechnical use in the Community.

This study should be made available to Parliament in the near future.

On the other hand the Commission can accept Amendment No 8 as well as in principle the part of Amendment No 10 dealing with scientific data because they introduce useful clarifications to the text.

To conclude, I wish once again to thank Mr Olsson for the excellent report and his support on this important issue.

In summary, the Commission cannot accept Amendments Nos 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10 as far as the point of comitology is concerned, 11, 12, 13, 14 and 15.

On the other hand it can accept Amendment No 8 and in principle the part of Amendment No 10 dealing with scientific data.

Mr President, I naturally respect Commissioner Byrne' s view, recommending the committee procedure.

However, what we are aiming at is not to delay the handling of this matter but to be able to conduct a debate here for, on this issue as on many others, there is a lack of scientific clarity.

Yesterday in Stockholm, I met a representative of the American Department of Agriculture, who did not take the European view of science.

In this Chamber, we need, then, to debate issues which are not only scientific but are also about ethical stances and the precautionary principle.

It is not, then, about postponing dealing with this issue. Rather, the aim is to obtain a more thorough political debate.

The vote will take place at 11 a.m.

The next item is the debate on the report (A5-0005/2001) by Mrs O'Toole, on behalf of the Committee on Culture, Youth, Education, the Media and Sport, on new frontiers in book production: electronic publishing and printing on demand [2000/2037(INI)]

Mr President, I want to first talk about why this report is important and in doing so I picked at random a number of published authors: the works of Michel Tournier, Leonardo Sciascia, Italo Calvino and a man in my own country, Caryl Philips.

A couple of shelves at home house this work of rich linguistic diversity, of rich form, rich culture and rich history.

They fashion the way in which I think about and look at the world.

The canvas upon which I work has been painted by these authors who are enjoyed by many people.

Books for me are principally about access to choice, access to ideas and access to opportunities.

I grew up in a pretty humble background, in a poor area with impoverished expectations and poor prospects.

But from the day that I entered a public library, books became my liberation as they have been to so many others.

I am very grateful to the authors and publishers of those books for giving me that liberation and it is now my duty to ensure that experience is passed on to others.

What then is the report about?

Quite simply, I want to ensure that as we fully enter the electronic age, the framework which operates in Member States for books, whether it be protecting intellectual property rights, tax regimes, the regulation of demand or grants, continues to operate in the new age.

Books have always been recognised as more than simply a commodity and in an increasingly commodified world this is extremely important.

Electronic publishing covers four specific areas: electronic books, printing on demand, Internet bookshops and publishing on the Internet.

We need to make sure that we have the policies to operate a fully comprehensive canvas on which all of these developments can take place.

So what do I want to see in this report?

Firstly, we need to encourage the huge growth and development of these industries and the widespread use of electronic media in Europe.

We need to have affordable access to these media for all Europeans and the educational provision to make this possible.

We should continue to foster linguistic and cultural diversities through the use of electronic publishing and we should facilitate the easy transformation of traditional publishing industries into the e-publishing arena.

In order for this to happen, we need to ensure that the appropriate policies are in place to pursue this growth and to ensure that there is choice and access for all.

Therefore, my report calls for a number of things.

The EU institutions have a very important part to play in ensuring future growth.

First of all, the Commission can establish a comprehensive policy to develop this sector.

Secondly, we can all promote policies that develop and encourage literacy and combat the digital divide.

The Commission can and should develop training and vocational programmes and support mechanisms for SME development in this particular sector and we should work with Member States to build safeguards for the rights of authors and the interests of publishers, and ensure that workers in the industry have the opportunity to develop their capacity in the new age.

Member States should ensure that the current VAT rules applying to books be monitored and mirrored for electronic publication.

All of this is within our grasp and with this I commend to the whole House, as it almost is, my report with the hope that it provides us with a route map that will allow everybody to enjoy the benefits and the fruits of the emergence of this new sector.

Madam President, may I congratulate Mrs Toole on her report, which throws into relief the dramatic changes which have taken place in the world of books over recent years as the result of new technologies.

All of us who love books, both as readers and writers, must rethink our relationship with books from square one.

A revolution has taken place which makes books even more interesting, even richer, even more indispensable to each and every one of us.

At the same time, however, it means that there is vital need for us to develop European and national policies to address the problems caused by new methods of production and distribution.

To the question of whether books should be protected from uncontrolled market forces we say yes, given the huge cultural importance of books and reading in our society, which we must strengthen as much as we can.

The new prospects for spreading information and enlarging the reading public via the Internet are accompanied by the problems of intellectual property and the status of authors and the risk of large swathes of the population being left with no access to the new media.

A lack of equal opportunities for the computer illiterate, rural areas and minority groups may prove to be fatal, especially where it compounds the considerable degree of illiteracy which already exists.

The problem is so serious that there is even talk of yet another threat to social cohesion, a threat which needs to be dealt with promptly through decisive policies on the part of the European Union.

But all the Member States should facilitate access for the young to books and encourage them to read during their education, because it is they who represent the future of the European Union and there can be no future without books, be they in hard or soft copy.

Mr President, Commissioner, books are an important instrument by means of which culture is passed on, and modern publishing techniques contribute to this.

This is why this report is excellent.

I would like to thank the rapporteur for all the work and the research she has carried out.

It is a field which is continually changing.

In the publishing world, however, not only is production important, but so is consumption.

Reading is a form of consumption which needs to be encouraged effectively.

People have to make choices constantly about how they use their time.

This is why I, together with my fellow Member Mr Graa Moura, tabled an amendment concerning the issue of a European day of reading.

We proposed 23 April, as it is Shakespeare' s birthday and the anniversary of Cervantes' death.

It therefore covers the whole of Europe.

There is already a UNESCO day of reading in many countries.

But I grant the Commission the freedom and wisdom to select another date.

Commissioner, there is no supply without demand.

In order to give an extra boost, Mr Gara Moura and I have also asked for a year of reading, preferably within the foreseeable future, but that might be pushing things.

A second point is market forces.

A book sector which is synonymous with a multiform and cultural diversity must be protected, where necessary.

Fixed book prices and reduced VAT rates, as applied in various Member States to paper printing, must also apply to the electronic alternatives.

Madam President, I should like to speak today from a reader' s perspective and consider both the good and bad points of electronic publishing.

On the positive side, we all know that the individualisation of supply and demand is one of the opportunities presented by electronic publishing.

We take it for granted; but we may equally take something else for granted, something that has been receiving less attention, namely the fact that the book-publishing chain will change out of all recognition, with publishers and bookstores assuming a more central role, because electronic publishing will completely transform the distribution system.

On the negative side, access to reading material will be twice as difficult as it is now.

Of course, new digital technology offers an opportunity to democratise book reading, but it may also create an additional obstacle to literacy.

Allow me to conclude, Madam President, by appealing for vigilance regarding the protection of copyright, since electronic publishing poses a particular threat in that respect, which is ultimately a threat to the creation of literary works.

In this context, I must also draw attention to the need for regulated pricing of books in Europe for the same reasons, namely to safeguard the creation and distribution of literary works.

Madam President, this highly stimulating report by Mrs O' Toole gives us the opportunity to think more deeply about the future of book-publishing and to develop new initiatives.

As the report quite rightly emphasises, books play, and will continue to play, a vital role in extending the influence of our diverse European cultures, and indeed the remarkable growth in the number of published titles testifies to the wealth, the vitality and the diversity of these cultures.

So it is only natural that we should have opted for an initiative designed to promote culture, an initiative which takes increasing account of the role of books as indispensable carriers of our cultural heritage.

This, incidentally, is a feature of the cohesion policy we are pursuing through the Structural Funds.

Are you aware of that, ladies and gentlemen?

Let me give you some examples.

Thanks to Community support, the number of libraries in Greece will double between now and the year 2006, rising from 526 to 1170.

Over the same period, EUR 38 million will be devoted to the development of archives, libraries and reading under the operational programme on culture in Portugal, more than half of which will be financed from the European Regional Development Fund.

The same thing has been happening in the domain of competition policy, where great emphasis is being placed on the value of books to the people of Europe.

This is reflected in our cultural initiatives too.

When we discussed the Culture 2000 programme, Parliament emphasised the major role that should be assigned to activities for the promotion of books and literature.

The first year of implementation of the programme shows that this wish has been fulfilled.

Mrs O' Toole' s report invites us to broaden our horizons and to consider all aspects of the technological revolution with a view to preserving the range of European publications in all its diversity, seizing new opportunities, dealing with any risks, guaranteeing access to knowledge and, last but not least, guaranteeing the rights of creative artists.

The digital revolution constitutes both an opportunity and a risk.

But that is very well expressed by Mrs O' Toole in her report, so I need not dwell on that point.

Allow me to make just one remark, which relates to the risk of exclusion that could emerge if we do not pay special attention to the needs of disadvantaged people.

Digital technology can do nothing for culture and education unless it is accessible.

Madam President, I refuse to accept that there must inevitably be a technology gap between generations, between social strata, between those who are 'switched on' and those who are not, between those whose life and work will derive maximum benefit from digital technology and those for whom such technology will remain an object of fear and a threat to their place in society.

I believe we must do everything possible to close this digital divide rather than merely declaring (a) that it exists and (b) that we cannot do anything about it.

On the contrary, we certainly can do something about it.

That is the civic duty and the social responsibility of everyone of us here, in Parliament or in the Commission.

Besides, Madam President, I believe that globalisation, if it is harnessed, and digital technology need not automatically destroy national and regional cultures.

It is certain that the cultural industries will be radically and rapidly transformed to incorporate the new reality of the information society.

So we must guide these momentous changes rather than merely watching them unfold and allowing ourselves to be left behind.

We must be in at the start of their development to ensure that digital technology is able to offer new access routes to published material as well as a rich diversity of such material.

One of our first initiatives, financially modest but exploratory in nature, is the establishment of a cooperative network of publishing houses.

There is no doubt in my mind that this is the area in which the Commission has its most important role to play, and I was determined that the proposal for the implementation of the Culture 2000 programme in the year 2001 should provide for specific support for the realisation of several projects involving cooperation between authors and publishers.

If the experiment bears fruit, we shall launch more initiatives for the promotion of the publishing trade in its role as a carrier of culture.

I believe that this opens up a new path which has not yet been adequately explored and that we have a key role to play here as a source of inspiration and innovation.

Besides the specific initiative of the culture programme, I can name a host of support activities through which we are helping to ensure that the book publishing and distribution trades achieve their own digital revolution; in this way, we are pursuing the very aims that our rapporteur has set out.

The e-learning initiative, which I launched in May of last year, relates to the infrastructure of the education system, because any future action in that field depends on a sound educational infrastructure.

The services of the Commission have prepared a detailed programme for the implementation of the e-learning initiative.

The Commission is also funding pilot projects and will continue to do so, especially under Minerva, part of the Socrates programme, which is devoted specifically to the use of technology in education and which, along with the Leonardo programme for vocational education, is one of the cornerstones of our activity.

In addition, the development of partnerships between the public and private sectors can also remedy shortfalls in the provision of training.

The Commission' s e-Europe action plan, for its part, is designed to ensure that the information society also serves to further the aim of social integration.

Access to the Internet, to multimedia resources, will be made available in many public centres, including centres in disadvantaged areas, by the end of 2001 and to all school pupils by the end of 2002.

Another focal point of our efforts is the development of services which help to provide content in the fields of e-education and e-culture.

The e-content programme has just been adopted for a four-year period with the aim of encouraging the creation and use of digital content.

The market can also be stimulated now, thanks to our collaboration with the European Investment Bank and the creation of a venture-capital fund for multimedia businesses.

The promotion of multimedia content is the aim of this collaboration between the Commission and the EIB, which has agreed to step in with funding for the cultural industries.

We have opened up a new avenue here which bodes well for the future, for this future that digital technology holds out to us.

This prospect, ladies and gentlemen, also merits greater commitment on our part and should be given a higher profile.

I personally agree with the idea advanced by several of you - Mr Graa Moura, Mrs Sanders-ten Holte and Mrs O' Toole - who have advocated the organisation of a year of books and reading.

For various reasons, it is not possible to devote a special year to books and reading, but I believe we should sit down together and think about a books and reading day or week or month, which could be staged some time after the start of 2002.

We shall not look at any specific dates or format just now, but do let us discuss this together, so that we can select the best possible option for inclusion in the Culture 2000 programme.

I am very receptive to the idea of discussing this with interested parties in the framework of the Committee on Culture, Youth, Education, the Media and Sport with a view to finding the solutions that will best serve the interests of books, reading and cultural diversity.

As Members of the European Parliament will appreciate, technology is no more than an instrument, but it could be a very valuable instrument in our bid to maximise the potential of our European cultural heritage.

And so I thank Mrs O' Toole and the Committee on Culture for their work and the important contribution they have made to the pursuit of this goal.

The vote will take place very shortly.

Madam President, certain Members have correctly pointed out the existence of the MEDA programme, for which I would like to ask if the Chamber would agree to an oral amendment worded: "Calls upon the Commission to set up a special programme for the purpose of introducing, where possible, or extending aquaculture and the development of the fish sector" .

Report (A5-0009/2001) by Mr Nar, on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy, on the Commission Communication on relations between the EU and the Mediterranean region: reinvigorating the Barcelona Process [COM(2000)0497 - C50630/2000 - 2000/2294(COS)]

Motion for a resolution (B5-0087/2001) by Mr Miranda, on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation, on the peace process in Colombia

Madam President, with regard to the first paragraph we shall be voting on, if I have understood correctly, a compromise with its authors is possible is the sense that Amendment No 1 can be withdrawn once a split vote has been held on the first paragraph.

Paragraph b) would include the entire first part up to 'Plan Colombia' and, in the second paragraph, the remainder of the text.

We can avoid the vote on Amendment No 1 by holding a split vote on the original text of paragraph b).

Madam President, the Socialist Group accepts Mr Miranda' s proposal and we would vote in favour of the first part and against the second part.

Madam President, we would accept this proposal.

Madam President, there is also a possible compromise on the following vote.

With regard to Amendment No 2 by the Group of the European People' s Party and the Group of the Party of European Socialists, if I understand correctly, the following would happen: we would initially hold a split vote on the original text, from "Whereas 'Plan Colombia' " up to "social partners" .

We would then vote on a second part - which, I think, those tabling the motion will choose to reject - and finally, as an appendix, we would vote on Amendment No 2.

In other words, we will first hold a spit vote on the original text and then vote on Amendment No 2 as an appendix to the paragraph.

Mr President, I was the shadow rapporteur for the PSE on this.

What Mr Miranda says is correct, but it is misleading to say that is an amendment.

As the notes in front of you say there was a mistake by the services and in fact the wording that was put in by both the PPE and ourselves was not reflected in what was printed.

Therefore Mr Miranda' s interpretation of what we should vote on is absolutely correct and I totally support him, but this is not a question of a further amendment.

There was a genuine, technical error by the services.

For absolute clarity, I have the wording here from the original.

Missed off at the beginning of the amendment were the words "whereas Plan Colombia is not the process of dialogue amongst the various social partners and..." and then the rest remains.

Madam President, I simply wish to confirm Mr Howitt' s words.

It is true that in some versions, such as the Portuguese, Dutch and others, where it should say 'strategy for peace' , as is written in the Spanish and English versions, which take precedence, it says 'Plan Colombia' , which is wrong.

The translation of these versions must be amended.

Report (A5-0398/2000) by Mr Ferri, on behalf of the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs, on the report of the Multidisciplinary Group on Organised Crime - Joint Action on mutual evaluations of the application and implementation at national level of international undertakings in the fight against organised crime [10972/2/99 - C5-0039/2000 - 1999/0916(COS)]

Report (A5-0005/2001) by Mrs O' Toole, on behalf of the Committee on Culture, Youth, Education, the Media and Sport, on new frontiers in book production: electronic publishing and printing on demand [2000/2037(INI)]

We abstained from voting on this report, just as we shall abstain on the report concerning the fisheries agreement with Angola for one and the same reason.

It really is not our intention to be obstructive if there is the remotest possibility that the people in these two countries who earn their living from fishing might receive a share of the licence fees paid by the European Union for fishing rights in the waters of Cte d' Ivoire or Angola, even though we are aware that such a share would at best be minimal.

What we are condemning is the hypocrisy involved in speaking of granting aid to these countries and the even greater hypocrisy of claiming to be helping their people.

The very figures cited by the European Parliament rapporteurs reveal the extent to which such agreements are governed by relations that are disgusting in their lack of fairness; we see, for example, that the licence fees paid to Cte d' Ivoire by European vessels have not risen over the past ten years, in spite of inflation.

It is also apparent that the European contribution to the same country in 2003 will have fallen to less than half of the 1991 level.

And then we see in black and white that the European Union reserves the right to suspend payment of its licence fees for fishing rights to Cte d' Ivoire and Angola in the event of civil unrest in those countries.

Whether they are cloaked in the mantle of 'aid' or 'agreements' , these figures and these one-sided clauses speak only of exploitation of the African continent by the European powers.

Mr President, I voted in favour of amending the directive on the development of the Community's railways.

I have read the Conciliation Committee's report and I must express my hope that Mr Jarzembowski becomes a frequent member of conciliation committees because he has achieved all that it was possible to achieve.

This outcome means the liberalisation of the rail freight transport systems all over Europe.

I hope that Mr Jarzembowski achieves equally good results when tackling the Council with regard to measures to help the elderly and pensioners.

I am genuinely impressed by the success of the Conciliation Committee on this occasion.

(FR) The two reports from the Conciliation Committee on the development of the Community' s railways and on the licensing of railway undertakings express satisfaction that a compromise has been reached which will open rail-borne freight transport completely to the private sector in 2008 at the latest.

This compromise paves the way for new proposals for the liberalisation of the remainder of the railway system, namely passenger services.

The recent tragic accidents in England, however, and the many accidents on privatised networks, such as the German network, are constant emphatic reminders of the damage that is done by privatising this public service.

And to claim that opening rail transport to the private sector will resolve the social chaos resulting from the fact that goods are largely transported by road is deceitful, to say the least.

For decades, rail services have been withdrawn in all parts of Europe for the benefit of the private road-haulage and bus companies.

Today, with the road networks on the brink of suffocation, some sources of private capital are turning to the railways in search of new profits, aided and abetted by both the European authorities and the national governments.

Neither the users of public rail services nor the general population have anything to gain from privatising these services.

The same applies to railway workers, who protest and campaign against deregulation and privatisation and their ravaging effects on jobs and working conditions.

It goes without saying that we are solidly behind these workers and their unions in their condemnation of these abominations.

For this reason we have voted against these two reports.

(IT) I think it is appropriate, in this explanation of vote, to set on record the clear progress made in the development of the European rail network following the recent decision at the Italo-French summit in Turin to approve construction of the Turin-Lyons rail tunnel and the resulting new high-speed railway line.

This decision finally gives the go-ahead for a project which is essential to the goal of improving the rail system and transferring freight traffic from road to rail through the Alps.

As I have already told this Chamber, while the Swiss Lotschberg-Simplon and St. Gotthard project is making progress, the Turin-Lyons project suffered considerable delays at the planning stage; however, we now have a coherent sense of purpose for this century through the Trans-European Transport Network.

I must add that the decision by Italy and France, fully supported by the European Commission, is in line with the transport protocol of the Alpine Convention.

Moreover, it is encouraging that, just last January, the Commission, after years of showing no interest in the Alpine Convention, requested the Council to authorise it to sign the protocol, calling for this important document to be ratified soon.

As it stands, the project, which favours the relaunch of rail in the Alpine region to reverse the increase of freight traffic on roads decisively, will be appropriately supplemented by the development of new rail routes.

In this respect, the Commission is already aware of my hope that the Aosta-Martigny rail route will finally become part of the trans-Europe network to be established in the coming years.

I would like to conclude by expressing my satisfaction at the decision, also adopted in Turin, to reopen the Mount Blanc road tunnel after the summer.

I feel that, in setting limits on the number of lorries which can use the tunnel, the French and Italian authorities have exercised good sense.

I call upon the Commission to facilitate the application of this decision to reduce numbers. This must be a radical, well-regulated operation.

Mr President, I voted for the directive on the recognition of professional qualifications for nurses, pharmacists, doctors, midwives, veterinary surgeons, etc.

I feel that these recognition directives will be of particular benefit to doctors and professionals, who will now be able to move easily around the European Union. However, after I broke my right foot and required medical attention in Italy, Belgium and France, I noted that there were differences in the medicines and treatments offered to me.

I now believe that it would be good for all patients to be able to move freely around Europe receiving treatment from doctors who have had the same training.

I would thus like to see a single European qualification.

Mr President, I voted for the report concerning the energy efficiency labelling programme for office computers.

As I was telling my pensioner friend, Giuseppe Rossi, who accompanied me to the airport at Bergamo when I was leaving to come to Brussels, this regulation seeks to save energy when users go home from their offices leaving their computers switched on, by putting them into sleep mode.

At the end of a long discussion and explanation of the benefits of this document, my retired friend asked me: "Wouldn't it be simpler to make employees turn off their computers completely when they are no longer using them?"

This is the question which I am still asking, Mr President.

Mr President, I voted for the ban on oestradiol-17 and all those substances which are so damaging to the human organism because they slow down, as has been noted, the growth and development of the human beings who come into contact with them.

I know that Ministers for the budget of the Member States are not entirely opposed to continuing the use of these oestrogens which, as we know, accelerate the growth of animals, making them grow more quickly.

But I wondered, why on earth was this the case?

I now believe I have found an answer in the fact that perhaps they - our Ministers - hope that increasing the speed of growth of animals would also accelerate the speed of development of humans: humans would thus be elderly and retired for less time, resulting in savings for State budgets.

Mr President, I voted in favour of intensifying trade relations with the United States, Canada, Japan, Korea, Australia and New Zealand, which is surely a positive step.

I hope that cooperation will be intensified in future to bring about also a direct action to improve the standards of living of the elderly in these countries.

I also hope that we can examine the current pension systems of these countries to see if we can derive any suggestions for improvements of the legal conditions which govern the lives of the elderly in the European Union.

The Mann report will not receive our support for various reasons.

First of all, the projects lack a legal basis.

That is right, because these projects do not constitute EU tasks.

Cooperation between Member States is a way to complete these, without independent EU authority, unless the Member States grant a mandate to this effect.

Despite this, the Commission and rapporteur have discovered a legal basis in Articles 133 and 308.

The Commission fails to specify precisely which activities fall under Article 133 and which under 308, so that ambiguity as to competences continues to exist.

In addition, the Commission proposes one budget line.

However, funding for multiannual programmes and large-scale projects is undesirable, because the Commission is not allowed to pursue independent policy on behalf of the said partner countries.

Furthermore, the Commission has promised to pull up its socks by carrying out fewer tasks.

The Commission should represent the EU Member States at WTO level.

Its complementary role is manifesting itself in the coordination of Member State activities.

There is hence no scope for further deepening or extending.

The Commission is inundated with topics of a European nature, such as agriculture, effects on developing countries and trade conflicts.

That is why a more common trade policy is not expedient.

In our opinion, the rapporteur' s report is an improvement on the Commission proposal, but it fails to sufficiently underscore the said points.

That is why we abstained from voting.

Mr President, I voted in favour of the strategy presented by the Council concerning relations with Mediterranean countries.

My country, Italy, is a Mediterranean country.

I believe the European Union should pay more attention to the countries on its southern borders, which are only separated from us by the sea.

To whomever follows up this part of our policy in the future, I propose extending the regulations which allow cumulative work periods to count towards a pension to all workers from countries of the southern borders of the Mediterranean. These regulations should thus be extended from European Union States to countries on the other side of the Mediterranean.

Many workers from these Mediterranean countries move around Europe and it seems only fair to me that they should have access to the benefits of a single pension.

The Barcelona Process opened up encouraging prospects for relations between the European Union and the twelve countries of the Mediterranean.

Nevertheless, the conclusion was soon reached that this instrument was not up to the task.

This is due to political reasons, including the complex peace process in the Middle East, which is an important factor but not the only one.

Making a commitment to simplifying the MEDA programme, making it more flexible and increasing the number of policies for the endogenous development of the Mediterranean countries are vehicles for change raised in this report which warrant our full support.

