Mr President, I would like you to convey a message of solidarity to the United Nations.

I would also like you to inform the Indonesian authorities of the outrage felt by the Members of the European Parliament and to stress our wish that people whose sole objective is to defend peace, human rights and the dignity of the Timorese people, be they in Indonesia or in Timor Lorosae, should be respected.

I am sure the President would be prepared to convey her views to the appropriate authorities in the manner which you indicated.

The Heads of State and Government, meeting in the UN, observed a minute of silence in honour of the peacekeepers who died and I think it would be appropriate if this House did the same.

(The house rose and observed a minute's silence)

Mr President, I wish to support the sentiments expressed by Mr Seguro and to draw the Commission's attention to this issue.

On various occasions throughout this year I have emphasised the potentially premature nature of the new policy being adopted by the European Union towards Indonesia, given that it is particularly clear that there is a degree of uncertainty.

This has unfortunately become clear in recent weeks.

I have addressed various questions to the Commission on this subject, and the seriousness of yesterday's events, together with other facts such as the infiltration of militias into East Timor, clearly demonstrate that the situation is not yet safe.

The European Union must, once more, make its views known to the Indonesian Government as forcefully as possible, in particular through the channel of the European Commission.

We understand the difficulty of the situation in Indonesia, but it is essential to demand that the Indonesian Government should exercise its authority on its own territory.

We will only be able to change our attitude towards that country once democracy is effectively ensured in Indonesia and self-determination and peace are guaranteed on Timor.

Mr President, I very rarely rise on a point of order and particularly now when we have extremely important votes to conduct, I only do so on what I consider to be an extremely important point.

Your predecessor in the chair has just apologised to Commissioner Reding and I think that the whole House would wish to endorse that verbal apology.

This week we have demonstrated here in Parliament that when we want to call the Commission to order, we can do so and the Commission responds in the appropriate manner.

But when a Commissioner is making an extremely important speech which demonstrates the amount of work and effort that she has put into a subject, which perhaps generates as much interest in the people we represent as anything else, there is complete chaos and a shambles in the Chamber.

I do not accept what your predecessor said, that it was difficult to call the house to order; that can always be done and it should be done.

My request is that an apology to Commissioner Reding be now made in writing on behalf of Parliament and I hope this is not an experience we see repeated.

I know that Viviane Reding is a very robust parliamentarian, as well as now a Commissioner and I am sure she managed to cope with it, but I take the point.

It is perfectly appropriate to make her an apology in writing.

Mr President, normal practice would have been that I should have led the debate last night, but unfortunately due to a scheduling problem that was not possible.

I would like to commend this result of the conciliation to the House.

It was probably the most difficult conciliation and overall framework directive that this House has had to handle.

The way in which Mrs Lienemann conducted the whole matter of taking all the political groups the whole way through was really something to be admired.

I congratulate her most comprehensively for the way she did it.

We now have before us a legally binding directive which Parliament can be fully proud of.

That was not the position with the original directive.

We now have a legally enforceable directive which means that the environment of the Community over the next twenty years really has the opportunity of improving.

My only complaint, and this is why I took the floor, was that during the conciliation process non-governmental organisations were trying to influence Parliament beyond the stage that Parliament had agreed in its second reading.

Documents were very often available to those organisations before they were available to members of the Conciliation Committee.

In conciliation, where we need to build trust between the Council of Ministers and Parliament, we need confidentiality.

This is something that we have to address seriously in the future.

I congratulate the Portuguese Presidency for the way they conducted the conciliation, but I hope that Parliament will be able to improve this situation internally for the future.

Report (A5-0212/2000) by Mr Florenz, on behalf of the European Parliament Delegation to the Conciliation Committee, on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a European Parliament and Council directive on end-of-life vehicles (C5-0258/2000 - 1997/0194(COD))

Recommendation for second reading (A5-0218/00) by Mr de Roo, on behalf of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to adopting a European Parliament and Council directive amending Council Directive 92/23/EEC relating to tyres for motor vehicles and their trailers and to their fitting (5347/2/00 - C5-0220/2000 - 1997/0348(COD))

This report has some positive aspects, in particular the restatement of the binding nature of the proposed measures to protect water quality.

But by granting deadlines, in particular a 20-year time-limit for banning discharges of hazardous substances, the report makes a nonsense of its own resolution.

That time-limit is equivalent to authorising undertakings to discharge their toxic substances for another 20 years.

Moreover, it is not made sufficiently clear that it is up to polluting undertakings to pay for any damage they have caused.

As for charging for water, the only decision that would be in the interests of the public would be a ban on all private profit-making from the supply and distribution of water, but that is not even mentioned in this report, which, in pillorying Ireland for its practice of publicly financing water provision, is instead at pains to stress the commercial nature of this vital substance.

Although I support the report, I wish to make known certain reservations pertaining to same.

Ireland's derogation for domestic water charges is not as strong as I would want it to be.

The key provisions - Art. 9, paragraph 4 - state that a Member State "shall not be in breach of this Directive" if a decision not to introduce domestic water charges based on "established practice does not compromise the purposes and the achievement of the objectives of this Directive".

It follows from this paragraph that a decision not to impose water charges would be in breach of the Directive if it can be linked to the Irish Government's failure to meet the new standards.

I have no confidence, given the Irish Government's failure to date, that they will reach the standards set.

I support the Conciliation Agreement which has been agreed by the European Parliament and the European Council on the Framework Directive on Water.

This Directive provides a framework for consolidating legislation which has been in existence at national and European level concerning the whole area of the safety of surface water and ground water.

The core elements of this Directive ensure the protection of surface water, coastal water, internal waste and ground water now and into the future.

The European Council, which represents the fifteen Governments of the EU, originally did not include any provisions relating to the elimination of hazardous substances in this new Water Directive.

I am supporting this Conciliation Agreement, which guarantees that the elimination of hazardous substances will now feature in this Directive and addresses this imbalance.

From an Irish perspective, we make the working assumption that the elimination of hazardous substances includes the prohibition on discharging radioactive substances as well.

Water pricing was always going to be a sensitive aspect to this Directive.

This Directive now calls on Member States to take account of the principle of the recovery of the cost of water services, including environmental and resource costs, in accordance with the polluter-pays principle.

Member States must ensure by 2010 that water pricing policies will provide an adequate incentive for users to use water resources efficiently.

Member States will be allowed on an exceptional basis to opt out of the obligation of cost recovery if this is based on established national practices.

Water pricing policy is also a taxation issue.

Under existing EU Treaties such tax changes require the unanimous support of all EU Governments.

It is only right and proper that this matter of taxation is left in the domain of Member States, which must have the final say as to what taxation policies, at local or national level, it wishes to pursue.

As a result of the implementation of this Directive, the safety of water quality standards in Europe will substantially improve.

(DE) With its communication "Pricing policies for enhancing the sustainability of water resources", the European Commission is seeking to harmonise and give practical form to the economic provisions of the EC framework directive on water resources.

The Commission's proposal to monitor observance of the break-even principle by means of price surveillance is aimed at those EU Member States that still heavily subsidise their water industries.

In contrast, in Germany the break-even principle is already being implemented, as is monitoring of unfair practices by the cartel office and by local authorities.

Against this background, the framework directive on water resources and the Commission proposal on water pricing should not be used to create further layers of bureaucratic supervision in Germany.

Furthermore, the provisions on the charging of environmental and resource costs associated with water use are aimed at those Member States that still make excessive use of and pollute their water resources, and therefore not at Germany, where exceptional efforts are already being made in this respect.

The provisions of the framework directive on this point do not, therefore, provide any grounds for introducing a universal water or sewage tax in Germany, for example.

In view of the non-binding nature of the economic provisions of the framework directive on water resources and the Commission communication, there is a danger that there will be a considerable delay in implementing these provisions in the countries actually being targeted, if they are, in fact, implemented there at all.

If, as has already been the case with the transposition of other directives, Germany, the 'model pupil' , goes its own way, this would heighten the distortions in competition between the national water industries in the EU still further, thus running counter to the aim of the directive, which is to create a uniform framework for Europe's water industry.

Germany has to learn to implement EU provisions in accordance with the objectives of the directive, not as individual Länder would like.

With the EU framework directive on water resources we will once again see individual countries going their own way.

The framework directive on water has finally been adopted - very welcome news.

Ever since 1997 the European Parliament has been calling for the piecemeal nature of water legislation in Europe to be brought to an end.

After nearly four years, these rationalisation attempts have finally borne fruit.

The conciliation between Parliament and the Council of Ministers, the final stage in the legislative procedure, has enabled what I consider a balanced and satisfactory compromise to be reached.

The discussions were difficult, but I am happy that the Council finally agreed to make the main objectives of these new rules binding.

Our Parliament could not have endorsed a text which was nothing more than a statement of intent.

The PPE/DE Group has always taken an ambitious and realistic stance.

In my view, it was essential for this new framework directive to guarantee, in the future and for the sake of future generations, improvements in European water quality.

Henceforth, water management in Europe will be based on the principle of a hydrographical district, a body that goes beyond the administrative boundaries of Member States and takes account of the real water situation in Europe.

The objective is gradually to eliminate discharges of hazardous substances, within 20 years of their identification.

That is a realistic compromise between, on the one hand, Mrs Lienemann' s initial position in favour of a zero level of discharges into water and, on the other, the position of the Council, which was opposed to any binding objective.

A list of what are called 'priority' substances will be submitted to the European Parliament in the near future.

That will be a vital step and I hope our Parliament will be able to follow the same line as today.

Under the polluter-pays principle, the Member States will have to incorporate environmental costs in water pricing. That is real progress.

Water is a vulnerable and invaluable natural resource.

Public health and long-term supplies are at stake just as much as biological diversity and landscape conservation.

For all these reasons, I voted for this text.

Nevertheless, I am sorry that we could not keep the article allowing Member States to transfer water in the form in which we had adopted it at second reading.

That kind of project complies with the principle of regional cohesion and solidarity that we have always upheld.

In that sense, it deserves strong EU support, in the context of promoting trans-European networks and regional policy.

All proposals aimed at improving the environment in Europe are to be welcomed.

Trying to incorporate piecemeal water policies in one framework directive represents a considerable challenge.

The binding commitment the European Union has made to its Member States to eliminate discharges of hazardous substances into water within 20 years is certainly a step forward, even if 3 years are enough for certain chemical products.

Although we welcome the introduction of water management plans based on hydrographic basins, we must remain vigilant when applying these policies; here I am thinking particularly of the project to divert water from the Rhone basin towards Spain.

In that specific case, priority should be given to water management and the water savings that can be made, before massive projects to transfer water from one hydrographic basin to another are proposed.

The European Union now also needs to consider water pricing.

It is unacceptable for multinationals alone to fix water prices, on the pretext that they are providing a technical water management service.

This directive represents a step in the right direction, but there will have to be more precise rules to reduce water pollution upstream.

Mr President, I voted in favour of the Conciliation Committee' s definitive decision on the directive on end-of-life vehicles.

I voted in favour, not just because pensioners and elderly people who have reached a certain age feel that their fate is similar to that of cars, but, above all, because it is right and proper that, at last, thanks to Europe' s initiative, a solution has been found to the problem of where to put cars when they do not work any more.

I would, however, suggest improving on our decision, by providing for the payment of a deposit when a new car is purchased, to be returned when the old car is brought back.

I welcome the agreement which has been secured between the European Parliament and the European Council which represents the fifteen Governments of the European Union on this specific directive.

We know that each year within the EU there are up to nine million vehicles that are scrapped on an annual basis.

This directive, which will now be enacted uniformly across the European Union, will ensure that cars will be disposed of in the future in a more environmentally friendly manner.

All vehicles within the European Union must now be fully recyclable by the year 2015.

This is only right and proper because the European Union has both national and international obligations to implement more environmentally friendly legislation.

Up to 75% of all metallic components in new vehicles can be recycled as metal scrap.

This process should and must continue in an effort to promote higher environmental standards.

This directive aims to increase the scope for vehicle recycling and to encourage the re-use of car components.

This can be achieved by improving the construction of various commercial motor vehicles and by setting up dismantling facilities throughout the European Union.

The common position established the right for the last owner to return a vehicle to a treatment facility free of charge.

There is an obligation on manufacturers to bear the whole or a large part of the cost of implementing these measures and for them to take back end-of-life vehicles at no charge to the last owner.

It was agreed at conciliation between the European Parliament and the fifteen Governments of the EU that this provision should now apply from 1 January 2007.

However, any Member State within the EU is free to implement this specific provision of this directive earlier than this date.

Car manufacturers, the suppliers of materials and equipment manufacturers must make an effort to limit the use of hazardous substances.

We must all ensure that recycled materials can be used in the manufacture of cars at the design stage.

The European Parliament and the European Council at conciliation have also agreed that all vehicles placed on the market after 1 July 2003 should not contain any heavy metals such as cadmium or lead.

Car manufacturers must also provide information on the rate of re-use, recycling and recovery of used cars which will be achieved within the coming years.

In conclusion, I have had much representation in Ireland on the need to take cognisance of the special vintage car industry in Europe.

At the request of the European Parliament, collector's vehicles will now be expressly excluded from the scope of this directive.

This is very important in light of the key social and economic role the vintage car sector plays in promoting tourism across the length and breadth of Europe.

We conservatives seldom vote against conciliations.

We cannot, however, support the compromise reached in the conciliation group concerning the way in which end-of-life vehicles are to be dealt with.

The compromise contains retroactive measures, and we cannot back a legislative text which alters the rules retrospectively.

Retroactive legislation affects competition and is unacceptable from a legal point of view.

. (FR) I have spoken several times previously on this complex subject involving quite considerable economic interests, but also, and above all, the protection of the environment.

The proposal for a directive on end-of-life vehicles, submitted in 1997, is aimed at preventing the creation of scrap from vehicles and promoting the re-use, recycling and recovery of vehicles and their components, so as to reduce the amount of scrap produced by end-of-life vehicles that are dumped or incinerated without any energy recovery.

The European Commission' s strategy is based on measures such as increasing the percentage of re-usable components, ensuring an adequate number of collection points for end-of-life vehicles, achieving a number of objectives regarding the re-use and recovery of end-of-life vehicles, checks on the use of certain heavy metals in vehicle manufacture and ensuring that the cost of disposing of end-of-life vehicles is not borne by the last owner.

The negotiations came up against stumbling blocks on several points.

The difficulties focused on producer liability and the treatment of heavy metals.

After several hours of conciliation, the negotiators managed to reach agreement.

On the question of producer liability, the directive stipulated that the last owner would be able to return an end-of-life vehicle free of charge and required producers to bear a substantial part of the cost of treating end-of-life vehicles.

The compromise provides that for new vehicles, i.e. for those put on the market after 1 July 2002, producers should be liable from that date.

For existing vehicles, i.e. vehicles put on the market before 1 July 2002, producer liability would begin in 2007 rather than 2006.

The directive would also allow Member States to introduce these provisions before the dates specified.

On the question of heavy metals, the Council and Parliament have agreed that vehicles put on the market after 1 July 2003 should no longer contain heavy metals such as cadmium, lead or hexavalent chromium.

The two delegations reached agreement on the exceptions set out in Annex 2 of the directive.

Apart from that, I am glad that Parliament' s call for vintage cars to be excluded from the scope of the directive was favourably received.

. (FR) The compromise that came out of the conciliation procedure, the final legislative stage, is the result of hard negotiations between the European Parliament and the Council of Ministers.

Far from being satisfactory, I see it merely as a first step, although it does, in some respects, go in the right direction.

While I welcome the figured objectives that have been set (by 2006, 85% of the weight of vehicles produced after 1980 is to be recycled, re-used or recovered, and 95% by 2015) I regret the hypocrisy of some of the provisions advocated by the PSE and supported by the Socialist and Social-democratic Governments.

The Council of Ministers has, in fact, remained inflexible about allowing the owner to return his end-of-life vehicle free of charge.

It may well be based on goodwill towards the consumer, but it is totally unrealistic.

In fact, the directive stipulates that the cost of treatment will be borne entirely by the producers.

The latter are bound to pass on at least part of these costs to the purchase price of new vehicles.

So, far from encouraging the purchase of a new generation of less polluting vehicles, this measure is a hidden bonus for those who own the most polluting old vehicles.

The Council of Ministers finally responded to the wishes of the MEPs, who had been calling since the first reading, for vintage vehicles to be expressly excluded from the scope of this directive.

The amendment I tabled and supported has, in fact, been fully incorporated into the final text.

In wider terms, this directive is not ambitious enough.

For example, it says nothing at all about the problem of the dumped cars that disfigure the landscape.

Despite the polluter-pays principle, it is the taxpayers who bear the cost of removing them.

It is a pity that neither this directive nor the directive on the disposal of waste has concerned itself with this problem, which, after all, has disastrous environmental effects in much of Europe.

Mr President, following this directive, tyres will be quieter: cars, lorries and road trains will make less noise as they drive along roads and motorways.

That is good news, because pensioners like peace and quiet.

Nevertheless, four weeks ago, Mr President, I was crossing the road near the Gare du Nord in Brussels, and a shiver went down my spine because it was night, you could have heard a pin drop, and I saw a tram pass behind me in complete silence.

Thankfully, God wanted me to be here so I could give my explanations of votes and I was not hurt.

But are we really sure that less noisy tyres are really in everyone' s best interests?

We can only congratulate our colleague, Mr de Roo, and support him in his efforts to include noise pollution in the context of protecting the environment.

Unfortunately, the impact of the increase in road traffic density is not limited to pollution from end-of-life vehicles and their recycling, something that has not yet been resolved in spite of its worldwide nature, or to the damage and harm this does to the air we breathe, or even to the serious resultant global warming.

Road traffic also produces considerable, incessant noise pollution, which millions of people living beside roads and motorways as well as the humble pedestrian have to suffer on a daily basis.

So, the purpose of Mr de Roo' s proposals is to highlight a form of pollution that is generally overshadowed by others, and here we support him fully.

But let us not forget that we must also set out more general requirements in relation to pollution from cars, which are becoming increasingly prevalent in developed societies and in our towns, and let us put pressure on the Commission to introduce policies to shift traffic off the roads and onto the railways and public transport.

The Strasbourg tram is a clear illustration of this.

. (NL) For a long time now, the use of cars for transporting people and goods has been such a matter of course that we have given little thought to the effect this has had on many people and the environment.

We only saw the economic gain and how convenient it was for the car driver, not the drawbacks.

Exhaust fumes and the lack of traffic safety were accepted as part of the deal, as well as the noise cars generate.

Fortunately, over the past few years, this attitude has started to change.

Many cities give bicycles and trains more space and restrict the freedom of cars.

This does not end the problems caused by cars and lorries.

The number of cars is still on the increase, as is the proportion of freight transport by road, and with it, noise pollution.

Looking at it through the eyes of the car industry, it is evident that manufacturers will pass the buck.

They will look to the road owner - in general the Government - to increase safety and to reduce environmental pollution.

As long as the car industry succeeds in doing this, they, themselves, do not have to look into reducing pollution caused by cars, or incur any additional costs as a result.

In their opinion, noise pollution should be countered by using 'very open asphalt concrete' , a road surface which, however, can turn unexpectedly slippery overnight when frosty.

What matters now is that a choice should be made between the interests of the car and the car-tyre industries on the one hand, and the interests of the public and the environment on the other.

Far too often, we see that the short-term interests of powerful industrial groups are given priority, whilst the majority of our electorate increasingly sets different requirements for political decision-making.

Protecting the quality of our life, rather than making a fast buck, is gaining in importance all the time.

This contrast was highlighted once again during the debate on car tyres.

Mr De Roo was right in demonstrating that the regulation proposed by the Commission will not sufficiently improve matters, and that it is technically possible to reduce pollution by a few decibels.

This simply requires the political will to put sufficient regulations in place, to monitor compliance with the regulations and not to allow too much leeway.

The Group of the European United Left has constantly backed Mr De Roo in this.

We regret that his reasonable and self-evident proposals cannot count on the general approval they deserve.

Mankind moves, and moves other objects.

Our amazing age of movement, to which we also owe our sense of freedom, is a noisy one.

It is our freedom that creates noise.

The states, and also industry, are working to combat this noise pollution, which can cause illness.

The industry endorses the legislator' s resolve to make transport, the movement of people and goods, which is a cornerstone of free movement, safer and less polluting.

We are aware of the progress made in road holding, in resistance to wear and tear, in reducing fuel consumption, but for known technical reasons the investments in research and technology do not yet allow all the rapporteur' s demands to be reconciled.

Global performance is estimated according to a range of often conflicting criteria that are well-known to tyre-manufacturers.

Yet we chose not to support the rapporteur because the amendments he has proposed will adversely affect safety, our safety, the life span of tyres and their road-holding properties.

We condemn these amendments, which would lead to what I would also call a nonsense in industrial terms.

Yet again, the Union is putting the devil in the detail.

And I will never cease to be surprised at the areas the Commission pokes around in and finds reason to legislate on.

Noise in all its forms may well be a scourge in our town centres, around our airports, on our roads, yet surely we should put road safety first.

Anyway, what do we find most annoying on a day-to-day basis? Is it the muffled sound of tyres in contact with the road, or the sudden acceleration of vehicles and the roar of powerful motorcycles?

It would be better to do some in-depth research on road surface noise and dangers.

Let us not lose our sense of priorities and, what I would term, legislative efficiency.

Mr President, I also voted for the Bakopoulos report because it is certainly right to exercise a certain amount of caution when placing products on the market which could be harmful to us all.

But I would suggest that we are going too far with these directives, and that we are taking up too much of Parliament' s time discussing such technical subjects, such technically important subjects.

Would it not be preferable to authorise the Commission to decide in a single directive which new harmful elements should be marketed, thereby avoiding spending so much time on each occasion that this comes up, going through the procedures to ban the placing on the market of new products yet again?

We voted for the joint resolution on AIDS, because if it produced any effects, and there is no guarantee of this, it would mean progress.

Yet we do not always agree with the wording, in particular of the recital that implicates only the African Governments or cultural and religious traditions that obstruct the effective implementation of anti-AIDS measures. That may be true, but at the same time it is a way of concealing the responsibility of an entire health system dominated by pharmaceutical trusts and the race for profit.

The reason people die in Africa, as in many poor countries, of malaria, bilharzia, tuberculosis or even just measles is not because of religious obstacles but because the people who are ill can afford neither medicines or care.

We voted against the joint resolution on mergers in the telecommunications sector.

This resolution, in fact, does away with any idea of public service in considering that this sector, like others, should be based on 'an open market economy with competition' .

Moreover, the vague reference to the 'guarantee of growth and employment' will certainly not protect workers against the likelihood of redundancies as a result of future mergers.

No binding rules are being envisaged to prevent companies from laying off workers on the pretext of restructuring, whereas the truth is that they are seeking to boost their profits.

Furthermore, obviously we do not propose to join in the ode to 'effective competition' contained in this resolution.

Once again communication is being regarded purely as a commodity from which to derive the highest possible profit.

We reject that approach, which disregards people' s social needs.

The ever-increasing influx of private capital into public operators that have become multinationals is now encouraging these operators to wage a ruthless economic war.

This means a way of sharing out the world markets that gives priority to the more profitable areas and leads to unfair pricing, quite apart from job losses and job insecurity for hundreds of thousands of workers.

The national and European political authorities must therefore impose public service constraints on all these operators, whatever their origin, for example:

for fixed telecommunications: lower charges for local calls, which in France make up 83% of the average bill of private individuals;

for mobile communications: in addition to lower charges, total coverage of the territory, even if it means using satellite links in inaccessible places;

for rapid Internet access: in addition to a radical reduction in charges, a timetable for the complete coverage of the territory.

At a time of indecent, record profits, that is how to include communication among the fundamental rights respected by a quality public service.

Mr President, the majority of the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance has voted in favour of this resolution.

In the debate in the Chamber yesterday on cloning, I heard a number of people more or less clearly defending cloning for the purposes of medical treatment, on the grounds that this would be quite different from cloning for reproductive purposes.

Unfortunately, there is a tendency now to engage in a new semantic debate or strategy of this kind which would lead to a watering down of the moral implications of cloning human beings.

Those who do not wish to permit any form of cloning would be viewed as immoral in the sense that we would be allowing people to suffer from diseases such as Parkinson' s which would be curable if only the ban on gene technology were lifted.

This is a completely absurd assertion which I think ought to be withdrawn.

Researchers throughout the world have said that Parkinson' s disease and other serious illnesses can perfectly well be cured by other methods.

We also heard Emma Bonino say that politicians must take risks, but we in the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance believe that it is our absolute duty as elected representatives to identify the risks and to be careful.

In this connection, I should also like to ask the Group of the Party of European Socialists why they have not called on Tony Blair to withdraw the whole proposal, but are content to request that a committee on biotechnology be set up.

We must observe the precautionary principle, in this case more so than ever.

We must ask ourselves the most important question of all. For what purpose should we clone human beings?

I believe we must realise that there is a race going on in the field of genetic technology, which means that there is a great risk of overstepping the limits in a quite horrifying way.

The technology is developing incredibly fast now.

We cannot just content ourselves with this debate. Rather, we must push the debate further and speed it up, whilst also observing the precautionary principle.

I was one of the 237 MEPs who voted for the resolution tabled by the Group of the European People' s Party and European Democrats on human cloning.

Science has always had two sides to it: it has always been the case that discoveries can be used for our benefit or against us: the wheel can be used to move us around more quickly or to kill people; revolvers can be used to defend or murder people; atomic energy can improve our lives or make atomic bombs.

In the case of cloning research, I wonder whether, in actual fact, a decision has already been made to do something to harm humanity rather than waiting for unbiased research to generate scientific results and only then deciding how to use them.

It would have been better if Europe were able to decide and not just one Head of State.

Mr President, given the conflicting viewpoints on the therapeutic cloning of humans, we can imagine that a great deal of restraint will be needed when applying this new technique.

Commercial and industrial cloning, or cloning in order to create people with certain characteristics is unacceptable in everyone' s book, and rightly so.

Nevertheless, we are today dealing with two conflicting points of view.

Within the GUE/NGL Group, it has been left up to the conscience of the individual members as to how they wish to vote.

In my opinion, the difference between the views of the Christian Democrats and the Greens on the one hand and the Social Democrats and Liberals on the other hand is that the former emphasise the penal implications for the medical profession, whilst the latter focus on the need for further research into the effects.

A solution needs to be found for people who need a new heart, a new kidney or liver, as well as for people suffering from Parkinson' s disease.

This too is a question of ethics.

My party, the Socialist Party in the Netherlands, exercises utmost reserve with regard to cloning and genetic manipulation.

From this perspective, I have been able to support the alternative put forward by the Social Democrats and Liberals rather than that put forward by the Christian Democrats and Greens which goes for all-out rejection.

Moreover, it appears as though it will be possible, within the next couple of years, to use the recipients own brain stem cells to grow organs which are not rejected by their bodies.

I very much prefer this technique over and above the circuitous route developed in Great Britain, which is based on the reproductive technique.

Mr President, together with the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance, the Group for a Europe of Democracies and Diversities and the Union for a Europe of Nations Group, I voted in favour of all parts of the resolution from the Group of the European People' s Party and European Democrats.

I am extremely pleased about the decision taken.

At the same time, I am concerned about the narrow majority by which the resolution was adopted: 237 votes in favour, 230 votes against and 43 abstentions.

I presented a text concerning the unique, equal and inviolable dignity of human life when the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union, which was adopted almost unanimously by this Parliament, was referred to us for consideration.

It is important that we be guided by the view of human life which has characterised this Europe of ours for more than a thousand years.

Civilisation and humanity show their character most clearly in the way in which they treat life when it is defenceless.

We must say no to the cloning of human beings.

Human beings are subjects, not objects.

Mr President, I think it is a great achievement in human rights terms that we have succeeded in giving a signal with this resolution - a signal that it is not acceptable for embryos to be deliberately created for research purposes.

And I think that this resolution makes it clear that human life must not become a kind of consumer item.

But I, too, am unhappy about the small majority in favour of this motion for a resolution.

I hope that this is just because of tactical games on the part of the Socialist Group.

I have to say that I think their behaviour here has been shameful.

There have been calls for a temporary committee without it being made clear that Tony Blair is delaying his decision until this committee comes to a conclusion.

It is shameful, to say the least, to ditch all your principles out of loyalty to Blair.

I would like to stress once again that we have always said that this is about 'therapeutic cloning' .

We have the alternative of using human stem cells to achieve the same result.

But I also hope that the Commission will now have the courage to act on the demands we have made in this resolution, by refusing to grant research funding to establishments which use these means directly or indirectly.

Mr President, this morning our group discussed our attitude to paragraph 5 of the motion for a resolution on cloning, which states that there can be no difference made between cloning for reproductive purposes and any other sort.

The matter is a controversial one and depends very much on one' s chosen perspective.

There are two points of view, with no real great difference between them.

In the first place, technically speaking it is a question of the same sort of procedure.

Secondly, philosophically speaking, if the action is examined from the point of view of the foetus, there is no difference at all.

In either case it is being used as a tool, as something to use, and not as a living being with intrinsic value.

Everyone is touchingly unanimous in their opinion that cloning for purposes of reproduction is unethical.

My own profound concern relates to what grounds we have for preventing it, and I am someone who has studied philosophy.

Are our arguments later to be abandoned on the basis of the fact that we actually already clone anyway, technically speaking?

Does our purpose matter in the end, if the deed is the same?

I voted against Amendment No 5 today only because, in my opinion, it would have required justification.

However, I do not think that there are any grounds for making a distinction from the point of view of technical methods or the foetus.

For that reason, discrimination such as this cannot be approved without the proper kind of thorough discussion.

. (EL) My group, the European United Left, did not support either of the two motions.

We disagree with the proposal by the European People' s Party because, behind its total opposition to human cloning, it is merely taking up its familiar stand against abortion.

On the other hand, we are not covered by the Socialists' position because it does not take a stand against the decision by the British Government, which has paved the way for cloning for medical purposes, thus giving the American administration the green light to take similar action, as demanded by the biotechnological industry.

We believe that, without wasting any time, what we can do today on such a complicated and difficult issue is to set up a temporary parliamentary committee on bioethics to give us the basis for a substantiated, in-depth discussion of the problem of medical embryonic research resulting from human cloning.

Therapeutic cloning entails creating an embryo by cloning only to destroy it afterwards, in order to remove cells for medical research purposes and, later perhaps, with a view to curing currently fatal diseases.

So the intention cannot be said to be a bad one.

The method, however, is highly questionable, for at least two reasons. First, a life is created (either by using a surplus embryo originally destined to create a new human being, or by using a cloned embryo), and then it is destroyed to save another one.

Do we have the right to create in this way categories of sub-humans that can be manipulated at will?

Secondly, although everyone agrees that human cloning must be condemned in general, some people are trying to draw a distinction between 'reproductive cloning' (aimed at reproducing a complete human being), which would be banned, and 'therapeutic cloning' , which could be authorised under supervision, subject to certain limits, and provided it is not carried out for commercial purposes.

But that is an artificial distinction, since it is based on the intention behind the cloning, whereas the act itself is identical in both cases: therapeutic cloning also essentially involves the reproduction of embryos by cloning.

All cloning is by definition reproductive.

The cloning of embryos for research purposes, or even the mere use of surplus embryos for these purposes, would amount to crossing an invisible boundary beyond which the exploitation of human life would become acceptable.

We would be entering a different society, one contrary to our values.

One solution to this dilemma would be to speed up research into the possibility of obtaining stem cells from adult organs, which could be clearly earmarked for therapeutic purposes, as called for in the resolution tabled by our fellow Members, Elisabeth Montfort and Nicole Thomas-Mauro.

That kind of procedure would be acceptable, since it is comparable to organ donation.

Looking ahead, that suggests that perhaps our current questions concern only a transitional stage in the research.

At any rate, we hope so.

Unfortunately, the working party, which has dubbed itself a 'Convention' , responsible for preparing the first draft of a Charter of Fundamental Human Rights is about to take a wrong turning here.

Article 3 of the draft, as it stands, confines itself to prohibiting 'the reproductive cloning of human beings' , i.e. it perpetuates the false distinction that we reject.

I tabled an amendment on this point, together with a few other Members, but although it was worded in very moderate terms, it has not, to date, been accepted.

Really, from whatever angle we look at this Charter, it is impossible to find any virtue in it whatsoever.

Throughout the ages, mankind has had to consider how to guide scientific developments so as to bring them in line with ethical and social choices.

This issue is all the more sensitive when it concerns human beings and genetic foundations.

We must, therefore, be extremely cautious, without going so far as to be obscurantist.

Given the present state of our knowledge and of the ethical debate, and in view of the UK Government' s unacceptable authorisation of human cloning, the first thing we must seek is a total and absolute moratorium on all experiments in human cloning.

The second, after hearing the opinion of the European Committee on Ethics, is to define clear guidelines that guarantee human dignity.

As they stand at present, I do not like any of the resolutions submitted by the groups.

The Socialist Group is not calling strongly enough for an immediate stop to all human cloning.

The PPE Group seems to be making a final judgment on such sensitive points of discussion as the distinction between reproductive and other cloning.

In my opinion, however, I think it would be useful to obtain an analysis from the European Committee on Ethics on these points, in order to clarify the issues.

The urgent nature of the subject should have demanded an effective approach:

in-depth reflection and a very wide-ranging basic debate prior to a directive laying down the rules to be adopted.

That is not the case with the resolutions put to the vote today.

I will therefore abstain on these motions for resolution.

- (DE) I abstained in the vote on the PPE/Greens/EFA motion for a resolution on human cloning.

I think it is right to take a stand against the decision taken by the British Parliament.

It has been stressed that the European Parliament is standing by its decision to ban cloning, and consequently also to withhold all funding for clone research.

However, I regard paragraphs 6 and 8 in particular as very dangerous, because the medical claims being made for biotechnology are taken at face value here, although the results so far have at best been contradictory.

By calling for further research into gene therapy and other forms of genetic engineering, the European Parliament is treading on very thin ice, particularly as there is not a word about the risks or about unsuccessful experiments, nor are they subjected to any kind of political assessment, all of which would cast some doubt on the unreservedly positive claims being made.

This expression of the European Parliament' s views on the cloning of embryos may represent a success in the short term. However, I fear that totally uncritical calls for more medical genetic engineering could in the long term completely undermine this success and even reverse the situation completely.

They could open the door wider for technology whose implications are completely unknown.

The recent decision by the Governments of the United Kingdom and the United States of America to allow the cloning of human embryos, in order to create 'spare part stores' for bones and vital organs, raises huge questions and problems.

This decision was taken before giving due consideration to numerous crucial medical, moral and social issues.

No one disputes the fact that rapid developments in genetic and molecular biology have opened up new paths for science, reduced the gulf between the impossible and the feasible and given us hope that we can combat the diseases and illnesses which are the scourge of mankind.

At the same time, however, and precisely because biomedical science has incalculable potential and a tremendous ability to penetrate every aspect of human life and development, turning dreams to nightmares, both the scientific community and society as a whole at all levels need to address the urgent and vital question of who should have control of this new, highly powerful scientific 'weapon' and why?

Where capitalism in its most unadulterated and depressing form and the unbridled market economy rule, there is a fine, indiscernible line between the scientific motives and speculative madness of the multinational pharmaceutical monopolies.

It is criminal for issues which impinge on human existence itself, on life and death, to be commercialised beyond the bounds of any social or political control.

The rapid rate of advance in this area, with crucial questions unanswered and matters of capital importance pending, is fraught with danger, given the huge economic interests hiding behind this endeavour.

The 'therapeutic cloning' plan will be the spark that kindles the fire since no one can guarantee that limited and specific use will be made of cloning.

The cloning of embryos could become the 'Trojan horse' which rekindles attempts to clone or 'counterfeit' human beings, with unpredictable and possibly dramatic consequences for the human race, and it must be averted.

The biggest risk is not inherent in the power of science but in the erroneous and uncontrolled exploitation and application of science.

And when these activities are conducted in the context of the profit motive and its obscure interests, then we must be especially attentive and constantly vigilant.

Mr President, this is the second time today that we have talked about a report which will help us all to sleep, particularly the elderly.

How could we not support this report which aims to reduce the noise of aeroplanes which come and go from airports surrounded by the homes of many people, who are certainly disturbed at night but also during the day?

However, allow me to put forward a proposal pertaining to this: that, in future, we try to build lots of small airports in isolated, uninhabited areas instead of a few enormous ones in state capitals.

At a time when France has entered a conflict with the main users of diesel oil (truckers, farmers, ambulance drivers), which risks spreading around Europe with the escalation in fuel prices, at a time when negotiations have begun in Lyon on implementing the Kyoto Protocol, with all its provisions that need to be adopted in The Hague to combat emissions of greenhouse gases, we can see how far we still have to go at all levels to shift away from modes of transport that pollute and damage the environment towards environmentally sustainable ones that make a real contribution to the fight against greenhouse gas emissions.

In that sense, Mrs Lucas' report sets out the positive measures that will help reduce pollution in air transport including, in particular, the phasing out of the loudest aircraft.

At the same time, it raises practical and political problems, namely the obstacles of air transport policies and their adverse environmental impact.

Europe' s measures to reduce greenhouse gases are being blocked by the fact that it has excluded air transport, a major CO2 producer, from the Kyoto Protocol and the plans to reduce pollutants.

A tax on kerosene, environmental charges, zero VAT rating of air tickets: these are all points that need to be considered in order to establish fair competition between the different modes of transport.

My group has just voted in favour of the Lucas report, because of the following considerations. A massive warming of the earth's atmosphere in coming years because of emissions of carbon dioxide and other harmful gases was recently forecast, once again by the World Wide Fund For Nature.

This calls for an immediate response in the form of a rational policy and an economic system that is not solely geared towards short-term profit. With an estimated share of 15%, air transport is, of course, not the only cause of air pollution and by no means the most important.

However, bearing in mind the forecast doubling of air traffic by 2015 within the EU alone, it is positively essential for the Council, the Commission and the European Parliament to take joint measures to limit the environmentally harmful impact of air traffic.

These measures need to cover the whole range of harmful impacts, including emissions, noise, and poor air traffic management and town and country planning, and to take account of the economic interests of airlines in a balanced way.

We support setting rigid limit values for emissions and noise pollution and the EU initiative being called for at the forthcoming 33rd ICAO Assembly.

And should the outcome of the ICAO Assembly be unsatisfactory, we are therefore also calling for the EU to set its own limits.

Measures of this kind can and must encourage the air transport industry to develop new technological solutions, and more efficient, cleaner and quieter jet turbines.

The twentieth century has witnessed some tremendous technological progress, especially in the field of transport and other long-distance communication.

This has created two holy cows: the car and the aircraft.

Those who seek material gain from cars or aircraft are prepared to subordinate everything to their freedom to use these modes of transport, and overlook the adverse effects on their fellow human beings and the environment.

Aviation and airports have now become a privileged sector.

They are largely exempt from taxes and environmental rules.

This is why they can offer their services comparatively cheaply, even if the airfares are high on journeys governed by a near-monopoly.

For this reason alone, aviation can win the unfair competitive battle against the railways, which have lost a large part of their share of international passenger transport to other modes of long-distance travel, especially aviation.

As a result, cross-border railways are having to rely increasingly on privatisation plans and major investments in the high-speed network.

These measures, however, have a number of detrimental effects on the public and the environment, effects which would not have emerged without the competition from aviation.

It is high time that aviation met normal environmental requirements of the kind that are in place for all other sectors, in order to protect the public and the environment against noise, emission of harmful substances and risks of accidents.

Should this render aviation companies less profitable or hinder the enormous growth in air transport, this would not be a disaster, but rather a necessity.

Mrs Lucas has made a few modest steps in the right direction and these are largely in line with what my party, the Socialist Party in the Netherlands, endorses.

- (SV) We abstained from voting in the final vote on Mrs Lucas' report.

We share most of the points of view presented in this about the need for a more vigorous policy to combat the negative effects of aircraft upon the environment. We cannot, however, support paragraphs 20 and 23 of the text.

These propose a direct right of taxation for the EU in this area, together with the standardisation of national legislation on country planning.

We are firm opponents of these proposals.

Immediate, radical measures are urgently needed in order to protect the environment from the adverse impact of the ever increasing use of air transport.

However, the Commission proposal approaches the problem from the angle of competition and the profits of the aviation industry and the airlines.

As a result, it fails to deal with immediate priorities and, more importantly, only addresses in vague and general terms the problem of permissible limits on emissions of greenhouse gases and the definition of new, or at least improved, standards and rules which need to be applied at local and regional level and promoted at international level.

Similarly, it only contains vague, unsatisfactory proposals on reducing permissible noise levels, especially in the vicinity of airports during the day and, more importantly, at night.

A whole series of basic issues, such as land use around airports, improving air traffic etc. has been ignored, issues which are important factors in dealing with the environmental impact of air transport.

The Commission proposal is mainly money-driven.

Instead of forcing aerospace companies to develop research and apply newer, more environmentally-friendly technologies, it backs measures to boost revenue by introducing new taxes on aircraft purchases or changing the VAT arrangements for airline companies or the tax on kerosene, all of which can easily be passed on to the final consumer.

Attempts to reduce the number and times of flights by increasing the price of tickets, in conjunction with constant efforts to erode labour costs and safety specifications, are merely ways of maintaining, if not increasing the profits of the aviation industry, not measures to reduce the adverse environmental impact of air transport.

Typically, no mention is made of liberalising the air transport market, which is exacerbating not only the environmental impact, due to restricted controls on old, inadequately maintained aeroplanes, but the very safety of flights and passengers.

Mr President, this report refers to the fight against doping in sport.

Unfortunately, the international sporting authorities have not been able to halt or even combat this extremely serious scourge.

Doping in sport is like a priest who sins or a tone-deaf musician.

It is unthinkable that in sport, which stands for honesty and competitiveness, there are athletes who win because they use drugs.

I therefore voted against this report because it does not go far enough in calling for a genuine change in the fight against doping.

We should set up a European anti-doping agency instead of waiting for a world-wide agency to do what an individual state cannot achieve.

How can so many countries be persuaded to agree?

Mr President, with regard to the Zabell report, I would like to make it clear that I only voted for the amendments which require a legal basis, while I voted against the report as a whole.

Indeed, current events show that the policy adopted by the World Anti-Doping Agency is a failure, and Europe should not have associated itself with it since it is a policy made by others and for which we should not have to bear any responsibility.

It is a shame that Europe has not understood this, and that today and over the coming years it will find itself involved in a very tough fight, where it will have to use much more incisive, firm and hard-hitting means.

I have tried, drawing on my wealth of experience, to make the Members of the European Parliament understand this.

I am sorry that many of them have not fully grasped what I have been trying to make them understand throughout this part-session.

. (NL) Playing sports is good for us.

After all, playing is in our make-up and benefits our health and sense of well-being.

But unfortunately, the enjoyment we derive from sport has come under pressure over the past decades and has been marred by a persistent and one-sided focus on performance and ever greater commercial interests.

The use of doping in sport must be seen against this background.

In my opinion, the phenomenon of doping cannot be considered in isolation but forms part of the commercialisation of a leisure activity.

As a result, the discrepancy between amateur and professional sport has become far too pronounced.

Sport is high on the agenda in the Commission' s Helsinki report.

In the resolution too, sport is commended as fulfilling a social and integrating role which brings people closer together.

It is regrettable that many major sports events show signs of the opposite.

Not for nothing did the Dutch chef de mission, Andre Bolhuis, nickname the Olympic Games in Atlanta the Olympic War, probably because these games involved thousands of police and because of the hostile atmosphere which the American public and their media created with regard to overseas sportspeople.

If we are to counter these expressions of hostility, which we also encounter during international sports events in our countries, sportsmanship needs to be placed at the top of the bill once again.

The focus on performance and commercial interests should disappear very much into the background.

This would at the same time create a much better climate for fighting the use of doping in the most effective way possible.

In the area of sport, the Treaty does not accord any direct powers to EU institutions.

Accordingly, the involvement of the Community in fighting the use of doping should be low-key.

The sports sector is organised in its own unique way and national federations and unions still play a key role in this.

Consequently, I do not agree with the request to include a reference to sport in Article 151 of the EU Treaty.

After all, pressing for a Community-wide sports policy runs counter to the subsidiarity principle.

Although the resolution we voted on a moment ago does contain positive elements, I cannot support it mainly for the aforementioned institutional reason.

I am very glad we were able to hold a discussion in this Chamber on the serious public health problem of doping in sport.

I must congratulate the European Commission on the action plan it has proposed, together with the rapporteur and Mrs Buffet, President-in-Office of the Council.

Under the terms of the Olympic Charter, sport must embody "a spirit of friendship, solidarity and fair play" .

Doping in sport runs totally counter to that ideal.

Yet doping products are widely used by professional sportsmen and women, but also by amateurs.

This scourge, whose true scale is difficult to measure, is a complex phenomenon that poses a serious risk to the physical and psychological health of the sportsmen and women.

It is also a form of cheating that is contrary to the sporting ethic.

Because of that, we must take stronger European Union action to combat this phenomenon.

I therefore support the inclusion of a legal basis in the Treaty that would allow for Community action in the field of sport.

I know that this issue is giving rise to much discussion, which will in fact help fuel the debate to be held in the European Sports Forum in Lille on 26 and 27 October.

I will, of course, take part in it and give my views.

Apart from that, I endorse the call for the Commission to step up research into the causes of doping in the various sports disciplines, even though we know that one of the main reasons for the spread of doping lies in the commercial profits that are now linked to sport.

Under the Fifth Framework Research Programme, the European Union will have to conduct more research on doping substances, on methods of detection and on the health impact of using doping products.

I think it is also vital to launch information campaigns on the risks associated with doping products.

These campaigns should be aimed primarily at young people and be conducted with the help of athletes with an established reputation.

Since doping must be combated at international level, the creation of the World Anti-Doping Agency (WADA) is without doubt a vital step forward.

This agency, set up in 1999, is currently operating under transitional procedures that leave something to be desired in terms of transparency and independence.

I am glad to say that the French Presidency has undertaken to improve the way it operates.

Let us restore the true value of sport.

Above all, sport must be regarded as an educational and social activity that encourages team spirit, solidarity and loyalty and helps combat racism and xenophobia.

We are voting against recitals I, J and K and are abstaining from voting on paragraph 2.

In different ways, these three recitals and this paragraph are urging the Commission to integrate sports policy into the texts of the Treaties.

Sports policy is a policy area characterised by its cultural context and framework and ought not therefore to be covered by the texts of the Treaties.

Sports policy is an area in which the Commission clearly ought not to have powers.

In our opinion, such powers are covered by the subsidiarity principle and ought to be exercised at national or lower levels of political decision-making.

We are abstaining from voting in the final vote.

Mr President, I voted for the Mennea report on sport because it contains a large number of positive elements and, in particular, because it highlights the importance of continuing the current practice of organising sporting events for disabled people.

I hope that this report will lead to the introduction of subsidised sporting events for the elderly.

If competitors were grouped according to age, in the same way that boxers are grouped according to weight, we could organise sporting events for people over 30, 40, 50 or 60 years of age.

Mr Mennea would certainly win another Olympic medal if we held events on the basis of age.

Mr President, I would like to thank the Members who voted for my report.

In my opinion, Europe has today taken a step forward in its approach to the world of sport.

Our task is still far from complete, for sport is continually changing and Europe cannot afford not to follow these changes.

I hope that the work which we have begun today, here in the European Parliament, will soon be completed.

I would like to make it clear that some of the points I had proposed were not approved, such as the status of sportspersons and the sporting contract etc.

I hope that Europe will soon become more mature from this point of view and take into consideration those points which were not included.

At a summit in Davos, Zbigniev Brzezinski, President Carter' s adviser, spoke about the need to use sport, show business and entertainment as a pressure valve for the millions of marginalised people that unrestrained free trade produces every year in a general free market economy.

A word was even coined for this new version of 'bread and circus' .

It is 'tittytainment' , formed from the American slang for breasts and the word entertainment.

The lesson was learned and the idea of sport as an entertainment, as an industry and as the opium of the impoverished masses of the world, took off.

There is an endless succession of world cups, European cup finals, Grand Prix competitions, the Olympics of Helsinki and Sydney, football, tennis, races, car rallies and horse races.

All this is done in the name of the social function of sport, which produces healthy minds in healthy bodies, to the point that the Treaty of Amsterdam now includes a declaration on sport emphasising "its role in forging identity and bringing people together" .

Indeed, we all know that, thanks to sport and to the Olympic Games, the Peloponnesian War never happened, that Athens and Sparta truly loved one another and that the circus brought the gladiators together. From the evidence of the Heysel stadium, with its death toll, to the British hooligans at the UEFA Cup in Copenhagen and elsewhere, not forgetting the case of Nivel, the French policeman murdered by German supporters, let alone the Turkish 'tourists' , the French PSG and others, it is quite obvious that sport makes people more sociable, tolerant and cooperative and fosters all those other qualities which have been promoted so well by the French suburbs and inner cities, since the World Cup, through the festive bonfires created by setting fire to cars.

Nor did high-level sport produce dozens of cases of rape and sexual attacks in the Olympic village in Atlanta; and French tennis champion, Nathalie Tauziat, who wrote a book criticising the very emotionally charged atmosphere behind the scenes of the tennis courts, was obviously eliminated from the French team selection in Sydney in the name of the team spirit and significant social values fostered by sport, according to Mr Mennea, the rapporteur for the Committee on Culture, Youth, Education, the Media and Sport.

Once this balm and these nice sentiments have been applied to the galling wounds of real life, our rapporteur becomes well aware that sport is not a cultural phenomenon but a political and strategic instrument used to enslave the citizen, who is made to forget the loss of his civic powers through a form of televisual training developing age-old instincts.

Share-capital companies, sports-club factories, from Manchester United to AC Milan, not to mention the US basketball and golf circuits, doping, the industry of anabolic steroids and other performance-enhancing drugs, which have left Pankov' s Germany and the Soviet Union to spread throughout the world, Adidas, Nike and other sponsors who want to see results, transfers to the tune of dollars beyond our wildest dreams, the EU Court of Justice' s judgments, including the famous 1995 Bosman judgment that everyone criticised but that ensures the free movement of young sportsmen and women and sports merchandise, the huge commercialisation, the alleged re-broadcasting rights and the collusion between sport and business - that is the real face of the industrialised world of sport that comes under our Community legislation.

It is from that manipulated world that we must protect real sport, the amateur sport practised in thousands of clubs, which have limited resources and survive thanks only to the devotion, ability and generosity of a huge number of voluntary workers.

That is where we must put our public funding, instead of investing it for the benefit of the tin gods of world stadiums.

That concludes the explanations of vote.

(The sitting was suspended at 1.36 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m.)

Mr President, I wanted to express my concern as some facts are liable to be misinterpreted.

With regard to the urgent debates, we argued in favour of the inclusion of the Temelín nuclear reactor because this is a topic which is very much in the spotlight at the moment. However, I would ask you if we could move on to the debate on Iran as soon as possible.

This remains necessary due to the relentless violation of human rights - the execution of the death penalty by stoning springs to mind, as well as the constant disruption of international television programmes.

We voted in favour of Temelín but we believe that a debate on Iran is just as imperative.

Mrs Maes, Iran is to be covered in the debate on human rights, as is the Temelín nuclear power station.

I hope that this will meet your concerns.

Approval of the Minutes of the previous sitting

The Minutes of yesterday's sitting have been distributed.

The next item is the debate on topical and urgent subjects of major importance.

The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions:

B5­0704/2000 by Mr Sakellariou and others, on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists, on nuclear submarines;

B5­0707/2000 by Mr Belder, on behalf of the Europe of Democracies and Diversities Group, on the sinking of the Kursk submarine and the danger of nuclear pollution in the former Soviet Union;

B5­0709/2000 by Mrs Thors and Mr Väyrynen, on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party, on the sinking of the Kursk submarine and the danger of nuclear pollution in the former Soviet Union;

B5­0717/2000 by Mr Posselt and Mr Oostlander, on behalf of the Group of the European People's Party (Christian Democrats) and the European Democrats, on the sinking of the Kursk submarine;

B5­0725/2000 by Mrs Schroedter and others, on behalf of the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance, on the danger of nuclear submarines;

B5­0736/2000 by Mrs Muscardini, on behalf of the Union for a Europe of Nations Group, on accidents involving nuclear submarines;

B5­0738/2000 by Mr Sjöstedt and others, on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left/Nordic Green Left, on the sinking of nuclear submarines.

Mr President, together with those who submitted the joint resolution, I, too, would like to express my deepest sympathy to the relatives of the Kursk nuclear submarine crew who died.

May they find comfort and strength in God, who can only truly gauge their sorrow and will gladly relieve their suffering.

The dreadful humanitarian disaster involving the Kursk once again brought home to the Russian population and to us how dangerous the consequences of accidents involving nuclear-powered installations and craft can be, and how important it is to comply with nuclear safety regulations.

This awareness-raising process has been set in motion, not least thanks to - and I would like to stress this here - those directly involved: Russian citizens and social organisations with a sense of responsibility.

Not only do they deserve our respect, but also all the European support we can provide.

How irresponsible, on the other hand, is the way the Russian authorities, fronted by the country' s military apparatus, deal with atomic energy?

And that for as long as we can remember.

The nuclear contamination of the village Muslyumovo, in the southern Ural, with plutonium - and this is as long ago as 1949 - is a poignant example of this utterly reprehensible behaviour.

According to a lady in the village, in the old days, mothers would contract leukaemia at the age of fifty.

The same fate would befall their daughters at the tender age of twenty; nowadays, their grandchildren suffer from this deadly disease as young as two.

The joint resolution is absolutely right in highlighting the considerable nuclear risks which the dozens of scrapped nuclear submarines of the Russian northern fleet constitute.

For the city of Murmansk and direct surroundings, I would like to add one major danger to this huge, potential risk to both the public and the environment, namely the cargo ship Lepse.

Since the early sixties, this ship has served as a warehouse for atomic waste originating from nuclear-powered ice breakers.

Due to the Lepse' s bad condition, its nuclear cargo should be transferred to and made safe in special containers ashore. At least, that has been the plan for years.

Why has nothing been done about it? The answer is simple.

It is down to the irresponsible attitude of the authorities, which refuse to meet the financier of the project, i.e. the European Union, halfway on two essential points: signing the agreement whereby Russia shoulders the responsibility for the activities, and the tax-free import of the required equipment for the operation.

This is a striking example of Russia' s official stance in urgent matters of nuclear safety.

The nuclear scandal in Moscow, which dates back to 1995, is also salient in this respect.

At the time, the director of the scientific institute which developed nuclear, Chernobyl-like reactors, came up with an 'enlightened' plan to increase the budget of his institute by providing heating for the houses in the vicinity by means of the institute' s research reactor.

The neighbourhood was tipped off in time and the whole plan was called off.

In fact, the reactor was closed down.

And how did the director Jevgeni Adamov fare?

He made it to Russia' s Minister for Atomic Energy and is dreaming of another, far more profitable project, a real money-spinner: Russia as collection and processing point for foreign radioactive waste.

May this serve as a warning to Europe.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party is deeply touched by the recent disaster involving the Kursk submarine and shares in the grief of those left behind and the Russian people.

In addition, we are greatly concerned about the nuclear time bomb and ecological disaster waiting to happen in the Barents Sea, involving the Kursk, but also other ship wrecks which are still located there.

It is therefore of utmost importance for Russia to join forces with international organisations for nuclear safety, and I would ask the Commissioner to press Russia to take responsibility and inspect the still active nuclear submarines, adapting them to better safety requirements if necessary.

There are plenty of international experts who could help Russia take stock of the problems and dismantle the nuclear waste present in the submarines in the Barents Sea.

Needless to say, Russia must exercise complete openness and cooperate fully.

Russia is also financially responsible. Could the Commission or Commissioner explain to me in what way the European Union can help Russia in the dismantling of shipwrecks and how it can stave off the nuclear radiation risk for our EU citizens?

Mr President, our prayers and sympathy go to the 118 sailors and their families.

But it must also be considered that we have a major concern in connection with the Kursk disaster, namely the situation in Russia.

We need to be quite clear that President Putin and the Russian authorities covered up a lot of the circumstances surrounding this accident.

Facts were suppressed, falsified or hushed up.

But in one interview he spoke the truth when he said that the Kursk accident was symptomatic of Russia's condition as a whole.

This is a situation that we finally have to face up to.

We have to see the reality for what it is.

This is not just about nuclear safety and the nuclear submarine fleet, it is also about a mass of highly developed arms technologies for which there are no appropriate control and safety measures.

That is why it is of the utmost importance that we should do everything to ensure transparency finally reaches Russia.

It is only because of Mr Nikitin, and the independent media, which face increased repression, that we heard about the disaster at all, four days after the event.Thanks to international support, it was at least possible to avoid the very worst and I hope that it will also be possible to find a solution.

But that is not a satisfactory state of affairs. That is why they need not only our help, but also frank talking.

What is called for is some plain speaking and an offer of cooperation that does not just mean reaching for our cheque book, but also includes developing the rule of law, democratic processes and independent media in Russia.

The most important point is to educate and support all democratic forces, all the independent media, the administration, the judiciary, and young politicians, especially those in local government, so that Russia becomes a partner with whom we can safely live together in Eurasia.

I do not want to go into other issues such as Chechnya and a host of others at this point.

Kursk by itself is symptomatic of how disasters in Russia can have a direct environmental and political impact on our part of Europe.

That is why it is very much in our interest to make sure that Russia gradually becomes a democratic state where the rule of law prevails.

What we are witnessing at present under President Putin is instead a retrograde trend which is a matter of great concern to us.

So we have an enormous responsibility here.

Mr President, as other Members have already said, the Kursk accident demonstrates that even ten years after the end of the Cold War, military objectives are still considered more important than human life.

I would also like to take this opportunity to express my deepest sympathy for the families who have been bereaved of their fathers and sons.

We know that it is not impossible that more people will yet be affected by this accident.

Everyone is aware of the dangers posed by two nuclear reactors lying on the sea bed.

However, no one knows how great the danger and the insidious impact on people's health will be.

I therefore believe that we can only draw one conclusion from this accident: we have to finally admit that despite the end of the Cold War we - in both the East and the West - are still arming and rearming ourselves, and this is incredibly dangerous and will lead to people being killed. So we must finally put an end to this.

There can only be one response to this accident, and that response is 'disarmament now' .

This disarmament will only work if it is applied equally by the East and the West.

That also means that it has to be pursued jointly, in cooperation. It must not mean that people like Alexander Nikitin, who take part in this and thus help to fight the continuing dangers to humanity of the Cold War and of armament, are eliminated.

I call on the Commission to make it crystal clear to the Russian Government that we will not accept further legal judgments against Nikitin or tolerate his being put on trial again.

Mr President, our Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left entirely shares all the considerations and proposals regarding nuclear submarine accidents, which are a sad legacy from the Cold War.

In order to show that it is not all one-sided, I am bound to refer to the situation of the British submarine which broke down on 12 May in Sicily and has been in Gibraltar, the only British colony in the Mediterranean, since 19 May.

The situation is causing a great deal of alarm among the population, because, according to the Royal Navy' s own regulations, within a radius of 10 kilometres there is danger, within 100 kilometres there is still potential danger, and the submarine may only be repaired in category 'X' docks.

The docks in Gibraltar are type 'Z' .

I find the neo-colonial behaviour on the part of the United Kingdom, which solved the problem by replacing a 'Z' with an 'X' on a piece of paper using correction fluid or an eraser, very strange.

I think that it is important that the Commission and the Council demand that this submarine goes back to the United Kingdom and that they ensure that safety standards are complied with.

Mr President, the sinking of the Kursk has - mainly as a result of Russia' s inadequate response - brought home to us the disastrous heritage of 70 years of Soviet power.

The golden era of Communist nomenclature has generated a climate of such contempt towards people in the old Soviet Union, with so few standing a chance of survival in the present day, that this is why we are now facing this terrible disaster.

This is at the heart of our resolution.

In my opinion, the fact that the GUE Group is now tabling amendments which attempt to divert the attention away from this disaster by introducing a regional problem of a completely different nature displays very little taste indeed.

It is, in fact, downright impudent.

The European Union and European Parliament will need to put their foot down when it comes to the Kursk salvage operation.

We will need to be involved in these operations, partly on humanitarian grounds.

The recovery of the Kursk also highlights another problem, namely that of a large number of obsolete nuclear submarines in Russia, as well as the nuclear waste in the same northern region.

The European Union and European Parliament will need to make it clear that it is in Europe' s general interest, and as such in that of Russia, to lay this matter to rest sooner rather than later, firstly on behalf of the relatives, whom we offer our deepest sympathy, and secondly for the benefit of the nuclear situation in Europe.

This is what our resolution is about.

Mr President, we are talking about the tragedy involving the Russian submarine Kursk and we do of course share all the considerations of this joint resolution on the subject.

However, we must add immediately that, in order to gain credibility, the European Parliament and the European Union in general cannot ignore the fact that within its own territory there is a situation of serious nuclear risk as the result of a submarine accident, even though it is not, of course, of the tragic nature of the case of the Kursk.

I am referring to the case mentioned previously by my colleague Mr Marset, the British submarine Tireless, which has been anchored in the port of Gibraltar since May, where the intention is to repair it.

It is a port which, has been pointed out, does not have the technical conditions or the location for repairing this type of vessel.

The port is only equipped for repairing merchant ships, not warships and much less nuclear submarines.

The problem cannot be solved by simply reclassifying it, because that reclassification could affect the technical conditions.

But the problem is that the safety standards include emergency plans and special action for the population within a radius of ten kilometres, which in this case means around 200 000 people.

That is something that cannot be improvised overnight, among other things because the population cannot be moved.

We must criticise the deplorable attitude of the British Government, but even more so the attitude of the Spanish Government, which maintained a deplorable and shameful silence on this issue until they were forced into a timid reaction by the protests from the inhabitants of the area.

I would like to conclude, Mr President, by saying that I am not in the habit of raising issues of domestic policy in this Parliament.

But this is not a matter of domestic policy, but one of European security, it is a matter of European decency and I am raising it here in order to provoke a reaction from this Parliament and from the authorities of the Union in general in order to remedy this intolerable situation.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party, and along with my colleague Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel, we join others in offering our condolences to the victims of the Russian nuclear submarine, and in asking for greater cooperation between the European Union and the Russian authorities in order to prevent a further disaster.

Obviously, we believe that the European Union has sufficient arguments to ensure such cooperation.

We would also like to express our concern - as other speakers have done - because, unfortunately, the matter that we were to discuss, that of the very serious, terrible and fatal accident of the submarine Kursk has led us to deal with the problem of a nuclear submarine in Mediterranean waters, in European Union territory, in a British colony.

This is causing very serious and justified alarm, due to a serious breakdown in the nuclear reactor, and because, among other things, European Union directives are not being complied with.

We think that there is a need to take urgent action.

The European Union must intervene, and this nuclear submarine needs to be urgently transported to a British base to be repaired under the proper conditions.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, as has been said, a British nuclear submarine has been moored at its Gibraltar base since 19 May.

The smallest breakdown in the cooling system of a nuclear reactor can never be considered as insignificant, as it contains heavy water with radioactive isotopes.

Moreover, the United Kingdom has knowingly failed to comply with Community regulations in terms of radiation protection, exposing its citizens in Gibraltar and those in Algeciras Bay to a very high probability of contamination, as it is now, and not last May, that it is recognising the extent of the breakdown.

In this case, there has been a violation of Community law.

We complained that Russia took four days to inform the European Community about its accident.

I suppose that the booing that we received from some British Members when we criticised the situation in this House was also directed at the citizens of Gibraltar.

In this House we criticised the lack of information for the population in the area and of reliable and official news from the United Kingdom.

In the same way, we criticise something which is a reality: the United Kingdom, faced with considerable social pressures in the country, has decided to transfer its base for nuclear submarine operations and repairs to Algeciras Bay, without respecting its own standards, which do not allow it to have this type of base in highly populated areas.

Equally, we deplore the contemplative attitude of the Spanish Government, which only reacted when the pressure and concern reached a maximum.

For the above reasons, those of us from Andalusia ask this Parliament, and its President, far beyond the bilateral diplomatic interests of the Member States, to carry out the appropriate consultations and negotiations to make it possible to immediately transfer this submarine to bases that have sufficient security conditions to repair it and thus to put an end to the public alarm that has been created.

The Commission shares the deep regrets expressed in the resolutions on the accident involving the Russian submarine the Kursk in the Arctic Bering Sea on 12 August and the loss of the lives of 118 seamen.

We were particularly concerned about the policy of the Russian authorities in the first days after the accident on foreign assistance and information provided to the Russian population and the wider public.

Russia is ultimately responsible for devising and implementing a plan to manage its nuclear waste and spent fuel, and the resolutions, therefore, quite rightly call upon Russia to use all available resources, including its own specialists.

The Commission considers that the international community should offer the necessary assistance to Russia.

It has already launched a number of assistance projects under various Community programmes.

Improved radioactive waste management in north-west Russia is one of the explicit priorities included in the new TACIS regulation covering the next seven years.

The Commission welcomes any action that would increase the budget funding to be used to reduce the ideological threat in north-west Russia and in particular to enable laid-up nuclear submarines to be dismantled more quickly than 10 of the North Fleet's 100 disused nuclear submarines moored at various based in north-west Russia have been dismantled so far.

Besides the submarines, spent fuel from a number of nuclear-powered icebreakers also adds to the ecological risk.

The lack of storage capacity for spent nuclear fuel remains one of the major bottlenecks in dismantling operations as a whole.

Community-backed activities are studies to design and cost a storage facility in north-west Russia or in the southern Urals.

In the light of these studies, the international community, perhaps including the European Community, might later finance the construction of such a storage facility.

To speed up dismantling, the Community is supporting the design, construction, and licensing of a transport and storage tank for damaged spent fuel produced in the operation of nuclear submarines and icebreakers and currently stored under primitive conditions.

The Commission is also involved in a number of studies aiming to improve radioactive-waste management in north-west Russia.

Before concluding, I would like to stress the importance of international coordination in this immense task.

To give two examples, the Commission is serving in the IAEA-sponsored contact expert group.

The group's work might eventually make it possible to draw up a comprehensive strategy and key investment projects that should be supported by the international community and, together with a number of donor countries, the Commission is currently negotiating an agreement with the Russians.

This agreement, known as the 'Multilateral Nuclear Environmental Programme', is intended to overcome obstacles to international aid stemming, for instance, from tax exemptions and nuclear liability.

The Commission hopes that the Kursk accident will bring about real progress in these negotiations and, in particular, strengthen the resolve of the Russian authorities to conclude the agreement.

Mr President, I would like to know whether the Commissioner has anything to say on the issue, which also relates to nuclear submarines, of the Tireless in Gibraltar.

It has been raised by five Members in this House and he has not said anything about it.

I am concerned: is it that he is deaf?

Is it that he does not know what to do?

Mr President, we are talking about nuclear safety, and I repeat what was said by my colleague, Mr Marset Campos: we hope that the Commissioner will say something about our problem, a problem in the European Union that is affecting citizens from two Member States.

I took the liberty, on behalf of the Commission, of responding to the issue that we have on the agenda.

Discussion of other subjects would have to be covered by other means and under a different agenda item.

I will be suggesting to my colleagues that we answer your questions in writing.

Mr President, the subject for today is 'Nuclear submarine accidents' .

The Conference of Presidents decided to also include the subject of the submarine in Gibraltar in the agenda.

The vote will take place today, at 5.30 p.m.

The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions:

B5­0660/2000 by Mrs Sauquillo Pérez del Arco, on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists, on Burundi;

B5­0711/2000 by Mr Van den Bos, on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party, on the agreement on peace in Burundi signed in Arusha, Tanzania;

B5­0718/2000 by Mr Johan Van Hecke, on behalf of the Group of the European People's Party (Christian Democrats) and the European Democrats, on the situation in Burundi;

B5­0726/2000 by Mrs Maes and Mr Rod, on behalf of the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance, on the situation in Burundi;

B5­0734/2000 by Mrs Muscardini, on behalf of the Union for a Europe of Nations Group, on Burundi;

B5­0739/2000 by Mr Vinci, on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left/Nordic Green Left, on the Arusha agreement and the transition to democracy in Burundi.

Mr President, why do so many Africans struggle when it comes to sharing power?

If the principle 'the survival of the fittest' applies, leaving the weakest with nothing, then there is something fundamentally wrong.

If, on top of this, the fittest constitute the minority, then conflicts are bound to ensue.

As long as ethnic groups exclude each other and refuse to cooperate, there is precious little hope.

Only national reconciliation can offer some hope and this is certainly true of Burundi.

Following Mandela' s remarkable efforts, peace seemed to be on its way at last.

Unfortunately, the fighting has not stopped and some parties have refused to sign the peace accord.

Every effort must be made in order to ensure that the new negotiations are a success.

Maximum pressure must be brought to bear on Hutu rebels to take part in the peace process instead of following the destructive instructions issued by the likes of Mr Kaliba and Mr Mugabe.

In order to ensure that all parties are involved, it is of utmost importance for the political leaders to receive personal protection, and it is high time that the violence against innocent citizens, both on the part of the government and of the opposition, came to an end.

If the fight continues, human rights continue to be violated and parties fail to get involved, there can be no talk of fully resuming European aid.

Greater willingness on their part to make peace will lead to greater willingness on our part to help.

The mediators must bring about initiatives to demobilise the parties so that they can ultimately unite in one army.

As soon as the cease-fire is achieved, the Burundi refugees must be able to count on help from the international community to provide them with a safe shelter in Burundi.

On a final note, for lasting peace in Burundi, it is crucial that peace in the Congo region is established.

Only if Africans are willing to share power does this continent have a future.

Mr President, if we start from the principle 'better a deal that is flawed than no deal at all' , then it is true that Arusha constitutes a step forward in the Burundi peace process.

All credit for this has to go to Mandela, who shuttled between the different parties for months in order to get them not only on speaking terms but also around the negotiating table.

But the accord is not perfect.

Indeed, there is still no cease-fire and the fights around the capital of Bujumbura simply continue.

The two main Hutu rebel movements in the army, which are responsible for the best part of the violence, were not involved in the negotiations.

As such, the next phase in Nairobi, the meeting between the armed troops on 20 September, is probably more crucial than Arusha.

It is regrettable that the accord does not look beyond the regional context.

The neighbouring countries Congo and Tanzania, from where the armed groups operate, must also be reminded of their responsibilities.

Indeed, the question arises as to whether Mandela has not analysed the Burundi conflict too much from his own South African context.

It is correct that some Tutsi parties have used the risk of annihilation of the minority as an excuse to maintain their supremacy.

But this does not take away the fact that this risk in Burundi is real.

This is why we need to demand sufficient safety guarantees to protect the minority and make sure that in the event of any elections, there is no incitement of ethnic hatred.

Finally, Mr President, I do believe that Europe should resume the provision of semi-structural aid, especially in the areas of education and health care.

Otherwise, there is a risk that we will be held partly responsible for the death of thousands of innocent citizens; a thought to which I, as a Christian-Democrat, cannot reconcile myself.

Mr President, I fully subscribe to the entreaties of Mr Van den Bos and Mr Van Hecke.

With 200 000 fatalities in Burundi, Commissioner, there is clearly a need for a peace deal or a peace accord.

However, I fear that the peace accord has been brought about because it suited the Heads of State at the time.

Maybe they should have dragged the negotiations out a while longer in order to gather everybody around the table, because I am aware that as long as the key players, both on the Hutu side and Tutsi side, do not meet, there will be no real peace.

I do welcome the fact that some movements, which were at one time some of the most implacable, have now gathered around the table.

This is why I have good reason to believe this peace accord sets the tone for the future.

I now wonder how the European Union can best fulfil the desire for peace expressed by so many people in Burundi.

To start with, I believe we will need to step up the pressure in order to achieve overall peace in the Great Lakes region.

I cannot shake off the impression that various African leaders are still too self-seeking to be able to work steadily towards peace in Congo and the Great Lakes region.

A second point is the contentious resumption of aid.

I have always regretted the notorious boycott of Burundi, particularly as it was so selective.

I now hope that we can make some real headway by means of clearly-defined peace projects and development of democracy, which we can underpin with structural aid.

Mr President, as a militant supporter of the Lutte ouvrière party in a country that played and still plays a shameful role in Burundi and in Rwanda, as it does in the whole region of central Africa, I cannot remain silent in the face of a resolution that strings together phrases supposedly in support of the people of that region while, in fact, concealing the despicable role the major powers played in the massacres carried out by the armed bands of the two conflicting ethnic groups in that region, the Tutsis and the Hutus.

Without even going back to the responsibility of the former Belgian colonial power deliberately sustaining and exacerbating the hostilities between the two ethnic groups in the two countries, today the part that both French and British interests played in the civil war is public knowledge, just as it is public knowledge that the French army was directly responsible for mobilising and arming the Hutu extreme right, which was responsible for real genocide.

And successive French Governments, on the right as well as on the left, were not even willing to do what the Belgian Government did, namely acknowledge their responsibility for this situation, although obviously that in no way lessens the crushing weight of that responsibility.

I therefore want to register my opposition to the hypocrisy of the major powers and express my solidarity with the people of Burundi and Rwanda who, over and above their ethnic rifts, over and above the responsibility of their own leaders, have paid a heavy price for the large imperialist powers' domination of Africa.

Mr President, over one hundred years ago, European colonial powers divided tribal lands in Africa to establish national boundaries.

African countries inherited the legacy of tribal conflict as major tribes sought to dominate national politics.

Some examples are the Afars and Issas in Djibouti, the Kikuyu and Luo in Kenya and the Hutu and Tutsi in Rwanda and Burundi.

I believe the EU has to focus on how the ruling elite, the Tutsis in Burundi, can be persuaded to reconcile and cooperate with the majority Hutu to achieve peace.

The EU must insist that neighbouring countries do not interfere in Burundi and EU aid to them should be conditional on their cooperation.

This Parliament and the European Commission can help Burundi and this resolution is a very good step in that direction.

Mr President, I am very happy to be speaking at the request and on behalf of Mrs Sauquillo. We would first of all like to thank Nelson Mandela, who once again truly deserves the Nobel Peace Prize which has been awarded him.

I would like to stress that the Arusha Agreement does not represent the end of the war, for peace has not yet been established, but the agreement does exist and requires an immediate initiative from the European Union.

The initiative must include the following elements: we must send a message to those who have signed the agreement to urge them to persist and keep going along the road they have chosen; we must send a message to those who have not yet signed the agreement to remind them that there is no alternative to peace, that the only alternative to peace is to continue with the suffering caused by colonial inheritance, death and oppression; we must also send a message to the neighbouring countries to request that they refrain from interfering in the domestic affairs of other countries and must contribute to and uphold the peace process.

The European Union's initiative must include financial assistance, for genuine, stable peace processes need assistance if they are to evolve into stable democracies.

After last minute amendments and a nine-hour delay, the majority of the parties involved in the two years of talks signed a scaled-down peace agreement in Arusha on 28 August.

The Commission welcomes the signature of the peace accord as an important preliminary step in the long and difficult process of negotiations to end the conflict between Burundi's majority Hutu and minority Tutsi population.

However, as has been said in this discussion, some very important questions are still open, such as that of the cease-fire, which is the main gap in the agreement, the amnesty, the composition of the national assembly, the duration of the agreement and the transitory government leadership - no minor issues.

In spite of the number and the importance of these questions, the signature does represent an important event which puts an end to the Arusha process but not to the negotiations as such.

These will continue, mainly in Bujumbura, hopefully ensuring a higher ownership of the process by the Burundians themselves.

This has been a problem in the long process on many occasions.

The refusal to sign the agreement by the extremist parties is of concern to the Commission and every effort should be pursued to urge them to do so.

Two Tutsi parties added their signature to the agreement on the following day.

Cease-fire talks are organised for 20 September in Nairobi.

The regional presidents Moi and Thabo Mbeki stress their importance.

Successful conclusion is seen as a prerequisite for the start of the implementation of the peace agreement, deployment of UN peacekeepers and full restoration of development cooperation.

The European Community, at this stage, is ready at the technical level to gradually resume a full-scale cooperation programme in coordination with other donors.

Beyond a EUR 48 million rehabilitation programme whose implementation has started, the EC is finalising the procedures for the release of EUR 50 million STABEX funds to relaunch the rural economy.

A strategy paper is being prepared by the Commission to support the peace agreement implementation concentrating on demobilisation, social and economic reconstruction of Burundi and state reform.

Finally, the Commission is going to hold an informal donor meeting at technical level in Brussels on 15 September.

Its purpose is to report on the programme implementation, to improve coordination between donors, to prepare a common strategy to contribute to the peace agreement implementation and to prepare a high level round table of parties and donors which should take place in Paris this autumn.

We are organised to step up the actual cooperation.

I can tell Parliament that we see this as a good case to try and demonstrate how to better manage the transition from the phase of humanitarian assistance to the building up and gradual introduction of forward-oriented long-term development cooperation.

We are giving all the signals we can to organisations like the UNHCR, and also to other donors, to try and get well organised, as you can hear from what I have said.

Coordination is extremely important because we are still in a situation where the right balance and the right kind of signals to the parties in the process in Burundi are as important as the euros we are mobilising.

This is a very focused effort, trying to do things right.

The vote will take place today, at 5.30 p.m.

Mr President, the resolution that we have before us today is not intended in any way to criticise the key actors namely the Bhutanese or Nepalese Governments in the process of finding a solution for the 96 000 Nepalese speaking Bhutanese refugees living in the camps.

There have been 17 000 children born in those camps over the last ten years.

This resolution seeks to encourage initiatives and action and ask the Commission to help perhaps with financial mechanisms to support the re-settlement of these people.

We welcome the fact that Japan has donated USD 1.3 million to the refugees, and that USD 1 million has been forthcoming from world food programmes.

But the people in those camps would prefer to be re-settled back in their homelands and not have that money.

They sent us this memorandum asking our support for action to solve their problem and to have justice.

In it they say "we pray at your end, honourable European Parliamentarians, that justice may prevail on us".

That is what we are doing here today.

Let us hope that our resolution will bring some justice to these people, will help them re-settle in their homelands and achieve some results.

Mr President, earlier this year, I had the honour to be part of a delegation from the European Parliament to New Delhi and Nepal.

Arising from our visit and in particular our visit to the refugee camps in eastern Nepal, the delegation gave a commitment that they would do everything possible to raise the issue of the continuing plight of the Bhutanese refugees in Nepal.

I would like to assure the Members of the House that the refugees are fully aware of, and greatly value and appreciate, the earlier efforts of the European Parliament in drawing attention to their situation.

This was clearly demonstrated to us during our visit to the region, and our resolve to continue to encourage an agreement now between Bhutan and Nepal is as strong as ever.

The influx of Bhutanese refugees into Nepal began in late 1991 and the fear of diminishing international attention, therefore, is always present.

The refugees have been waiting for the last ten years for an amicable and permanent solution to the crisis.

As Ms McCarthy has said - very many of them want to go home.

There have been numerous bilateral talks but so far a final political settlement has not been secured.

In New York, the United Nations Millennium Summit is taking place as we speak and it offers the Prime Ministers of Bhutan and Nepal an opportunity to come together and to demonstrate their commitment to the ideas of peace and tolerance by agreeing to an early solution to the problem of Bhutanese refugees in Nepal.

This would be a fitting way to mark the UN's Millennium Summit.

I hope they will be given every encouragement to do so.

One of the crucial issues to be decided is the definition of the family unit for verification purposes.

Nepal has accepted a compromise put forward by the UNHCR who has been playing an important role in seeking to help to resolve the impasse.

I strongly urge the Bhutanese authorities to accept the compromise so that field verification can begin immediately.

While the European Union remains one of the major donors, both the UNHCR and the World Food Programme are finding it increasingly difficult to raise funds to run the refugee camps.

I would urge international donors to continue to make sufficient funds available to permit the running of the camps during the negotiation and the verification process.

At the same time, I would expect the donors to insist that the Bhutanese Government facilitate a rapid repatriation of the refugees.

I very much welcome the news conveyed to the House by Ms McCarthy of the generosity of the Japanese people in this particular respect.

We were assured that bilateral negotiations would be speedily concluded and that actual verification in the camps would begin last July.

That agreement regrettably is still outstanding.

I therefore reiterate once more our appeal to all those concerned to take the necessary political initiatives to achieve a lasting solution to the unacceptable plight of the Bhutanese refugees, of whom over 17 000 have been born in the camps.

Mr President, we in the European Parliament's SAARC delegation had an opportunity in April to see for ourselves the conditions in which tens of thousands of refugees have been living for years in the camps in eastern Nepal.

The assistance from the European Union and the international organisations is quite respectable, but no one can guarantee long-term financial aid at that level.

It is high time that substantial agreements were reached.

Bhutan and Nepal are not neighbours, but they are close to each other in spirit.

Both are kingdoms, both have parliamentary systems with short histories, one is Buddhist and the other is Hindu.

Both are aware that lasting conflict will paralyse their national and economic progress.

Bhutan criticises Nepal on the grounds that its constant changes of government make it incapable of action.

Nepal accuses Bhutan of not being ready to adopt effective solutions.

The undertakings given by the Bhutanese Foreign Minister when he visited us in Brussels on 8 June have been honoured, as crucial negotiations began mid-year.

There is agreement on the four categories of people living in the refugee camps.

However, there has to be a common definition of the term 'family' for the purposes of the compromise put forward by the UNHCR, which Mr Collins has referred to.

We are also appealing to India to stop primly holding back.

It is linked with both neighbours through agreements and economic ties.

There are 6 million Nepalese working in India.

The borders are open, and there are no asylum problems.

I am very familiar with the charter stipulating that bilateral conflicts should not be resolved at SAARC level.

Nevertheless, the largest democracy in the world does have the greatest influence in the region and bears some humanitarian responsibility here.

The Group of the European People's Party and European Democrats is putting its faith in far-sighted people of good will in Thimphu, in Kathmandu, and also in Delhi.

We are hoping that the talks in New York between the UN High Commissioner for Refugees and the Prime Ministers of Bhutan and Nepal will lead to a decisive breakthrough.

Mr President, the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance can only lend its firm support to this resolution which, as the Members who have direct experience of this tragic situation have said, shows our institution's concern for a region which may well be far away but whose human tragedies cut us to the very heart.

As previous speakers have pointed out, a great deal has already been achieved and more will be achieved in the future, and it is our hope that the outcome of the forthcoming talks will be positive.

For my part, I join with Mr Dupuis in calling upon the Commission and the European Union as a whole to make diplomatic advances towards the countries which are most affected by this crisis.

All that remains is for me to state that we too will follow future developments in the situation closely.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, we are faced, once again, with an exemplary case.

The text on Burma, unfortunately the umpteenth one, is very good.

The situation in Burma is crystal clear; there is a perfect dictatorship on the one side and an exemplary opposition on the other. There has, in fact, been no sign of progress in this country for ten years.

So I think we should ask ourselves a few questions.

Our policy towards Asia is a criminal policy; it is quite literally criminal.

We treat regimes such as India, which continue to consolidate and strengthen democracy, however difficult that may be, on the same footing as other countries like China, Burma and North Korea, which, you could say, do all they can to strengthen dictatorship.

So, I think we should consider drawing up lists, defining categories and establishing different types of relations depending on the type of country.

Unfortunately that is not the case.

The European Parliament has been calling for this for a long time and we must continue to urge it.

We cannot continue to dialogue with organisations such as ASEAN and pretend that we regard them as a homogenous whole.

ASEAN is simply a grouping of totally different countries, with widely diverging interests and no prospect of integration.

We must encourage forms of integration based on democracy - which is absolutely not the case with this kind of country - and therefore promote and encourage our bilateral relations with the countries that respect democracy and want to strengthen democracy and the rule of law, and pursue an extremely tough policy towards countries like Burma.

Let me finish by saying that Burma is a country now occupied by the People' s Republic of China.

We are informed by many sources that there are dozens of Chinese military bases in Burma.

The People' s Republic of China is currently encircling India: that is a real fact, an actual fact.

You are aware of the situation in Pakistan.

The People' s Republic of China' s strategic aid to the rearmament and strengthening of Pakistan' s nuclear weapons is a form of encirclement and if, in the course of the twentieth century, the major world problem was the German problem, the Franco-German problem, today and tomorrow too it will be an Indo-Chinese problem; and if we do not, as of now, support the countries that are moving towards democracy, towards strengthening democracy, such as India, but instead continue to roll out the red carpet for the Beijing authorities, we will simply be encouraging a grouping that will eventually become explosive.

The explosion will hit not just Asia, but in the end will also affect Europe and the European Union.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I regret having to speak once again to defend the cause of Mrs Aung San Suu Kyi.

This is not only the defence of a person who suffers for having fought for democracy and freedom, but also of what she represents in a whole population' s fight to achieve those things.

Mrs Aung San Suu Kyi deserved the recognition of the international community by being awarded the Nobel Prize, the Sajarov Prize from this Parliament and the Prize for Freedom from Liberal International.

Now she is being denied the most basic freedoms, along with those who follow her in the difficult process against dictatorship, to which Mr Dupuis has already referred.

All these people are in an unacceptable situation.

Therefore, the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party supports the proposals of the corresponding resolution and, in particular, I would like to draw attention to paragraph 8, which asks that both the United States and the Commission and the Council impose the appropriate political and economic sanctions as long as there is no process of democratisation in Burma.

Mr President, we are once again debating the difficult situation in which Burma' s elected President finds herself, as well as the aggression displayed by that country' s military regime.

I believe that over the past two years, we have submitted as many as five or six resolutions on the situation in Burma.

It is almost intolerable that a President, elected more than ten years ago with 80% of the votes behind her, who offers peaceful protest against her country' s military regime, should receive insufficient support to truly adopt the role which she deserves in her country, in order to fight a military regime which rides roughshod over human rights and the rights of minorities. This is despite the fact that she receives verbal support - by Mr Clinton only a few days ago -and the fact that she has received both the Nobel Prize and Sakharov Prize for her peaceful protest.

The national economy stays afloat thanks to drugs.

Burma, the world' s second-largest drug-producing country, after Colombia, has dismantled its own parliament, has had numerous parliamentarians killed and imprisoned in the process, and forces its minorities into slave labour, especially in the construction of infrastructure. However, it still benefits from investments, including investments from European countries, such as those of the French oil company Total and the Dutch hydraulics industry, and there has been no attempt to block this kind of investment, either on the part of the EU or on the part of national Member States.

I am not actually in favour of economic sanctions, but in some cases - I am thinking of South Africa and Chile in the eighties - it is necessary to stop cruelty in its tracks.

In my opinion, the European Union and the United States should agree on a strategy against Burma.

I believe that Burma should be isolated politically and economically and that real, effective pressure must be exercised; if not, we sanction violent opposition.

People elsewhere have commented: look at Mrs Aung San Suu Kyi.

She has now been in peaceful protest for twelve years and still she is being sidelined and placed under house arrest, and her people are being arrested. And what happens?

The international community looks on and does nothing.

I would ask the European Union to enter into talks with the United States in order come up with concrete ways of helping her, and in order to ensure that she and Burma' s parliament can re-establish democracy in Burma.

Mr President, I should like to support what the other speakers have said.

It is ten years since the NLD won a huge majority of seats in free and fair elections, but despite that, democracy has been suppressed from every angle and at every opportunity.

I believe that the recent readmittance of Burma to the Asean and EU-Asean meetings was a major mistake from the start.

Burma has done nothing since being readmitted to Asean to show that it deserves it.

There should be a serious rethink of this policy.

I also believe that the European Union could do a lot more.

Aung San Suu Kyi has asked for sanctions but we have done absolutely nothing about this.

Even the United States has at least halted new investment.

Why is the European Union not ensuring that sanctions are imposed?

We have to do everything we can to try and stop the forced labour and the human rights abuses.

As the resolution says, we should discourage any kind of tourism to Burma.

Mr President, I agree with many of the comments that have been made so far by Mrs McKenna and Mrs Maij-Weggen on the situation in Burma.

However I would also like to refer to the specific case of a constituent of mine, which provides a good example of the brutality of the present Burmese authorities.

In September 1999, James Mawdsley, from the north-east of England was sentenced to 17 years' solitary confinement in a Burmese prison.

His mother is currently travelling to Burma hoping to see him.

His crime, according to the Burmese authorities, was to enter the country and attempt to draw attention to the human rights abuses taking place there.

The charges against him were trumped up.

For example, he was alleged to have entered the country illegally and yet British embassy staff have seen his passport, which is stamped with a Burmese immigration stamp showing that he had arrived completely legally.

British Government ministers and staff have been making constant efforts to draw the attention of the Burmese authorities to his plight, but with no success.

I ask Parliament and the Commission to do all they possibly can to secure his release.

Mr President, I would like to make it clear that the fact that Iran has been replaced by Burma in the debate on human rights does not mean that my group is not deeply concerned about the human rights situation in Iran.

We will continue to concern ourselves with that situation.

However, the current situation and the scandalous decisions being taken by the Burmese military Government and their appalling behaviour simply make it essential for the European Parliament to take a stand on this.

We are full of respect and admiration for the non-violent action, the remarkably consistent action being taken by the Nobel Peace Prize winner Aung San Suu Kyi and also by the members and politicians of the National League for Democracy. They have earned our unreserved respect, and we wish to assure them that they have our support and that the European Union, together with the international community, will do everything it can to help to restore human rights, or to be more accurate, to introduce human rights, democracy and also the rule of law in Burma.

We are certainly still pinning our hopes in San Suu Kyi.

Her continuing campaigns show that her voice cannot be silenced and that we in Europe, therefore, also have a duty to do everything to ensure that her voice is heard not only here in Europe, but also in America and above all in Asia.

She bears the hopes of the persecuted and the repressed, and also of the many men and women used as forced labour. She also bears the hopes of those citizens who opted for democracy, the parliamentary system and the rule of law before 1990.

We must call on our partners, the ASEAN States, but also other states in Asia to do everything to bring about a change in this 'transitional government' as it so cynically still calls itself.

That is why I think it is right that we should take stronger economic sanctions.

The EU has acted correctly here.

We now need an institutionalised dialogue, and a debate on Burma should be right at the top of the agenda of the Laos Summit, to make it clear that both ASEAN and the EU bear some responsibility for events in Burma.

Violations of human rights in Colombia, particularly the case of Fr. Brendan Forde

Mr President, this Parliament has discussed the situation in Colombia many times.

The situation in Colombia is that of a latent civil war in which, over several decades, the violence has taken on a structural nature.

This latent civil war was complicated a great deal as a result of the development of drug trafficking, with Colombia becoming a country where drugs are produced and transported to the rest of the world.

In that situation, there are various groups who use violence.

I am referring not only to the paramilitary organisations and the guerrillas, but also to the drug trafficking organisations.

At times, even military units use violence and violate human rights.

In a situation of this kind, the attempt to establish peace zones, for example through the peace communities established in the rural region of Urabá, has faced great difficulties.

In fact, recently there have been murders in these communities in Urabá, specifically in the region of La Unión.

Their leaders have had death threats, and death threats in Colombia are something to be taken very seriously, because they tend to be carried out.

There is really not very much this Parliament can do.

We of course support the efforts of the Colombian Government and other organisations to achieve peace, and we reiterate our desire and interest in the European institutions cooperating with the Colombian Government in helping to maintain peace.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, as Mr Medina Ortega said, we too must reiterate the unfortunate position of the conflict in Colombia, and highlight that in the Peace Community in La Unión, in the region of Urabá, there have been three murders since 1997.

Fortunately, the Colombian Government has decided to pursue those responsible and punish them accordingly.

But the fact is that, since 1997, there have been three murders, the most recent on 8 July of this year, and the Peace Community of La Unión and the Intercongregational Committee for Justice and Peace, including the Irish Franciscan priest Brendan Forde, have had repeated death threats, despite their position of remaining neutral and contributing to bringing peace to the area.

We think that this situation again requires the strongest possible action on the part of the European institutions.

Both the Commission and the European Parliament have a series of opportunities for this in cooperation with the United Nations Human Rights Office and also through the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights in Colombia.

We urge the Commission, obviously in cooperation with Parliament, to provide the Colombian Government with all our political force and capacity for pressure so that finally the desired peace can come to Colombia and these tragic situations of assassinations, deaths and murders do not happen again.

I had the honour last year of visiting this beautiful, tormented country and it is a privilege accorded to us here in the European Parliament to be able to raise our voices to defend the rights of people a great distance from here.

I also had the honour of meeting many of the human rights activists in Colombia last year.

This year we have heard in Ireland, as is obvious from the concern expressed by Irish colleagues here today, of the danger facing Father Brendan Forde, a Franciscan working in the small village of La Ùnion who has chosen to remain with his parishioners at considerable danger to his own life.

He is so isolated he probably will never hear of the debate here today.

He has to go eight miles before he can find a telephone to communicate with anybody.

For that reason, it is our privilege here to raise our voices to demand that his life and the lives of those living in his community are protected and to make sure that the Colombian Government is aware of our concerns.

Madam President, first of all I would like to express my grave disappointment at the resolution which we have before us.

My group, the Green/EFA Group, signed the amendment, but we were appalled that the amendment and the resolution does not go far enough.

They do not cover a number of serious issues like Plan Colombia and the grave human rights abuses that are taking place in the country.

It has been stated by many human rights organisations that human rights abuses by paramilitaries have the support of the armed forces and that the murder of the poor people in rural areas is as a result of this.

Most of the Colombian military forces continue to be implicated in serious human rights abuses and their aiding and abetting of paramilitary atrocities are basically ignored by the Colombian authorities.

The US State Department has consistently reported that Colombia's armed forces have taken measures to punish human rights abuses in their ranks.

Plan Colombia will result in USD 1.3 billion from the US being allocated for mainly military purposes.

Many human rights organisations believe that the plan will worsen conditions for poor rural populations and will certainly increase political violence.

It is going to irreversibly damage the people and the environment and it will not solve the drugs problem.

There was no consultation on Plan Colombia with the Colombian people, which is unacceptable.

I was in Colombia last year with NGOs and I can tell you that the situation there is really grave.

The Colombian soldiers continue to actively encourage the paramilitaries responsible for human rights violations and it is clear that the United States and Colombia have acted against the interests of the people.

I believe that this should have been part of the resolution.

The only group that wanted to address Plan Colombia and the whole human rights situation in Colombia was our own group.

That is really unfortunate and a gross abdication of our duty to people all over the world.

Mr President, when President Pastrana appeared before this Parliament he committed himself to working for peace in his country, but he forgot to mention three quite important issues.

Firstly, the high level of responsibility of the Government itself, which covers up violations of human rights, torture, kidnapping and murders committed by paramilitary groups in collusion with the army.

Secondly, that such serious problems as cocaine growing and violence can only be solved through peace talks with the FAR and the ELN.

And thirdly, that he was preparing Plan Colombia for military intervention in the area with the United States, going behind the backs of European and world opinion.

For these reasons, and given the danger represented by Plan Colombia of Latin America becoming another Vietnam, we need to act with three specific proposals.

Firstly, that any aid to Colombia from the European Union will be granted once a peace agreement has been signed between the Government, the FAR and the ELN.

Secondly, that the European Union must condemn Plan Colombia and demand that the solution to the conflict be a negotiated and peaceful one, in order to avoid this escalation of military action.

And thirdly, the European Union must demand that President Pastrana puts an end to all violations of human rights by paramilitary groups in his country, and that the sad world records of thousands of victims that are reached each year should come to an end.

Therefore, allow me to also add - as has already been said, but I think that it is worth saying it specifically - that the European Union should establish a human rights observatory in Latin America, associated with the United Nations observatory that already exists.

Because there are so many countries, but above all Colombia, that fail to guarantee respect for democracy and human rights, it is our responsibility to give adequate help to the region, which has such importance for us and for the world.

Mr President, could I say directly to Commissioner Nielson that I wrote to you on 18 August expressing my concern about the life and the plight of Father Brendan Forde, the Irish priest whose life is currently under threat in the complex political circumstances that pertain in Colombia.

Could I add to that the name of one young man born and raised in Ireland, Tristan James Murray, whose mother comes from my part of Ireland in Wexford, and his Colombian colleague, Javier Nova, young environmentalists missing since July.

We all have concerns that Plan Colombia might escalate the conflict and increase the influence of the guerrillas out there.

Please ensure that aid from the EU, and indeed American aid, is used as it should be used, not to increase the attacks by the militia against the peace communities in the name of trying to take out the guerrillas.

Father Forde is staying where he is because he is trying to protect his community.

His life has been threatened; he has been given twenty days to get out and the International Red Cross will support all we are saying about it.

We have to raise the international profile of all the people, including the communities whose lives are under threat and we trust Commissioner Nielsen you will do all you can for us.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, two minutes are hardly sufficient to relate the appalling figures which describe events in Columbia.

I will mention but a few, listed in the last e-mail I received from Amnesty International: 50 civilians were killed last month by paramilitaries; 400 civilian massacres took place during 1999; 3 500 victims of police crimes; 1 000 abductions; 250 000 Colombian civilians have been thrown out of their homes for political reasons.

In addition, there has been another massacre in the rural community La Unión, the third in three years.

We have a moral obligation to declare that this massacre was perfectly planned, that, nowadays, everything that happens in Columbia happens for a reason.

Wait for the next massacre in La Unión or another village to produce yet another resolution expressing our grief or, as some of the Members have suggested - and rightly so - make our voice heard, loud and clear?

In my opinion, Parliament must now find the courage to make its voice heard, for, to make reference to Amnesty International once again, all the parties taking part in the conflict are responsible for the violations of human rights in Columbia, but one of them - the paramilitaries - has a greater responsibility.

Indeed, the paramilitary groups are crushing the civilian population in a lethal vice.

As has been pointed out, President Pastrana appeared before this House and offered to make a substantial effort to bring all the parties to dialogue.

It is Parliament's responsibility to call for a system of rules and rights to be re-established, within the Colombian State, most importantly, as well as condemning the current situation in Columbia.

The paramilitaries act in agreement and in cahoots with the army, which in many cases - including this one - draw up the death lists.

To date, there has been no serious attempt to bring the heads of this alleged paramilitary army to justice - for example Carlos Castaños, who continues to broadcast his interviews on Colombian radio with impunity.

We therefore reiterate our support for a peaceful solution and, without hypocrisy, we call upon the Colombian Government to reflect upon the tragic actions of the paramilitaries.

Lastly, we call upon the Commission and the Member States to employ all the appropriate political resources to preserve the security of the civilian organisations involved in upholding human rights.

Mr President, as Manolo Medina said, once again we are talking about Colombia.

In this case, in order to ask for protection for the Irish Franciscan priest Brendan Forde and his colleagues.

However, the last time a human rights defender was assassinated in Colombia was in May.

25 human rights defenders have been assassinated in the past year and a half.

In recent years, 3 000 activists from Unión Patriótica have died.

Luis Guillermo Pérez, also a human rights defender, insists that there is a plan, called the Hundred plan, to assassinate up to one hundred human rights defenders.

I think that this is a catastrophe for Colombia.

Let us hope that this human rights defender is exaggerating.

But if what he says is true, it is a catastrophe for Colombia.

I think that the European Union should have its own initiative, its own strategy, separate from any military venture, as that of the United States appears to be, in order to make life more bearable for the people of Colombia.

Mr President, unfortunately, kidnappings in Sierra Leone are once again in the news.

This time it is the kidnapping of eleven British soldiers by the West Side Boys militia.

To this we must add the attacks carried out by this group of rebels with the aim of extending their area of influence, which have cost the lives of three members of the pro-governmental forces.

These are actions that the Group of the European People' s Party (Christian Democrats) and European Democrats strongly condemns and which the European Parliament should also condemn. At the same time, it should also demand the immediate and unconditional release of the soldiers who are being held hostage and show its support for the Government of Sierra Leone, and for the UNAMSIL and British army forces who are working to consolidate peace in that country.

It is still a precarious peace, which is demonstrated by this kidnapping.

That is why we cannot just stop at words of condemnation, but we must move on to action and also demand that the Lomé Peace Agreements are complied with and that all the militias are disarmed.

However, as long as poverty continues to rule in Sierra Leone, until the trafficking of diamonds is put to an end once and for all and the arms trade is ended, there will be no chance of peace for this tortured country.

The European Union must therefore use every means within its power, not only in order to help fund the peace process, but also, above all, in order to make it possible to establish living conditions that make peace irreversible.

We therefore need a generous and coordinated policy of development cooperation, especially in the field of education.

This is why a budgetary effort is being requested for this policy, as a policy that will contribute to ending the blight of poverty.

But, above all, we need decisive action on the part of the European Union, the Member States and the whole of the international community in order to put an end to diamond trafficking in the area.

As long as a country' s natural wealth is only benefiting warlords, that is, as long as diamonds enable the paramilitaries to have sufficient capital to provide themselves with arms and continue their activities, peace will be nothing more than an impossible dream.

Without peace, development will only be a Utopia.

Mr President, Commissioner, hearing these accounts of misery related each time we meet here in Strasbourg makes me wonder what we can actually do to help.

In Sierra Leone, not only are UN soldiers and British soldiers taken hostage, a complete nation has been held hostage for years We are accessories to this, if only through the diamond trade.

On 5 July, the Security Council instituted an embargo on diamonds from Sierra Leone.

The European Union should now pull out all the stops in order to make this embargo happen and to stop all trade in blood diamonds.

I believe that, for this reason, it is not sufficient to curb the diamond trade in Sierra Leone.

We should also continue to support the Government, but I also believe that support for the war tribunal is absolutely necessary.

We need to put an end to the immunity from punishment whereby people can use weapons to kill their fellow-citizens.

Mr President, of course I feel sympathy for the 12 British soldiers captured in Sierra Leone by one of the armed gangs plaguing the country.

They, too, are the victims of a policy whose main victim is the people of Sierra Leone.

But primarily, that policy is a result of government action, of the action of the UK Government supported by all the major western powers, especially France, and the UN.

I find it disgusting that the resolution makes no mention of the United Kingdom' s past and present role in that country.

After plundering and exploiting the region, that former colonial power rigged the elections and imposed a government that mainly represents its own interests.

Its machinations are one of the main contributing factors in a barbaric civil war in which it is implicated directly, by its diplomacy and by the naval pressure it is exerting, and indirectly by the behaviour on the ground of the troops of its former African colonies, which is just as dreadful as that of the armed gangs.

These armed gangs, including the RUF, certainly do not represent the interests of the people of Sierra Leone, in terms either of their methods or their objectives.

But, however great their responsibility for the misfortunes of their country, it does not match the cynicism of the British ministers and high dignitaries.

To conclude, we will vote against this resolution, which conceals a colonialist policy that is hardly in keeping with today' s world.

Mr President, I rather object to the efforts made earlier by the Spanish left to make political capital out of Gibraltar on the back of the tragedy of the Kursk.

HMS Tireless is safe in British territory and the repairs will be carried out to the highest safety standards.

On the subject of Sierra Leone, I further object to the statement by the previous speaker, but there is a wider point that I would like to make concerning the British Government's role.

We warned the British Labour Government months ago about the dangers of an open-ended commitment of British troops to Sierra Leone.

Our troops should have been given a clear and finite mission with a realistic exit strategy from the start.

The present unacceptable situation is a clear consequence of mission creep and political indecision and provides a clear lesson for the future.

Mr President, the situation in Sierra Leone has been the subject of our urgent debates on several occasions, and we have always dealt with it by encouraging peace talks, national reconciliation and aid for the displaced population, and by calling for an international criminal justice system that can try those responsible for the genocide that is being committed in that country.

Today, we are not faced with a merely political issue, but with a criminal act that falls under a criminal code.

We are talking about a kidnapping carried out by criminals who have no political links, either with the members of the former military junta or with any of the groups that signed the peace agreement in July 1999.

Their demands are limited to a request for a group of prisoners to be freed and for the revision of a peace agreement that is supposed to be putting back together a country that has been torn to pieces.

The victims of the kidnapping undoubtedly have a great deal of political significance.

The international presence in Sierra Leone is a good example of the perseverance on the part of the international community in seeking world peace.

Therefore, taking on that responsibility, we are in support of the European Parliament addressing the Government of Sierra Leone today and calling for the immediate and unconditional release of the British soldiers who have been taken hostage.

Turkish bombing in the north of Iraq

Mr President, this is a truly distressing affair.

Possibly the most important founding principle of the European Union was peace and those who seek to join the Union must try to conduct their domestic and their foreign affairs in as peaceable a fashion as possible.

Turkey, as we appreciate, suffers from an extremely vulnerable border and it is a particular problem for it to establish the requisite stability and peaceful circumstances that its integration to Europe properly requires.

As a part of the pre-accession phase of Turkey's candidacy, we should try to establish a functional forum where military as well as civilian and economic issues should be shared between us.

Turkey's membership of NATO presents many of our Member States with a special responsibility in this respect.

The development of a common European Security and Defence Policy should be seen as a pretext, and also as a bridge, for us to reach common positions on ways to combat terrorism while respecting fundamental rights.

If we are able to succeed in creating such a practical forum, we should be able to expect that this sort of sad critical incident will be put firmly in the past.

Mr President, Turkey is one of the NATO countries and is applying to join the European Union.

It has signed all kinds of international Treaties, including those protecting human rights, banishing torture, etc. Nevertheless, Turkey continues to bomb the Kurds who live outside its borders, in northern Iraq.

Commissioner, I think we should be quite plain about this.

Matters will never improve without a clear, political and peaceful solution to the Kurdish problem, and Turkey should realise this.

I believe that stabilisation - and we at least hope that peace in the Middle East is inching nearer day by day - will only happen if a solution is found to the Kurdish problem.

We naturally want to express our sympathy to the families hit by bombings, most recently in August, and we demand the greatest respect for international borders.

If this respect is not forthcoming, it will be a continual source of misery.

War will never lead to peace.

Mr President, the mother of a victim of the bombing who was interviewed on television asked "How is my child to blame?"

Why should women, children and defenceless civilians always be the victims of military action?

Over 32 people were killed and 40 were injured in the bombing of Kurdish villages by the Turkish military in Kendakor on 15 August.

This is a bloodbath and a crime against humanity.

It is a sign of the Turkish Government's attitude towards peace and towards the Kurds at a time when the Kurds had made a peaceful gesture.

As a spokesperson for the Turkish Ministry for Foreign Affairs has confirmed, Turkey from time to time carries out operations against the PKK, who have now, for the third time, declared a unilateral ceasefire.

I would like to know why arms are being delivered to Turkey right in the middle of the pre-accession process, and why arms factories are being built.

Why were the human rights organisations and World Peace Day banned on 1 September?

Is it really possible to accelerate the democratisation process using weapons and arms?

The best way to achieve peace is a peaceful solution of the Kurdish problem and respect for human rights.

Why is that mothers always have to suffer?

Can we not help to foster fellowship and peace between the Kurdish and Turkish peoples?

I welcome the MEDA programme, which states that all state, legal, political, cultural and social discrimination against the Kurdish population by the Turkish Government should cease.

Granting EU financial aid to Turkey should be tied to solving the Kurdish problem, and this aid should be devoted to overcoming the economic and social underdevelopment of the Kurdish region.

Bombing civilian populations should no longer be allowed in this century.

I wish to condemn this inhumanity and want to see an end to this crime. Those guilty of such crimes should be condemned.

I call on the Council and the Member States to consistently condemn the bombing of Kurdish villages and to make representations to the Turkish Government for them to start negotiations with the Kurds' democratic representatives for a political solution as soon as possible.

That is the fast track into the EU.

Mr President, this will be the third time that I have spoken in the House during this part-session on various aspects concerning Turkey and its relations with the European Union.

This will have given me an opportunity to address a number of points that I will be taking up in the report this Assembly has asked me to draw up on enlargement to Turkey and its accession to the EU.

I will not go back over that but I do want to give my opinion here.

If it turns out that the bombardment of Kendakor on 15 August was carried out by the Turkish army, we will have to encourage the Turkish Government gradually to reduce the role its armed forces continue to play, on the pretext of combating terrorism, in areas likely to cast serious doubt on the credibility of Turkey' s wish to join the European Union.

There seem to be signs that the fight against terrorism is being won and I sincerely believe that the time has come to take this kind of decision.

Simply because the military has that force, it cannot and must not, except in times of emergency, have the power of decision on the use of force.

My 40-year military career has fully persuaded me that cedant arma togae, let war yield to peace.

Mr President, the joint motion for a resolution on the Turkish bombing in the north of Iraq was tabled by five of the European Parliament' s political groups. That proves the importance our Parliament attaches to respect for international law and human rights in that part of the world and its extreme vigilance when a candidate country for EU membership, in this case Turkey, is concerned.

Indeed, we cannot allow northern Iraq, which is an area of limited sovereignty by virtue of international decisions, also to become an area outside the rule of law, an area where anything goes and where, on top of that, the presence of observers is entirely prohibited.

The legitimate fight against terrorism does not justify collective acts of punishment, victimising the Kurdish inhabitants of entire villages.

Disproportionate reprisals of that kind should be banished forever from the military arsenal of a civilised country.

Mr President, as my colleague Mrs Uca said, it is unacceptable for a country that wishes to become a member of the European Union to bombard defenceless people, kill more than 30 civilians and injure more than 40 people.

We think that the least that can be asked of a country, in these circumstances, is that it respects international law.

And of course, we also must condemn the hypocrisy of some Member States which, breaking the code of conduct for exporting arms to countries that could use them in the way that Turkey did in this particular case, export arms there.

We think it is hypocritical to condemn the event and then to send arms so that it can happen again.

We also feel that the European Union should monitor each of the candidate countries primarily with regard to human rights.

Otherwise, it is not acceptable for it to become a part of this Union.

Firstly, on the refugees in Nepal, the Commission fully shares the concern of the honourable Members about the state of the refugees living in the camps in eastern Nepal and, like them, is calling for an early and permanent solution.

New impetus and political will are needed from both sides to find an appropriate solution.

Above all, arrangements should be agreed for those who wish to go back to Bhutan voluntarily.

Technical solutions cannot be found unless the negotiators are firmly resolved to reach agreement.

The Commission acknowledges the results achieved by Mrs Ogata, the head of the UNHCR, for instance, when she visited Bhutan and Nepal last May, and the commitment of both sides to find a viable solution soon.

I have also talked to government representatives from both parties.

They also seem determined to find a solution.

Mrs Ogata's and the visit of a European Parliament delegation in April this year have been instrumental to genuine progress.

However, the Commission regrets that the formula for verification in the camps has not yet been agreed, despite recent expectations that an agreement would be found.

In its regular contacts with the Nepalese and Bhutanese authorities the Commission has invariably stressed that this problem must be dealt with as a matter of urgency.

The EC is a major donor of humanitarian aid to the refugees and to date has spent more than EUR 11 million.

The Commission has used every opportunity to urge both sides to achieve tangible results.

It has repeatedly stated its commitment to provide the necessary resources to facilitate reintegration and resettlement of the refugees once real progress has been made.

A number of EU Member States have made the same commitment.

In the current financial year the Commission will supply EUR 1.5 million in assistance to the camps via the UNHCR.

The risk that funds might run short should be avoided.

This is completely manageable, given the amounts involved.

It is our responsibility to prevent it.

The Commission is looking forward to assessing the results of the forthcoming discussion between the Prime Minister of Nepal, Mr Koirala, and the Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Bhutan, Mr Zimba, due to take place in the UN General Assembly on 11 September.

Moving on to the recent events in Burma, on 18 May the Commission deplored in this House the continued violation of human rights by the Burmese military machine.

We referred on that occasion to extrajudicial killings, the imposition of forced labour, the forced displacement of local populations, the repression of political opponents and the prevention of the full functioning of legitimate political parties.

We also condemned the restrictions on the freedom of movement of Aung San Suu Kyi and other members of the National League for Democracy and the routine practice of arbitrary arrests.

At the same time, the Commission expressed its support for the common EU position on Burma and for the decision of the April 2000 General Affairs Council to strengthen this common position.

We use every possible opportunity to press our Asian partners to urge the State Peace and Development Council to enter into a substantive dialogue with the democratically elected representatives and the ethnic minorities.

The aim must be to arrive at a mutually agreed solution to the present situation, re-establishing respect for international standards of human rights in Burma.

Several speakers this afternoon have mentioned tourism.

The EU has already clearly expressed its support for Aung San Suu Kyi's call on people from all civilised countries to refrain from tourist visits to Burma.

We encourage our citizens to respond accordingly.

The most recent developments in Rangoon provide perfect proof, if proof were needed, of the validity of our condemnation of the military regime's unacceptable practices.

The unwarranted seizure and subsequent detention of Aung San Suu Kyi and senior members of her party, together with local youth leaders, last Saturday, cannot in any way be justified by claims that they need 'protection' .

Nor can such treatment be justified by unsubstantiated allegations of conspiracy.

This was a simple exercise in thuggery by an administration acting in panic.

The Commission therefore joins its voice to the calls from all over the world for an immediate end to the house arrest of Aung San Suu Kyi and her senior colleagues, the immediate restoration of normal channels for diplomatic access to the leadership of the National League for Democracy, the immediate release of the local youth leaders currently held without charge, and an immediate end to the illegal surveillance of private telephone conversations by democratically elected political representatives in Burma.

On the human rights situation in Colombia, our attention has been drawn on a number of occasions to the murders of innocent civilians in Colombia.

Impunity for the perpetrators of such atrocities has almost been systematic.

We have also seen a dramatic increase in death threats against people providing assistance on the ground to more vulnerable groups.

For example, we have been informed that serious threats have been made against the Irish priest Brendan Forde, who is working in one of the regions most affected by violence.

The Commission deeply deplores and condemns this situation and calls all parties in the conflict to respect humanitarian law and principles.

The Commission also supports the peace efforts promoted by President Pastrana.

It will do anything in its power in order to promote support for lasting peace in the country.

As regards what has been said in the debate this afternoon, in my view more guns are not a shortcut to a solution for Colombia but will merely add to the problems.

The Commission fully shares Parliament's concerns over the recent kidnapping of eleven British soldiers in Sierra Leone.

We hope the ongoing efforts to secure the release of the remaining six soldiers are successful.

We would like to express our solidarity with the soldiers and their families.

The Commission is concerned that incidents like this and the abduction of UN personnel could hamper attempts to put the peace process back on track.

We would welcome any decision by the United Nations Security Council to strengthen the UN force in Sierra Leone.

The Security Council's resolution of 5 July this year banning the illicit trade in diamonds from Sierra Leone has now been transposed into Community law.

This ban, as well as the ban on arms sales to other groups which has been in force since 1997, must be strictly implemented.

The Commission calls on all parties concerned - and that, of course, also includes the diamond industry in Europe - to support the UN's sanctions committees in achieving this end.

The Commission remains supportive of the Government's attempts to restore peace to the country and to implement programmes of economic recovery.

With funds from the European Development Fund support is being provided to demobilise and reintegrate ex-combatants within the framework of a wider reconstruction and rehabilitation programme.

Economic recovery is being assisted through a EUR 8.2 million programme of budgetary support and a technical assistance programme supporting improved public financial management.

Within the next few weeks the Commission will be seeking approval for a rehabilitation and reintegration programme of EUR 30 million, a health sector support programme of EUR 28 million, a programme of post-conflict budget support of EUR 34.75 million and a support programme to the Ministry of Finance of EUR 4.5 million.

As regards humanitarian assistance, the Commission, through ECHO, is continuing to finance programmes in support of displaced and refugee communities through international NGOs and the UN.

Since the beginning of 1999 ECHO has provided some EUR 26 million of assistance covering the supply of medical aid, therapeutic feeding, water and sanitation and psycho-social support for children affected by war.

This is especially important, given the terrible situation for child soldiers and children in general in Sierra Leone.

In addition, this funding has specifically covered support for amputees and refugees and internally displaced populations.

As regards northern Iraq, the Commission shares the concern expressed in various draft resolutions about the latest operations by the Turkish Air Force and the resulting civilian casualties.

The Commission has noted that the Turkish Minister of Foreign Affairs is looking into the incident and into possible compensation.

The upheavals caused by each incursion of the Turkish military into Iraq undermine the efforts to stabilise the area and inflict unnecessary suffering on the Kurdish population.

What is needed for a return to normal life in the area is stability, peace and support for economic development.

Over the past few years, the Union has repeatedly stressed the need to respect the integrity of Iraq and its border with Turkey.

These latest border violations again do not solve the problems in Turkey, or anywhere else.

In our view, a peaceful dialogue between the parties is the only viable path to lasting stability in the area.

I have noted carefully what Members of this House have said this afternoon about their expectations in relation to Turkey, not least regarding its future place in European cooperation, and I certainly share their views.

Mr President, I would like to say that, with regard to the situation in Colombia, we put a question to the Commissioner, who answered that the Commission supports the peace efforts being made by President Pastrana.

I asked him whether the Commission would complement this rhetorical support with any kind of support that did not just consist of words.

I realise that this is perhaps not the time to discuss this, but I would like the Commission to answer us, even if it is in writing.

I will be happy to augment what I am saying now by more thorough comments in writing.

My immediate response is that we have to be careful, to put it plainly and directly, not to be cast in a role as simply providing funding for activities that we may not agree with 100%.

We also have to take care to be sufficiently focused on poverty and doing something that really is to the benefit of the most disadvantaged groups.

So what we are doing now and what we will do in the future, financially speaking, in Colombia, will have to be tailored very carefully against that background.

The vote will take place tomorrow at 5.30 p.m.

The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolution:

B5-0708/2000 by Mrs McNally and others, on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists, on the Czech nuclear power plant in Temelín;

B5-0723/2000 by Mr Flemming and Mr Chichester, on behalf of the Group of the European People' s Party (Christian Democrats), on the Temelín reactor;

B5-0732/2000 by Mr Echerer and others, on behalf of the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance, on the nuclear power plant in Temelín;

B5-0745/2000 by Mr Papayannakis and Mr Sjöstedt, on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left/Nordic Green Left, on the nuclear power plant in Temelín.

Mr President, I am taking the place of Mrs McNally who has had to go back to the United Kingdom this afternoon.

The European Union with the support of this Parliament has already done much to raise the technical and operational safety of Soviet-type nuclear reactors and to create independent regulators.

As I understand it, what is being done at Temelín has already been done in Finland and there is similar upgrading work in hand at Kozloduy in Bulgaria with the support of a Euratom loan.

What I would like the Commission to confirm, if possible, is if the work at Temelín follows the recommendations of twelve inspections by the International Atomic Energy Agency and that it will, in fact, create safety standards equivalent to those in our Member States.

That is the assurance, or reassurance, that the public in the European Union requires.

We have had many messages from the Czech authorities this week.

They claim that most of the actions which we request in this resolution have already been carried out and that the remainder are, in fact, under way.

Is the Commission in a position to confirm that this afternoon, and if not, will it undertake to supply its views on this matter with urgency to the Industry Committee of the European Parliament?

Mr President, many EU Member States have a very friendly relationship with the Czech Republic, and even one based on family ties.

But I believe that in a good family you can also say things that do not suit other members of the family.

Nuclear power stations in the European Union have the highest safety standards in the world, and a candidate country that wants to commission a new nuclear power station must, of course, comply with those standards.

It is right to say that evaluating safety standards at Temelín is a matter for the Czech nuclear regulatory authority.

But it is also true to say that during the accession partnership with the Czech Republic, the Commission has identified the implementation of Community legislation on environmental impact assessment as a priority, partly because of Temelín.

Nevertheless, although the Czech Republic signed the agreement on cross-border EIA, the Espoo Convention, in 1993, it has still not ratified it.

Now, all of a sudden, trial operation is to start at Temelín, with undue haste and in a few days' time, before Germany and Austria, which are neighbouring countries, have received the information requested and before the deeply concerned population of the neighbouring countries has had an opportunity to consider the position and make their objections known to the Czech authorities.

That is what the Espoo Convention stipulates, and it is, after all, valid EU legislation.

I call on the Czech Government, indeed I implore it, to take seriously the fears not only of people in neighbouring countries, but also within its own borders.

The reactors at Temelín are a Soviet design, VVER1000, and there is nothing Westinghouse can do about that.

I appeal once again to the Czech Government to act voluntarily now in just the same way as they would have to act if they already belonged to the European Union and were a member of our great European family.

Mr President, I would first like to thank my colleagues for their constructive and objective cooperation, which has resulted in this joint motion for a resolution.

In the course of 13 project modifications, environmental impact assessment has been simply disregarded.

As Mrs Flemming said, it is a long time since the Espoo Convention was signed.

It should have been ratified by the Czech Parliament at the beginning of the year and transposed into national law, but this has been indefinitely delayed without any reasons being given.

Despite this, the constant concerns about safety expressed by the public, in the press and also in private discussions are not being taken seriously.

During the last bilateral meetings between Czech, Austrian and German experts on 2 and 5 September this year, it was once again stated that Temelín does not meet German safety standards and would not, therefore, receive an operating licence in Germany.

My fourth point is that electricity from Temelín is not intended for internal consumption: it is intended for export, and at dumping prices at that.

Fifthly, the safety of European citizens is at stake here and our responsibility towards them should be adequate grounds for action.

The Commission says that we do not have any legal options here.

Well, the Commission has known that for a long time.

Did the Commission expect that somebody would just pull a legal measure out of the hat?

I expect that the Greens' view will be the well-established one that safety and nuclear power stations are two incompatible concepts.The fact of the matter is that there are eastern European nuclear power stations and western European nuclear power stations.

Double standards are being applied here, and that must stop.

Our friends in the Commission have to accept that you cannot use legal measures alone to solve every single problem.

I therefore expect the Commission and the Council to demonstrate together the same strong and combined political will that the European Parliament is displaying with this motion for a resolution.

I would like to comment on the Technical Group of Independent Members' amendment, which does not include any sensible or new requirements apart from a hint at compromise.

I cannot vote for this policy.

It is simply populist to gloss over the long-standing failure or lack of interest on the part of politicians towards this issue by threatening a veto - it will not have the desired effect and it will not create a constructive basis for negotiations.

The safety of Europe's citizens and, thus, confidence in the Community should be a priority for us all.

Our motion for a resolution is enormously important for the people of Europe and above all for the Czech public.

I hope that we will not disappoint them.

Mr President, this issue should not even be a subject of urgent debate.

I deplore the cynical Green exploitation and misrepresentation of the situation.

Interference in the internal affairs of a candidate country with the political blackmail of a threat to veto accession to the EU is wholly unacceptable.

I regret that people in Austria have allowed themselves to be ruled by emotion, not rational scientific argument.

The Czechs show every sign of behaving responsibly and properly according to internationally accepted standards, and we should leave them to get on with it.

Although I signed the joint motion as instructed by my political group, I intend to vote against this resolution.

Mr President, as the third Austrian to speak, I was starting to worry that I would have nothing to add.

But having heard Mr Chichester, I think it is worth reiterating that we have to pay serious attention to the wishes and concerns of the people of Europe, and of Austria in particular, as regards nuclear energy. This applies especially to the Temelín nuclear power station.

My group is supporting this motion for a resolution on Temelín for reasons of principle, because we take the people's concerns seriously and because many of us have, for a long time, been actively fighting against nuclear energy in the East and in the West.

The political battle against the Zwentendorf nuclear power station in Austria has had an enduring formative influence on me personally, so I did not need to be convinced by the conservative arguments in the Austrian media over the last few days which I have followed with surprise and sometimes with quiet amusement.

Like Mrs Echerer, I oppose the single, very vaguely worded amendment, because I believe that the phrase 'high level' does not mean anything, because the Czech Republic itself is surely aware of the need for a high level of safety.

I therefore fully support the motion for a resolution before us and oppose the amendment.

Mr President, I should like to confess to the Members of this Chamber that I feel rather ambivalent about this issue.

On the one hand, I am an old opponent of nuclear power and have for many years been a member of the board of the Swedish Nuclear Power Inspectorate. On the other hand, I am chairman of the Delegation to the Joint EU-Czech Republic Parliamentary Committee.

I should therefore quickly like to say three things.

First of all: concern about nuclear power means that safety will not only be good but that it will, at all times, be as good as it possibly can be.

Secondly, the same rules naturally apply to the Czech Republic as apply to other candidate States and, in the long run, to Member States.

Thirdly, this resolution ought to be seen as part of an open dialogue with the Czech Republic, a dialogue we are conducting within the framework of the Joint Parliamentary Committee but which ought also to be possible to conduct in our respective parliaments.

We must broaden out this debate, which is part and parcel of our democracy.

This ought not, however, to lead to hard feelings between the Czech Republic and the Member States of the EU.

I hope that the Czechs are able to give positive answers to all the questions and that a favourable solution can in that way be found to this problem.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, you would think that we would all have learnt some lessons from the accident at the Chernobyl reactor.

In that case, the radiation was not confined to the Ukraine, nor was it simply a bilateral problem.

I know that there are both advocates and opponents of nuclear power in the European Union, and that there is no common line.

And, above all, there are no uniform safety standards for nuclear power stations.

There is an urgent need for action here if our credibility is to be maintained.

However, after the Chernobyl experience we have to ask if it really is possible to bring a nuclear power plant, Temelín, on line in the heart of Europe when it still has significant limitations in terms of safety.

The Czech Republic is trying to present us with a fait accompli in commissioning Temelín.

If you will forgive my saying so, this sort of behaviour falls far short of a spirit of partnership.

Edmund Stoiber was quite right when he said today that it is a matter of following the house rules.

A resolution was adopted in the Austrian Parliament this Tuesday by all the parties - all the parties, mark you - emphasising that approval could only be given to the completion of the accession negotiations if the Temelín plant is retrofitted.

I wish to make one thing quite clear: we support the accession of the Czech Republic to the EU.

But the conditions must be right.

I call on you to support our motion for a resolution, the content of which is identical to the four-party resolution adopted in the Austrian Parliament.

After all, it must be our objective for nuclear power stations to have the highest possible safety standards.

Mr President, I shall also be voting for this resolution, which I consider to be reasonable.

If it can help to defuse the battle of words between the two sides somewhat, than it will certainly have served its purpose.

I regret that the Czech Republic is unable to defend itself here and present its case, as it is always good to hear both sides of such a complicated argument.

However, in the same spirit of openness I would also like to say that I do not think it is right for the Austrian Government and Parliament to be delivering a kind of ultimatum here.

That is not the way we have handled these things in the European Union up to now.

It is quite evident that there is a problem, but if we start issuing ultimatums then the next thing will be that a delegation will arrive representing displaced persons and demand that the Czech Republic can only join the Union if the Benesch Decrees are withdrawn.

And then some other group will come along demanding something else.

You have to be careful with ultimatums like this.

There are other ways of solving such problems.

But I would also like to suggest to the Czech Republic that they should pay serious attention to the concerns expressed by the German Association for Nuclear Safety.

That was another point I wanted to make.

My last, but important point, is one for the Commission.

We hear a lot about environmental impact, and that is fine.

But we also have the Euratom Treaty.

Article 37 of that Treaty effectively stipulates that the Commission must be kept informed about any plan for the disposal of radioactive waste in any form whatsoever.

The Commission also has to determine whether the implementation of such a plan is liable to result in the radioactive contamination of the water, soil or airspace of another Member State.

I know that the Czech Republic does not yet belong to the European Union.

Nevertheless, I would be interested to know what the Commission's view is in relation to this article, and whether it considers that the Czech Republic has respected it.

It would be interesting, as Gordon Adam has already asked, to know what its view is on the environmental impact assessment.

Mr President, Mr Linkohr's comments are not quite correct.

I will gladly let you see the text approved by the Austrian Parliament.

It does not contain any kind of ultimatum or any hint of blackmail, and I, too, have made it quite clear now that we cannot and certainly do not want to compel anyone to do anything.

We request, we appeal to the Czech Government to act in accordance with current European law and quite simply to observe the Espoo Convention, even if they have not ratified it yet.

The Commission has been following the political debate on the Temelín nuclear power plant with great attention.

It has repeatedly stressed the importance of candidate countries adhering to a high level of nuclear safety in line with relevant Council resolutions.

The Commission is actively participating in the deliberations of the Council aimed at assessing and ensuring a high level of nuclear safety in candidate countries as a key requirement for accession to the European Union.

The responsibility for licensing nuclear installations lies with the Czech nuclear regulatory authority.

The Commission has cooperated with the Czech authorities in order to reinforce the authority's capacities.

The Czech authorities have ensured that the operating licence for Unit 1 of the Temelín nuclear power plant will not be issued until all outstanding problems are solved to the satisfaction of the nuclear regulatory authority.

According to current Czech legislation, an environmental impact assessment is required before the operating licence is issued.

The Commission expects this provision to be enforced by the Czech authorities.

Mr Adams asks whether the Czechs took account of the IAEA's inspections and views.

The IAEA has reviewed the modifications made to the safety systems by the Czechs following the IAEA's programmes.

The IAEA concluded that the issues were properly addressed by the Czechs.

That is the information I am able to supply on this subject.

The vote will take place in a few minutes' time, at 5.30 p.m.

The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolution:

B5-0703/2000 by Mrs Malliori and others, on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists, on the forest fires in Europe;

B5-0724/2000 by Mr Hatzidakis and others, on behalf of the Group of the European People' s Party (Christian Democrats) and European Democrats, on the fires in the south of the European Union;

B5-0723/2000 by Mrs Isler Béguin and Mrs Frassoni, on behalf of the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance, on the forest fires in Europe;

B5-0737/2000 by Mrs Muscardini and others, on behalf of the Union for Europe of the Nations Group, on the fires in Europe;

B5-0746/2000 by Mrs Ainardi and others, on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left/Nordic Green Left, on the fires in the Mediterranean regions;

B5-0747/2000 by Mr Korakas and others, on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left/Nordic Green Left, on the fires in Greece.

Mr President, the fires which again destroyed huge tracts of forest in the Mediterranean this summer are mainly the result of the rise in temperature and prolonged dry weather, not to mention of course criminal cases of arson.

Climatic changes, which are happening more and more rapidly, impact on the entire ecosystem.

Scientists have pointed out the risks inherent in our inconsiderate treatment of the planet, one of the results of which is extreme meteorological phenomena.

Southern Europe has been set alight more and more frequently over recent years.

The Mediterranean has become a high risk area and needs special measures.

In my country, Greece, more than 500 fires broke out this year, most of which were dealt with minimal disruption.

However, there were, unfortunately, also occasions on which the fires got out of control, causing death and destruction.

I should like to express my sympathy to the families of the victims and the injured in all the countries which faced similar problems.

I think, Mr President, that a European strategy on the conservation of forests is our political responsibility and an immediate priority.

I also think it essential that we reinstate the budget line for natural disasters.

The Commission should exert its influence to ensure that Member States introduce stricter legislation on changes of land use, compulsory reforestation following fires, suitable training on fire-fighting for those in positions of local and regional responsibility and a public awareness campaign on the benefits of forests and how they can be protected and to encourage volunteers fire-fighters.

Mr President, every September we return to the House and take tragic stock of the number of victims and the extent of the damage to forests as the result of fires.

The fires are, of course, the result of climatic changes and the weather which prevails in the Mediterranean during the summer; they are also the result of criminal offences. There may also be other causes, such as refuse tips and, of course, the lack of certain administrative structures, especially the lack of an overall, coordinated approach to fires, exacerbates the damage which they cause.

So what proposals can we make?

First and foremost, both the Member States and the Commission need to update the regional development programmes and action to prevent, restore and reforest.

They could use the Interreg Community initiative, for example.

Similarly, forest registers are desperately needed; this will help to protect and recover our ecological heritage and fight land speculation.

However, what we need is coordination and cooperation at European level and I call on the Commission to propose that a European fire prevention centre be set up in order to conduct systematic studies and introduce new technical methods to prevent and fight fires.

And to go one step further: the time has come for the Commission to draw up an integrated defence strategy to coordinate national action and measures against natural and man-made disasters, in line, of course, with the principle of subsidiarity.

I trust that these proposals will elicit a positive response from the Commission so that we can protect our forests more efficiently.

Mr President, indeed, like a chronic recurrent disease, the summer of 2000 will once again have suffered the ravages of fires raging through millions of hectares in our country and our continent and even causing the tragic death of a number of firemen and local residents.

This scourge is the result of criminal action: the blame lies with irresponsible arsonists who should face deterrent penalties, and with unscrupulous developers prepared to use any means possible to get hold of land on which building is forbidden, who ought to be deterred by a whole range of legal means to prosecute them.

But there are also other reasons for this affliction: they include the lack of any inventories of economic activities, such as agro-pastoral activities in Corsica, and the lack of any real approach, on the basis of geographical databases, to a kind of rural planning that makes the most of natural resources and reduces the risk of fires spreading.

Lastly, and above all, there is the lack of any genuine environmental education that goes well beyond the necessary prevention and awareness-raising campaigns.

So this summer epidemic is curable, Mr President.

It is vital to bring a new balance into some of the land-use policies, such as stock farming in Corsica, and to allocate subsidies on the basis of economic and preventive factors.

These upstream provisions cannot replace the need for downstream investment in adequate fire-fighting equipment in sufficient quantity to be deployed in all the EU countries.

The citizens concerned are counting on the Commission to take practical action.

Mr President, this year, the fires in the Mediterranean, and in Greece in particular, broke all previous records.

I believe that the area destroyed by the fires was twice as large as at any other time and a great many people were killed despite the fact, of course, that the Greek Government was well prepared and despite the fact that Greece now has some of the best fire-fighting equipment, aeroplanes and human resources in the world.

What it has proved is that reaction is not enough.

That is what we all say, but none of us does anything.

It is a complicated issue and, of course, it concerns local authorities and the national government.

What can the European Union do?

What it can do, Mr President, is to apply a more active basic policy with more coordination and increased intervention. It can examine the weaknesses of the common agricultural policy, which to all intents and purposes destroys the motivation of people living in and from forests and drives them away.

The common agricultural policy subsidises pasturing on burnt ground, subsidises animals which graze on burnt ground, at the same time as our forests are trying to reproduce naturally.

The European Union should also, of course, review its approach to and priorities for investments.

We have been crying for a land register for a long time now, especially a forest register and forest maps, which need to be supported as a matter of priority over everything else and, of course, any other development and investment measures which boost the development of forests as forests rather than a commodity and which enable people who live off the forest to stay there.

That is the best form of prevention and the best form of protection.

Of course we shall still have fires and, with what is happening to the climate, we shall no doubt be unfortunate enough to witness more and more serious phenomena.

But it is in our hands to try and do what we can to forestall the known causes at least.

Mr President, Portugal has also been affected by these tragic forest fires which have been the result either of natural causes or of criminal acts motivated by base economic interests.

We know that this matter is primarily the responsibility of the Member States, which need to organise themselves and build up their own control and prevention resources.

We also know that they should give priority to actions of this kind, and to national afforestation projects, under their national regional development programmes.

It is also necessary, however, to back a European forest strategy with technical and financial resources in order to strengthen and complement national resources.

With this in mind, I would like to highlight the proposal contained in paragraph 12 of our resolution, which aims to create a European Fire Prevention Centre, and I would like to take the liberty of suggesting that it should be located in Portugal.

The Commission deeply regrets the loss of human life as well as the ecological and economic damage caused by the recent forest fires in Europe.

The principle of subsidiarity has been mentioned in this debate.

We have to avoid raising too many expectations and overloading the Commission with tasks.

We must be careful not to promise things we cannot deliver.

Frankly, there has been enough of that in the past.

We should be careful, when entering into discussions such as this, not to automatically assume that the Commission will solve the problem.

We can and should do something, but I wanted to make that cautionary remark.

To get to the core of this discussion, the question of an emergency aid budget line, the Commission is considering proposing a legal basis for such a line at the moment.

However, the Commission might consider financial support for the restoration of the forestry production potential on the basis of the rural development regulation, No 1257/1999.

According to the Greek authorities, the financial contributions from the agricultural funds are not sufficient for a substantial contribution to be made to the restoration work.

The Commission therefore invites the Greek authorities to present proposals for the amendment of the development programme so that the necessary appropriations can be considered.

I should like to draw your attention to EC Regulation No 2158/1992, under which preventive action in relation to forest fires may be financed.

Each Member State should verify that all the necessary steps have been taken to reduce the risk of fires to a minimum.

New Commission initiatives are already in effect, or will shortly become effective.

A proposal for a Council decision establishing a Community mechanism for the coordination of emergency civil protection action will be considered by the college in the near future.

This will aim to improve the mutual assistance between Member States.

It will also have an important side effect in that it will help third countries to manage unexpected emergencies or disasters they would not be able to handle by themselves.

Through this coordination mechanism Member States will be invited to identify groups which can intervene at short notice at the scene.

The Commission recently initiated a satellite-based project to improve information on operational fire fighting centres in the Mediterranean region, with the aim of determining the levels of risk from day to day.

We will consider whether this could lead to a system for early detection of forest fires.

The Commission is also encouraging Member States to reinforce their intervention capacities.

The Regional Fund and the Cohesion Fund have already contributed substantially in the period 1994-99.

The national authorities should provide for the necessary financial resources to consolidate this action for the period 2000-06.

In general, the decision on the acquisition of such fire-fighting equipment will remain the responsibility of the Member States.

Self-tuition workshops on fighting forest fires are also planned.

However the Commission does not have enough resources to extend its activities beyond that.

The Structural Funds can be used for restoration after natural disasters and advantage has been taken of this possibility in recent years.

Mr President, like some other Members of the House, I have just been alerted to developments in the situation in northern Afghanistan where, after two months of relentless offensives, the Taliban apparently took the town of Taloqan last night, with a heavy toll of military and civilian victims.

It is obviously too late to table an urgent resolution on this issue. But I would ask you, Mr President, to forward to the Conference of Presidents a request that the Council and the Commission make a statement to the House at our forthcoming mini-session in Brussels on what action the European Union could envisage to help find a political solution in Afghanistan and put an end to these senseless bloodbaths.

Thank you very much, Mr Morillon, we will pass on that request.

Mr President, I would like to support Mr Morillon's suggestion.

I would like to emphasise - and I am now speaking on behalf of my group also - that we consider the Council Declaration on this subject to be very important, and I request you to forward it to the Conference of Presidents.

I will gladly do that, Mr Sakellariou

Mr President, following the vote, I would like to ask the Chairman of the Committee on Budgets to tell us whether he has at his disposal the appropriations called for in paragraphs 12 and 14 of the motion for a resolution on fires in Europe for which we have just voted.

Mr President, this shows the folly of making policy on the hoof.

This has never gone through any committee.

There have been requests for money, which does not exist and no one has said where it is going to come from.

It is an urgency which has been voted by this Parliament - so be it, but it is quite ludicrous.

I got the message very well, Mr Wynn.

Situation in Fiji following the coup d'état

The next item is the Commission statement on the situation in Fiji following the coup d'état.

The release of the hostages on 13 July, the arrest of the rebel leader and his main associates on 26 July and the efforts of the Government to reinstate law and order give some cause for satisfaction.

However, there are still serious worries about the future of Fiji.

First and foremost, the use of violence by certain ethnic groupings to impose their rule on other communities is unacceptable.

Secondly, a democratic government must be re-established.

The present interim government has no democratic basis.

There should be a clear blue-print for full restoration of democratic principles and practices.

The 1997 Constitution, which lays down the principle of equal rights for all Fijian citizens, must be reinstated.

This process should be finalised very quickly.

The time-frame currently being proposed, two or three years, is far too long.

The fundamental ethnic antagonism in Fiji must be resolved.

Multiracial cooperation and harmony must become a reality.

If we are to be realistic, we must support every possible step on the way to stability without losing sight of the scenario I have just outlined.

The international community and the donors of aid to Fiji agree on these principles.

As far as the EU is concerned, the Council has informed the Fijians of its request to begin consultations under Article 366 of the Lomé Convention, which calls for a thorough examination of the situation on the basis of information to be supplied by the Fijians.

Further input will be provided by the report of an ACP ministerial fact-finding mission to Fiji which took place in mid-August and which was led by the Foreign Minister of Papua New Guinea.

Furthermore, the Commission received first-hand information from the legitimate Prime Minister, Mr Chaudhry on 31 August.

We are now at the beginning of the consultations.

Measures under Article 366 will be taken if the consultations fail to produce an acceptable solution for both sides in the discussions.

All that can be said at present is that the measures, if any, should not harm the poor and those already suffering from the severe economic crisis triggered by the events.

In conclusion, I hope that the coordinated effort of the international donor community will have the desired effect on the current government in Fiji.

Even if we achieve our aim of restoring democratic principles and a government chosen in fair and equal elections within less than two years, this will be only a first step for the solution of the Fijian problem.

A strong long-term effort is required from all parties and, in the first instance, from the Fijian Government and the communities, to work on the entrenched prejudices and anxieties so that racial cooperation and harmony can be restored and become a reality in Fiji.

This is absolutely essential and there are no alternatives to that reality.

Mr President, the events that have unfolded in Fiji over the past few months seem to be taken straight from a soap opera.

Unfortunately, they are for real. What is more, Fiji is an ACP country which enjoys considerable benefits thanks to the sugar protocol with the European Union.

It is almost ironic that the new partnership deal, which considers democracy to be of paramount importance, was signed in Fiji at a time when that country was hit by a coup d' état.

It illustrates, once again, how fragile democracy is, even in regions where it seemed to be an established value.

But the Fiji story is more complicated than that.

There is a delicate balance of power between the indigenous population and the population of Indian origin, who make up 44% of the population.

The army plays a dubious role.

The attacks on Indian properties could apparently take place undisturbed and without any intervention by the body of officials responsible for order. In fact, certain elements within the army openly chose the side of the army taking part in the coup.

There are the recent revelations about the role of Mr Speight in the lucrative timber industry, which put the whole matter in a completely new light.

According to recent information, he was apparently discharged as chairman of the state enterprise which manages mahogany plantations, and earlier in the year, he was in danger of missing out on a major contract for the development of hardwood.

All this seems to suggest that personal and economic, rather than political, interests were behind the coup.

Be that as it may, Speight' s undemocratic behaviour has plunged a whole country into a deep political and economic crisis.

Tourism, which represented one third of the gross domestic product, has dropped to less than one fifth.

Ethnic tension is once again mounting.

Thousands of inhabitants of Indian origin are still on the run, and the events in Fiji are also prejudicing the promising dynamic in the region which was to culminate in the Pacific Regional Trade Agreement.

The European Parliament which, in its agreements with the ACP partners, makes strict demands regarding democracy and human rights, can and must condemn such a course of events.

We need to continue to demand that the safety of all citizens be guaranteed and that any form of ethnic division and provocation be penalised.

Speight should not be let off the hook.

Above all, we must work towards the return of true democracy within the meaning of the 1997 Constitution, which guarantees equal rights to all inhabitants of Fiji, and it is true that elections must be called as soon as possible.

A three-year transitional period is not acceptable.

If the interim government fails to restore democratic order within a reasonable period of time, sanctions must be considered, preferably 'smart' sanctions, and structural aid must be suspended.

Consultations on this matter will be starting in September.

I do hope that the Commission will stick to its principles and will not succumb to political or economic pressure.

As we are about to embark on a new major partnership agreement between Europe and its partners in the ACP, it is of paramount importance not to create a precedent.

Mr President, I generally welcome the comments both of the previous speaker and Commissioner Nielson who made a statement on behalf of the Commission.

I am not as convinced as he is that the violence is actually over in Fiji.

I had the opportunity last week, along with a number of colleagues from various parties and groups here, to meet with Prime Minister Mahendra Chaudhry who reported to us that violence against the Indo-Fijians is still continuing in Fiji.

Secondly, I disagree that there is a fundamental ethnic antagonism in Fiji.

It seems to me, if one looks at the origin of the coup d'état, that one should follow the money rather than the ethnic relations.

I welcome the fact that Article 366 of the Lomé Convention has been invoked.

If we look back at the history of what has happened in Fiji, we see a sweeping electoral victory by the Fijian Labour Party in the May 1999 General Election when they won, with their supporting parties, 58 out of the 71 seats, ousting the incumbent right-wing government.

Following that, there has been a systematic attempt to destabilise the new government led by elements of the former governing party and extreme nationalist gangs under the flimsy pretext of protecting indigenous interests.

It is interesting that, although Mahendra Chaudhry is an Indo-Fijian, twelve out of the 18 members of his cabinet are, as it were, indigenous Fijians and a majority of indigenous Fijian MPs actually supported the Government.

The destabilisation operation was financed by sections of private enterprise, frightened by the government's radical programme of social reform and poverty alleviation and by its close association with the trade union movement.

This financing was led by corporate groups bidding for the right to exploit mahogany and native hardwood forestry.

The police and the military singularly failed to protect and defend the government.

Alongside George Speight and his gang, when the people's coalition government were taken hostage on 19 May, were members of the armed forces' counter-revolutionary warfare unit.

What has happened in Fiji is nothing less than a coup d'état by the military industrial complex.

In fact, it is another Chile written small.

As a result, the 1997 Constitution has been ripped up.

A government has been imposed in power by the military that it is effectively controlled by those supporting the coup and the military is trying to offload the blame by prosecuting one small section of those involved, namely the gang around George Speight

I believe Parliament, the Commission and the Council of Ministers must back the proposals by the Labour led people's coalition for reinstatement of the 1997 Constitution and, in the spirit of national conciliation, for the formation of a grand coalition for the government in Fiji.

Unless this is achieved, unless the slide towards a form of apartheid in Fiji, where Indo-Fijians who comprise nearly half the population are rapidly becoming second-class citizens, driven from their homes and jobs, is stopped, then we should demand support for sanctions against the current government.

We should support the moves by Premier Helen Clark from New Zealand for a concerted action at bilateral, regional and global levels, which should include, as Mr Van Hecke said, 'smart' sanctions targeted at those involved in the coups, denying them the freedom to travel, freezing foreign assets and threatening them when they are apprehended with the consequences of the UN Hostage Convention.

Second, Fiji should be banned from all international sporting and cultural events.

Third, there should be a denial of all economic and military assistance to and through the present government.

The issue of Fiji is important, not only in its own right, but because it will set a precedent as to whether semi-clandestine coups-in-waiting along similar lines will see the light of day and whether Europe and the rest of the developed world is prepared to tackle the issue of indigenous rights - the Third World's variant of the racism that is threatening us all.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, the coup in Fiji in May of this year was not the first one. It was preceded by one in 1987 which resulted in exclusion from the Commonwealth.

This does lead me to believe that the tension, possibly ethnic in origin, must go far deeper than we might like to think. Then too, tension between the indigenous people of Fiji and Indo-Fijians was at the root of the problem and, needless to say, with Indo-Fijians accounting for 44% of the population and the indigenous people accounting for 64%, two peoples of more or less the same size are involved.

I can imagine that the removal of prejudice, as you referred to earlier Commissioner, is not a matter of course in such situations.

Moreover, unemployment promotes tension, and the legally elected government was driven out by the military coup.

What concerns me more than anything is that this conflict could spread to other islands with similar problems and similar tensions.

This is, in fact, the opposite of what we have in mind and to which reference has already been made: the establishment of a great Pacific Regional Trade Agreement between 14 nations.

If we are not careful, this will be the first major conflict in the Pacific and this may well affect the situation in the region for a few decades to come.

All this makes me wonder whether this coup is merely the thin end of the wedge.

It also makes me wonder what the European Union' s prevention policy actually consists of.

What can be done in order to put such a country back on the road towards being a democratic, constitutional state, no longer in a crisis situation and with the guilty parties brought to justice, as has been requested with good reason?

We should also press for the safety of all citizens - this seems basic to me, especially in a country where thousands of people are on the run in their own country - as well as for a parliament which should be re-convened this autumn, and for a democratically elected government.

Some of our motions for resolution also include the requirement that the opposition should take part in the government. This, of course, presupposes an agreement, which has not been concluded since the multi-racial constitution of 1997, which was seemingly approved by everyone at the time but which cannot, however, be applied in practice.

The European Union is Fiji' s key trading partner and provider of aid. How can we translate this role into effective peace mediation?

Could we not appoint a genuine mediator or mediating body in consultation with the UN and the Commonwealth?

The Kotonu conventions provide for a partnership for development and peace, and the Lomé conventions also provide for procedures, especially Article 366, which has already been referred to.

These procedures should be applied with due care, intelligence and maturity.

We invite the Commission to come back before the end of the year to report on the developments in Fiji and the region as a whole and on the efforts which the European Union has made.

Mr President, the events of the past few months in Fiji are not an isolated incident.

They are more than the sum-total of a crazed, racist businessman, a disloyal army, the interests of timber merchants, and politicians who accept that the democratically enacted constitution has been invalidated.

The events have everything to do with the relationship between people and state in general and with the history of Fiji and the composition of its population in particular.

European colonialism caused workers from other parts of the then British colonial empire to move to Fiji, as a result of which the 44% of people of Indian origin have now started to form a near-majority of the population.

The original Fijian population has never had a say in the matter but has meanwhile been faced with the reality that the composition of the population has changed beyond recognition.

Descendants of those newcomers rightly feel that they are a part of the established population of the group of islands, with equal rights, whilst a large section of the original population still struggles to come to terms with this new status quo.

The situation is in many ways comparable to that in Surinam, Guyana, Trinidad and South Africa.

Indeed, European colonialism brought peoples of very different origins together in those regions too.

The peoples involved had nothing in common in terms of language, culture and religion and there are also striking differences in their appearance.

They very often live as closed groups juxtaposed to one another within the same territory, but largely in separate settlements and urban areas.

In these countries, there have often been harsh clashes between these peoples.

Sometimes, part of such a group believes it is superior, but often the clashes are about the ruthless protection of interests and the distribution of goods in short supply among competing groups.

These competitors need the same land, the same jobs and the same houses, whilst everything is in short supply.

In South Africa, this situation even led to an atrocious system of inequality and oppression, referred to as apartheid.

Meanwhile, the people of such countries have come to the conclusion that all people are equal and that they have no choice other than to join forces.

But this does not take away the fact that closed groups continue to live side by side without real integration.

Politicians and adventurers who wish to set peoples against each other still have plenty of scope.

That is the key difference compared with the current states in Europe.

The latter are generally united with one people, one common history, one language and more or less one culture.

This is true of old countries, such as the Netherlands, Denmark and Portugal but is also true of relatively new countries such as Poland, Italy, Germany and Romania or of very new ones, including the Czech Republic, Slovenia or Lithuania.

Precisely because these countries are incontrovertibly linked to the people who live there as a large majority, they can be open to minorities and newcomers and maintain their democracy.

But in European countries, too, there are unpleasant recollections of former newcomers who came as soldiers, robbers and privileged groups of businessmen and who put the people at a disadvantage.

Very often, people these days would prefer to see the descendants of these newcomers leave their country or else wish that they had completely adapted.

From our European perspective, we recognise the right of the Israeli and Palestinian states to exist side by side, as was illustrated once again very clearly this week during the remarkable visit of the presidents of both parliaments.

It is impossible to live there in peace in one state but people can quite easily co-exist as good neighbours.

Fair enough, Europe is to blame and should help solve the problems.

But that does not take away the fact that the situation which has arisen in Fiji is completely unacceptable.

The equal rights of the large Indian minority, the constitution and parliamentary democracy must be restored.

Those who use racism to their advantage must be punished and at least be excluded from political power, the refugees must be able to return home, and violence must come to an end.

The multi-racial constitution of 1997, which came about following a previous coup d' état after lengthy negotiations, must be restored without delay.

Mr President, I speak as a friend of Fiji, as someone who has followed events there for many years.

I have friends and acquaintances there and have been there.

When I spoke to the politicians the last time I was there three or four years ago the one thing they were all pleased about was the new constitution which had taken four years to put together, and when I saw the events of recent times my heart sank because I knew the consequences for that country.

I should like clarification from you, Commissioner.

From what you said, I assume you are saying no sanctions, that it is a matter of wait and see and giving them time to sort themselves out before we take any action.

I would like clarity on that point.

I do not want to walk away from here just assuming that; it would be helpful if you could be more explicit.

Mr Ford has called for Fiji to be banned from all sporting events.

My sport happens to be a minority sport - rugby league football - and in October or November the World Cup will be taking place in the UK and in France.

Fiji will have a squad there as part of the World Cup.

The Australian Government wants them banned.

The Australian Government thinks that Fiji should not take part in this competition.

If you speak to the players, whether they be Asian, Polynesian or Melanesian, they will say they want to play, of course.

My specific question to you, Commissioner, is would the Commission advocate sporting bans at this time or not?

It may be quite useful for us, as politicians, to be confronted with the question of whether sports and politics should have anything to do with each other or not.

It is a very useful exercise in analysing the extent of our principles and whether or not there are human activities that should be quite independent.

Sport today is not only sport, it is also business.

For that reason the world of sport has created more difficulties for itself than used to be the case in more innocent times.

As far as I am informed, unlike the line you say they are following with rugby, the Australians, when it comes to participation in the Olympic Games are maintaining a clear distinction between politics and sport.

We have no specific view in the Commission as to one event or another.

At this moment we are engaging in the dialogue of the Lomé Convention, so at this stage we have not drawn conclusions.

In answer to your more general question, there may very well be broad sanctions, but it depends on the outcome of the dialogue.

This dialogue is well-organised and systematic based on the beauty of our relationship with ACP countries.

It is not just a donor-recipient relationship.

We have the background of a system to work from.

This system is put to work in the given situation.

We have both the stick and the carrot.

We are actively drawing into this debate the regional ACP partners and giving the authorities in the country in question a say in the discussion.

But it is an extremely critical situation.

It contains all the dilemmas that situations like this normally present.

It is not easy to find out what the right thing to do is but we are doing everything to mobilise pressure for a rapid, irreversible return to democracy.

This is also the reply to Mrs Maes.

We do have a very important role as a trading partner and donor in Fiji and this creates a serious framework for the present discussion with the people in power in Fiji.

As regards coming back to the Parliament, I would say that I am always of course willing to go to the Development Committee and discuss any issue.

I would certainly like to have an opportunity to go more into detail before the end of the year if this is something the committee would welcome.

I can fully concur with everything Mr Ford said.

It is really tragic what is happening.

Also, as others said, the risk of a negative spillover in the region should also be taken into consideration when we are deciding what our measures should be.

One important measure that was taken - and this is a comment for Mr Van Hecke - was to call off the signing ceremony planned for Fiji.

So it is not the Suva Agreement that will govern our future relationship with the ACP states.

We went to Benin instead of Fiji in the summer and that, in fact, was a strong measure from both the EU side and the ACP side that it was taken as a natural thing that we could not sign the new agreement in Fiji.

So, in political terms we have already sent a strong message.

Mr President, in the joint compromise resolution there is a reference to setting a deadline at the end of November for a restoration of democracy.

Would the Commissioner accept that is a suitable target and a suitable deadline?

Otherwise, the danger is the current government in Fiji will go on negotiating forever, but never come to a conclusion.

If we reflect on the ethics of picking a date, that date is far too late, but the operational, practical idea of fixing a date is to put meaningful pressure on the partner in the discussion.

I am not sure that particular date is meaningful.

We have partners in the ACP Group who are part of the process of convincing and putting pressure on Fiji to do the right thing.

I would not like to dictate a date just like that.

I prefer to have my partners in the south well on board in the process, also taking into consideration the risk of the negative spill-over in the region.

I would not be willing to accept a specific date at this stage.

There is a tactical necessity not to create the problem.

I have received five motions for resolutions pursuant to Rule 37(2) of the Rules of Procedure .

The vote on these motions for resolutions will take place tomorrow at 9 a.m.

(The sitting was closed at 6.40 p.m.)

I am afraid I have to start today by announcing the passing away yesterday of our fellow member, Mr Günter Lüttge, who died after a serious illness.

Mr Lüttge became an MEP in 1989 and was mainly involved in transport policy.

I suggest we observe a minute' s silence in his memory.

(The House rose and observed a minute' s silence)

Approval of the Minutes of the previous sitting

The Minutes of yesterday' s sitting have been distributed.

Mr President, referring to the text adopted yesterday and the issue of human cloning, item 8 in the English version, paragraph 11, reads 'considers that any temporary committee set up by this Parliament ....'.

It does not actually say that such a temporary committee should be set up.

Could we have some guidance as to what the presidency will do about this particular section of the resolution?

I shall submit this to the Conference of Presidents, Mr Adam, and you will be notified of the outcome.

Mr President, my name does not seem to be on yesterday's attendance list although I did actually sign in.

Mr Bowis, that will be duly corrected and amended.

Mr President, following up the point that Mr Adam made, I presume you will report back at the beginning of the mini-session on the result and, of course, if there is a proposal for the establishment of a temporary committee this House will have to vote on it.

That will be the course of action, Mr Ford.

European Year of Lifelong Learning (1996)

The next item is the report (A5-0200/2000) by Mr Gutiérrez-Cortines, on behalf of the Committee on Culture, Youth, Education, the Media and Sport, on the Commission report to the Council, the European Parliament, the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions on the implementation, results and overall assessment of the European Year of Lifelong Learning (1996), submitted pursuant to Article 8 of European Parliament and Council Decision 2493/95/EC [COM(1999) 447 - C5-0205/1999 - 1999/2163(COS)]

Mr President, the report on the European Year of Lifelong Learning is seemingly an unimportant document, and yet it has revealed significant gaps and black spots in the European system.

The report concerns a year of information and promotion in response to the Luxembourg Summit and other summits, at which tremendous importance was given to training as a means of integrating Europeans into working life, irrespective of age.

The report has shown, first of all, that when money is invested in education, that money is multiplied.

The Member States keen to participate quadrupled their budgets.

That is, money invested in education gives the best results as it is multiplied and does not lead to fraud, or anything like that.

Secondly, the European Year of Lifelong Learning highlighted the Commission's difficulty in providing information and responses and being transparent.

It was practically impossible to gather all the necessary documentation, partly, it seems, because the Member States do not provide it, and partly because there are no procedures for collecting it with the necessary ease and speed.

We have therefore turned the report into a response and a series of recommendations on the criteria that we think lifelong learning should meet.

We found ourselves with a muddle of criteria, partly introduced by the Council, as the document published by the Commission, the proposal for the Year of Lifelong Learning, was of far higher quality.

It is clear that we need much more clarity over training.

However, training for integration, language teaching and recreational training for the elderly is mixed up with training for work, resulting in such a muddle that it is impossible to make an assessment or gauge the quality and know what the criteria are for good practice.

So, we are asking for the educational objectives to be clearly distinguished and regulated.

Obviously, education for the integration of immigrants is not the same as training for new qualifications, training for a first job or retraining, or many other types.

We have therefore requested clarity and better organisation of the system as a whole.

We have also requested greater lifelong learning and retraining for teachers.

It is clear that, if we consider lifelong learning to be simply for unqualified groups, account will not be taken of retraining university staff and teachers at training centres, who have to be the flagship of knowledge and disseminate information in society.

Finally, we have asked that it be made quite clear where the money from the Structural Funds for training, which is not monitored, is going.

From our point of view, this is a key issue.

What we cannot have is Europe paying so little attention to education and the education funds being used for other purposes.

One of the great problems of European history stems from the fact that once social classes have fought their way up the social scale and succeeded in integrating into the ruling classes, they have imitated the faults of the aristocracy, they have become conceited and lost sight of the value of training and the fight to retain the knowledge they have acquired.

So, we are living in an aristocratic Europe, which does not want to concern itself with education, which has become somewhat conceited about being European.

We consider that it is enough to be a European citizen and we do not realise that if we want to have researchers, if we want to have a truly competitive Europe, we need to take care of our human resources.

Europe needs to realise that, in spite of the subsidiarity principle, training people and helping them to manage themselves and their future is one of the fundamental objectives of its existence.

Therefore, a Europe that only takes care of its own interests, a Europe of subsidies, a Europe with teachers who only want to reduce their teaching hours, a Europe that contemplates and confuses trade union policy with educational policy is a worrying Europe.

I would like to draw attention to this situation, and I believe that we must rethink our attitude towards education, as we are talking about people and our future.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, we have the report before us, undoubtedly so that we can make improvements to it, as the rapporteur, Mrs Gutiérrez-Cortines said.

I also think, however, that we ought again to use this morning' s discussion to raise awareness once more and to make people aware of education again.

We are all delighted with the new achievements of our age: travel, the Internet, mobile phones and simultaneous television broadcasts from the other side of the world, as we are now experiencing again with the Olympic Games in Australia.

These are all achievements, but also signs of the time and of the society in which we live: the information age, the information society, the age of knowledge, technology and globalisation, to mention but a few designations.

All are characterised by a very rapid pace of change and by an enormous number of transformations, indeed revolutions, which have been triggered, and continue to be triggered, by the new knowledge.

The dissemination of information and knowledge is now incomparably faster and more extensive than it was even a few years ago.

People must be prepared for this vertiginous and fascinating roller coaster of change.

From the earliest days of childhood, from schooldays in fact, the key words have been lifelong learning.

That tenet is now only half the truth, however, and it cannot remain so, for the processes of change and transformation in society, in the world of work and in the environment are by no means over after school or after training, but continue and become still more marked.

Human beings must therefore learn to meet these challenges themselves and to adjust to lifelong learning.

Only in that way can we all, in future, also participate in the fine achievements of our age, that is to say, hold our own in the ever more rapidly changing competitiveness of life - both personal and professional - and both seize and help to create opportunities.

In order to help these insights come to the fore throughout Europe, 1996 was designated the European Year of Lifelong Learning.

With relatively modest financial resources of ECU 8.4 million from the European Union, a much welcomed ECU 34 million was raised for the project with the help of partner countries from the European Economic Area: Liechtenstein, Switzerland and Norway.

In many congresses, seminars and PR events, there was constructive discussion in all areas of society of the necessity and opportunities for rethinking education in the direction of lifelong learning.

These are opportunities - especially for Europe and European integration - of which we can avail ourselves here and now: knowledge of other languages, other cultures, other ways of life, everything that is so important for us as Europe grows together.

The European Year of Lifelong Learning set us thinking in a way which must be continued and consolidated.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the traditional concept of education was that students would cease learning when they left school.

It is true that a small elite would continue to create, pass on or acquire new knowledge and ideas, but for the great majority, leaving school meant the end of formal education.

Learning has become broader and longer.

New methods and sources for acquiring knowledge and training have appeared.

Anyone who does not keep up with this progress, these new requirements, risks becoming marginalised, undervalued in his or her professional life, risks losing social status and suffering intellectual impoverishment.

It is said, and rightly so, that we are becoming a society of information and knowledge.

The great philosopher Nietzsche, however, warned us that it is impossible to found a civilisation on knowledge.

This warning should give us food for thought.

Although, today, there is no alternative to scientific progress and to the increase in knowledge and information, the truth of the matter is that lifelong learning cannot be reduced simply to the acquisition of useful skills. It must be part of a culture, of a set of values that provide meaning for mankind' s life in society.

Lifelong learning and training has therefore become an indispensable factor that states, educational bodies and the public themselves can no longer underestimate.

Holding the European Year of Lifelong Learning and Training was an important step and a symbolic moment in raising the awareness of the European people with regard to this new state of affairs.

The theorising that preceded and continued throughout the European Year of Lifelong Learning and the considerable interest it raised in schools and citizens' groups made a major contribution to this.

'Lifelong learning and training' has definitively entered the vocabulary of politicians, educationalists and businesspeople.

Even more importantly, these words have also become part of everyday language.

Lifelong learning and training has also become an instrument in the fight against academic failure, students giving up on education and illiteracy.

It is therefore a good cause.

For these reasons, this initiative was valuable, timely and fruitful.

Its objectives were achieved and what was lacking in funds was compensated for by the harnessing of goodwill and by the number of people who signed up to it.

The line between people' s first educational experiences and later opportunities has now been crossed.

(The President cut the speaker off)

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I would like to express the Liberal Group' s support for the report by Mrs Cristina Gutiérrez-Cortines, which, as she herself mentioned in the introduction to her report, is not, and should not be, considered to be purely a formality, a summary of the application of the European Year of Learning in 1996, but rather as an analysis that serves to make a series of proposals on what the standing of education should be in its various fields, including the fields of lifelong learning and vocational and technical training, which deserve special attention.

This coincides with the ideas expressed a few months ago at the Lisbon and Feira European Councils, when all the Member States pledged to develop a series of measures at European Union level so that, during this decade, the European Union can become a leading society at international level and achieve the levels of competence that North America has today, particularly in technological areas.

To be precise, the key element in the process to achieve this level of competence lies in training, education and in a society with levels of excellence that lay the necessary foundations for progress to be made in the most technologically developed and advanced fields of scientific and technological innovation.

The report by Mrs Cristina Gutiérrez-Cortines, and she has also mentioned this today, shows the imbalances that still exist in the field of education between the level of the European Union and national level, that is, on the one hand we want action in education at European Union level, but on the other, the Member States do not want to give up their competences and establish true cooperation on an educational level.

It is true that there are some programmes that we always use as references, such as Socrates or Leonardo, but in precisely these programmes, we must recognise the lack of sufficient resources to achieve the scope and effect that we would like.

Finally, I therefore recommend that you pay particular attention to points 16, 17, 18, 19, 23 and 24, which constitute a good guide for the achievement of these higher levels of education at European Union level.

Mr President, first of all, I should like to congratulate our rapporteur on her excellent work and also on the commendable way in which she cooperated in the Committee on Culture, Youth, Education, the Media and Sport.

Philosophical and literary texts, as well as popular wisdom, tell us that 'you are never too old to learn' .

The 'Lifelong Learning' initiative was a perfectly proper one and the result of a wise decision, aimed at doing justice to the demands of the twenty-first century and at enabling people to adjust to these demands.

It is mainly the early phases of life which, right into our own time, have been, and remain, the time for education and training.

The importance of lifelong learning cannot, however, be limited to the spheres of education and training policy alone.

Its success also depends, in large measure, upon labour-market policy and upon the successful dissemination of science and technology.

Lifelong learning begins where schooling, or basic education, leaves off, and this is where the first and, in my view, also the greatest weakness of this wonderful initiative is to be found. Lifelong learning can only work if there is a change to the way in which, and above all the pace at which, basic education under the original educational systems is adapted.

In a knowledge society, one of the main functions of schooling should be to offer students methods they need to gain access to large amounts of information, to understand this information and to transform it into knowledge.

Syllabuses, or the means by which learning has so far been imparted, must be fundamentally altered.

I do not of course want to interfere in the nation states, but this is, nonetheless, an idea which we ought to explore communally in this European Community.

Instead, the direction taken should be an individual one, but with social components.

We need to learn more about arguing critically, about increasing students' self-confidence and about increasing their ability to express themselves in language.

Skills of this kind will become ever more important alongside instrumental skills such as the ability to write, to acquire other languages and to do arithmetic.

One goal must be to enable pupils constantly to update their knowledge and skills so that they are neither able nor willing to view a diploma or certificate as the end of a learning process or as a seal of approval upon something finally completed.

Our society must break away from the outdated system of school, work and pension.

Lifelong learning begins, then, with the reform of our schooling.

The individual must learn for him or herself.

That is not something it lies within our power to bring about, but we can do a lot to help bring it about, for the population of Europe is not, of course, just a human resource for the European labour market, but a wealth of marvellous individuals.

Allow me to give a personal example by way of conclusion. I know a joiner in a small suburb of Vienna where the prejudice is still somewhat commonly held that anyone who works with their hands must not be very well educated.

This joiner is between 40 and 50 years of age, speaks four languages and is known as something of a philosopher.

A Europe of people like that would be my ideal.

Mr President, in Finland we ordinary people say: 'All in the good time of the powers-that-be.'

We could say the same in connection with this, as the political balance sheet for the Year of Lifelong Learning (1996) is yet to be reckoned.

In spite of the time wasted, the rapporteur regrets that the qualitative assessment of the implementation of the theme year programme is imperfect.

The number of opportunities can surely be counted in a shorter space of time than this.

In a seminar on the European paper industry held here in Strasbourg on Wednesday a representative of employees in the industry turned our intention to an important issue.

When we purchase hardware, it is always an investment, but when we acquire software labelled 'company staff training' , it is not considered to be an investment.

The rapporteur has justifiably emphasised this.

Training has to be considered to be an investment and not a running cost.

We must stress the importance of the fact that lifelong learning also involves an all-round educational element and not just a professional one.

Far too often training is too biased in its scope, and that is especially true today of information society development.

Electronic programs are complicated and get more so all the time.

Those who master the language of software often do not understand the language of its content.

Can I ask something that is being asked in Finland now? A man speaks six languages, but what has he got to say?

A person might speak the language of computers in the information society, but perhaps he has nothing else to say.

It is only noughts and ones anyway.

In this, we are clashing with the eEurope strategy, which the Commission prepared for the Lisbon summit.

Much attention was paid to hardware in it, but little to that software which we call training software.

The public must be trained, not only to use computers, but also to use them for their own benefit.

People must know how to use computers for beneficial and essential purposes so they can improve their own way of working and take better control of their lives.

Nowadays, everyone must have the necessary reading and writing skills to use the various forms of electronic media to their advantage.

This new sort of literacy has to be taught to many adults starting at the beginning.

When, under the eEurope programme, the aim is in place to bring a computer cable into every home, that will increase democracy.

These days, democracy is created by everyone having equal access to a diverse array of information.

For the information to be fully exploited we have to remember that learning is also a social event.

Training cannot be left to depend on the eEurope programme alone: we also need social communities for it.

As no one knows everything, an individual must be able to decide for him/herself what is worth knowing.

If the state makes that decision it is just a step away from propaganda and indoctrination.

When we examine EU programmes, which are often mean the same kind of thing for everyone or contain demands for conformity on the part of everyone, we see we are turning the EU into a totalitarian federation.

We need lifelong learning and all-round educational knowledge, so that we can counter the attempt by the European Union to create a European totalitarian state and be its politburo.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, just an hour ago I was still sitting with my French teacher, making a big effort to learn some more French.

I must tell you, it is really fun learning a language.

It is good when you know that you do not have to take an examination afterwards but are learning for yourself and in order to communicate with other people and treat them in the right way.

I have to say that I am honestly enjoying learning French

(The President asked the speaker whether he might not like to continue his speech in French.) (Laughter)

I believe that that is also what we need in the future: for learning to be fun.

In life, the learning pyramid is, in fact, turning.

When it comes to learning, we really used to think of young full-time students, whereas now we see that people in employment are having to learn more and more.

I believe that we, ourselves, in the European Parliament can confirm that we are actually, day by day, doing more in the way of learning, evaluating and passing judgment than ever we had to do at school or university.

With increasing age, you also become more aware of what it is you would like to learn.

You become significantly more selective, and it is the very joy of learning that makes you enthusiastic and want to learn new things.

What we have here, then, is a paradigm shift, not only in the economy, but also in broad strata of society, not only through e-learning and the new opportunities provided by technology, but also through a change in consciousness.

I believe that this very change in consciousness shows that adults in all walks of life really do consider lifelong learning of this kind to be more and more important.

I therefore consider it a very good thing that we in the European Parliament should have a good look at long-term strategic issues of this kind.

Especially on a Friday like today, it is important, I believe, that we should also have the courage to think in terms of long-term strategy about how we might best provide support to the people of Europe.

Particularly for elderly people, the subject of health becomes increasingly important on into old age.

We still have a lot to learn about, for example, how to eat properly and how to treat our bodies.

I believe that precisely these fundamental virtues are very important for the future.

What do we need now at the level of the European Community?

We need a general system of accreditation for private, public and in-house education, a European education passport like a European driving licence so that the building blocks of education can be used and compared throughout Europe.

We need ways of comparing educational expenditure and revenue throughout Europe, as well as ways of comparing qualifications.

We should be trying to introduce best practices worldwide as a spur to positive competition.

We ought to be learning from the whole world which system and which form of education are best for our people and citizens in Europe.

Mr President, I hope I will not strike too discordant a note, but it seems to me this debate has been excessively self-congratulatory so far.

When I picked up the agenda and read the phrase 'Year of Lifelong Learning' it seemed to me that this was an oxymoron similar to the phrase 'military intelligence' .

A year seems a short time for the project.

The question is: how valuable are these 'Year of ...' enterprises when applications for funding have to be submitted within three months and everything will have to be carried out in one year.

I have been at the receiving end of such systems, both as a university teacher and when I was involved in an educational and social charity.

From the point of view of people trying to do the job, these challenges, at very short notice and with very little explanation of how applications are to be made and what criteria are to be applied, can do at least as much harm as good.

One can always point to the fact afterwards that the money was spent and other money came in and that good things have been achieved; but could things have been done better?

Both the Committee reports - the Committee report and the subsidiary Committee opinion - draw attention to the fact that the assessment methodology used by the Commission was not very exact and the criteria set were not particularly clear.

This is not to say we should not do these things, but we should do them better and reflect very carefully on what can best be done at Community level and what at lower levels, not even at Member State level or in autonomous regions within the Member States, but right down at the level of schools, colleges and universities.

My constituency has just come through a serious crisis in its educational assessment, partly due to a lack of proper consultation with classroom teachers.

Grandiose ideas issued from on high and not adequately and rigorously tested at the sharp end will always fail, sometimes with damaging consequences for individuals and for society.

Subsidiarity matters, especially in a field like education and lifelong learning, and we forget that at our peril.

Networking can be useful in disseminating ideas for best practice, but we must not delude ourselves that a Year of Lifelong Learning will make a real difference.

That can only come from the commitment of the people on the ground.

Those are the people we must respect and encourage and support.

We are all in favour of lifelong learning, but let us not be too self-congratulatory when the evidence is so thin.

Lifelong learning is something we all look upon with the greatest benevolence.

We can hear that especially from this discussion.

When it comes to taking action, however, the situation is often the reverse.

I agree with the rapporteur who criticises the Commission' s efforts on behalf of lifelong learning during 1996, the year of the relevant campaign, together with the slipshod evaluation which followed.

Lifelong learning is a phenomenon requiring a lot of resources.

It demands new thinking on educational policy and calls for financial resources to be prioritised.

Allow me to begin by commenting on the new thinking required.

In our education systems, we specialise in the contrary, that is to say self-enclosed educational courses, limited by time and with heavy emphasis upon the final examination.

Lifelong learning requires the opposite, namely continuity and courses of long duration.

It is no longer enough to educate for the immediate needs of the workplace.

Now, it is a matter of educating people for life.

We therefore need new forms of organisation in education.

We need new educational ideas and tools.

Perhaps the greatest problem is that which many other speakers have raised, namely access to money.

We need to allocate much greater resources to education than we have done up until now, both to the workplace and to the public education system, as well as to other areas.

There must be money to pay for the costs of education and also to replace income in the form of wages, especially in the case of those who need to study full-time.

It is especially important to be able to finance the fairly long study periods which may be required if people are to be able to move from traditional sectors to new areas of the labour market.

Because access to money is always a problem, I think that quantitative objectives are required in connection with expenditure on adult education.

Consideration might be given to earmarking a certain proportion of companies' production costs for this purpose, a specific percentage of the State budget, a particular portion of normal working hours or, if appropriate, a certain number of the individual' s working hours. Alternatively, other similar quantitative measures might be made use of.

The Swedish Presidency, which will begin on 1 January 2001, has said that lifelong learning will be one of its priorities.

I think we could call upon the Swedish Government to propose just such quantitative objectives for lifelong adult education.

Many speakers here in the Chamber have agreed about the need to set financial priorities.

Perhaps we could issue a joint statement to the Swedish Presidency on this issue.

Mr President, Gutiérrez-Cortines' report states that the Union administration' s besetting sin - its slow start to getting measures off the ground - afflicted the theme year of lifelong learning.

National coordinating bodies suffered from such matters as materials arriving late and there not being enough of them.

Furthermore, things moved slowly when it came to using the Internet.

That naturally made it hard to implement the theme year programme.

Unfortunately, the situation appears to be the same with the Socrates programme 2 that has just started.

Messages of concern are coming from national agencies that the agreements between them and the Commission are still not finalised and there is a lack of certainty about payment.

This cannot help but be reflected also in the implementation of the adult education component, Grundvik, which forms part of Socrates.

The administrative problems associated with Socrates have to be resolved swiftly for the Union' s input into lifelong learning to come within reach of the people.

Training and education are being seen more and more clearly as European resources.

They do not mean just vital items of expenditure.

Hopefully the change in attitudes will also be reflected before long in the Union' s budget.

But the Year of European Languages, organised for next year, will have to persevere in the same way, appropriations being as meagre as they were with the Year of Lifelong Learning.

Parliament, however, did its best to establish a legal basis in time for the measures to be effected.

Although training comes under the principle of subsidiarity, its European dimension is strengthening all the time.

European success in global competition is built on skilled and involved people.

Lifelong learning is essential in the fight against unemployment and exclusion.

It is justifiable that the report adopted by the Committee on Culture, Youth, Education, the Media and Sport should contain a request to the Commission to apply the notion of further education, not only at the level of advanced know-how and skills and universities, but also in traditional professions, particularly the craftsmen trades.

Lifelong learning, as such, is often seen only as a necessary regeneration of the workforce.

It should, however, be a fundamental right of every citizen, leading not just to improved professional skills, but also to human growth, happiness and understanding.

The facilities modern technology offers for learning can be brought within everybody' s reach.

Mr President, paragraph 16 of Mrs Gutiérrez-Cortines' excellent report calls for training designed to correct school failures.

It would be far better if we could avoid that sort of failure.

The saddest case of all is a school leaver with no qualifications to his credit descending into hopelessness.

A situation which becomes sadder and sadder as the occupations available to those with no qualifications become scarcer and scarcer.

The reason is often that the young teenager is discouraged from learning by the rigidities of an education system that sticks to established lines and tries to fit square pegs into round holes.

I appeal to the Commission to look favourably on a research programme into the use and development of aptitude tests to identify at an early stage - 12 or 13 years old at the latest - what a young person is going to be good at, no matter what that profession, occupation or job may be.

Schools have to respond by providing courses at which young people will succeed.

It means satisfied, enthusiastic teenagers instead of discouraged troublemakers.

It means school-leavers with light in their eyes, with excitement about the future, able to contribute to society.

It means school-leavers with a passport to a better and more fulfilling life.

Nothing is more vital to the future of Europe than the young people who are going to build that Europe.

There is not one young person who cannot play his part.

We have to enable this sadly wasted potential to be mobilised and to succeed.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, first of all I would like to thank your rapporteur, Mrs Gutiérrez-Cortines for her work, not only for stressing the positive aspects, but also for making certain criticisms which the Commission has examined and taken on board, understanding that the comments were made in a constructive spirit, to encourage us to 'do better' , as one of you just commented, both in the way we deal with the subject of lifelong education and training and the way we organise this type of operation in the context of the 'European Year' together with you and the Member States.

I should also like, on behalf of the Commission, to express our thanks to Mrs Evans who was given the task of drawing up the opinion of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs, and other Members of Parliament who contributed to the quality of this debate both in committee and in plenary.

I should like to devote a few moments, ladies and gentlemen, to responding to a number of criticisms outlined in Mrs Gutiérrez-Cortines' report, and stressed by several of you, particularly Mr Herman Schmidt. Naturally I should like to do so by highlighting the positive aspects of this European Year of Lifelong Learning.

It is an initiative which, as the report indicates, was very favourably received by Parliament and by the Council.

Even though the charge can be levelled that we should have done better yet, it is an initiative which has had a mobilising effect, to judge by the number of people that have been interested and involved in this initiative, and has also had the effect of harnessing additional financial resources which were used in a more decentralised fashion.

It is a European initiative which we can consider to have been successful on the whole, since it was implemented in this decentralised fashion, closer to the citizens, having involved the national, regional and local authorities in each Member State.

Mr Posselt mentioned the spirit and the meaning of subsidiarity, and I noted his concern.

I also noted, in the Commission report, in your report, that the initiative engaged the interests of many schools, universities, businesses and associations, not only in the world of education, but also organisations involved in the economy, in combating social exclusion or concerned with rural life.

I also think, however, ladies and gentlemen, that it is an initiative which has enabled the idea of lifelong education and training, the ambition and the need for it, to emerge from the specialist field of education and training and to gain wider currency among a wider public.

I think it was Mrs Klass who stressed this point earlier.

Ladies and gentlemen, we must continue to bear these positive aspects in mind. Now, as promised, I should like to devote some time to answering the set of criticisms expressed in the report.

Firstly, I should like to outline the approach adopted by the Commission in determining the level of detail that the report would go into, bearing in mind that a budget of EUR 8 million was allocated for the operation. This is not inconsiderable, but it is not a vast sum either.

The Commission wanted to issue a succinct report giving an idea of the content of the European Year of Lifelong Learning and summing up its achievements and impact in a clear manner.

We included statistical data, including, of course, figures for the deployment of the budget, which I have just mentioned, but I must state that it is primarily a political impact report.

To a great extent, the Commission services based this report on an external assessment conducted by a company which, by virtue of its network covering all the participant countries, seemed to me to be able to make an objective analysis of the way this year was perceived by operators in our various countries.

The qualitative assessment was based on wide sampling of the projects with additional interviews with national bodies and, subsequently, with the initiators or promoters of these projects at grass roots.

The Commission services made the full text of this external assessment available to your rapporteur.

Let me add that it is also, of course, possible to consult the archives regarding administration of project budgets.

Your report, Mrs Gutiérrez-Cortines, and some of you discussed this just now, particularly Mrs Livari, points out a number of delays in the implementation of the European Year of Lifelong Learning, particularly with regard to the distribution of brochures.

You must remember that the European Parliament and Council decision regarding this European Year of Lifelong Learning was one of the very first texts adopted under the codecision procedure, and that, in practice, it took some time to adjust to this new procedure.

The decision was not formally adopted until the end of October 1995, i.e. only a few weeks before the start of the year itself.

This had a perceptible effect on the Commission' s ability to take action.

This initial delay, particularly regarding the signature of a contract with advertising service and product suppliers, continued to have effects throughout the year.

Similarly, the first call for projects had to be initiated in an extremely informal manner, with the cooperation of national bodies. It was signed in order to implement a project which did not yet exist officially, and once again this provides an objective explanation for some of the gaps highlighted in your report and, unfortunately, the effects of these gaps.

I think it was Mr McCormick who mentioned the problems that promoters at grass roots level had in implementing projects.

These were clearly the results down the line of the initial delay, which I have just explained.

Ladies and gentlemen, like your rapporteur, I regret that some of the publicity materials were available only in three languages, but this was a difficult decision which had to be taken for purely technical reasons in view of the budget and the staffing resources available, as all the language versions of publications issued on behalf of the Commission had to be scrupulously checked.

I would like to stress, however, that other materials, particularly posters, were available in all the official languages of the European Union and that we gave national bodies the opportunity to add other languages according to their own particular needs.

We shall obviously be making a special effort for the European Year of Languages, which we are preparing at the moment, to respect the principle of linguistic pluralism as much as possible. I feel this is necessary and legitimate.

Mrs Gutiérrez-Cortines' s report pinpoints a certain lack of clarity with regard to the objectives of the European Year of Lifelong Learning, which she considers to be due to the lack of a definition of lifelong education and training.

Just now I heard your fellow Member, Mrs Echerer, mentioning the many philosophical works which have, for centuries, pointed out the simple idea that one never stops learning.

Quite apart from this research and these philosophical references, it is true that there were no clear definitions of what this requirement for lifelong education and training should be, while respecting disparities or the identities of our countries and even our regions.

We appreciated the rapporteur' s attempts to clarify matters by putting forward a definition of various concepts of lifelong education and training.

I should, nonetheless, like to defend the Commission' s failure to establish a definition from the outset, particularly if the objective was to limit lifelong education and training to training designed solely to meet the requirements of the labour market, for, even though it is true that the initiative originated in the Commission' s White Paper on growth, competitiveness and employment, it was nonetheless clearly apparent, right from the first exchanges of views with the European Parliament and the Council, that there was a consensus in favour of a broader approach including all aspects of education and training, practices and achievements. In this field, as I said earlier, systems vary appreciably from one country to another.

We had to agree upon a collective idea which would be such as to initiate debate on the significance of lifelong education and training in terms which suited or respected the disparities between national and regional situations. The Commission therefore preferred to emphasise the continuum of training and the complementary nature of the various different aspects of training, including not only initial and higher education and initial and further training, but also other types of more informal training.

As the year progressed, the Commission became increasingly convinced that this approach was justified.

We deliberately supported what might be called recreational training, as we were aware that some people who left the formal education system with the feeling of having failed - Mr Purvis stressed this point earlier and, incidentally, Mr Purvis, I have taken note of your suggestion for a research programme and I shall pass this on to my fellow Commissioners, Mr Busquin and Mrs Reding - people, young people, and not only young people, who leave the educational system with the feeling of having failed must be gradually won back to the idea that learning can be useful, pleasant and can instil self-confidence.

It is clear, furthermore, that while lifelong training must become a reality, nonetheless even at the stage of basic education, in what Mr Seppänen called general education, it must be taken into account in order to ensure that every school pupil is motivated and has the necessary skills to learn in the various situations he will find himself in as an adult.

In a nutshell, the child must learn how to learn.

Since the end of the European Year of Lifelong Learning, in the direction which Mr Lage mentioned just now, the idea of lifelong education and training continues to gain ground. It is no mere chance, ladies and gentlemen, that since 1996, for instance, ministers in a number of European countries have been made specifically responsible for lifelong learning.

This concept provided the basis for the discussions which led to the latest generation of Socrates, Leonardo de Vinci and Youth Programmes. It was taken up by the G8 ministers who last year in Cologne adopted a charter on the subject, inspired to a great extent by the debates which took place within the fifteen Member States in the course of this European Year of Lifelong Learning.

Moreover, as you know, education from this angle has continued to be one of the themes of the Japanese Presidency.

Ladies and gentlemen, the Commission has continued its deliberations on lifelong training and, as Mr Gasòliba i Böhm requested earlier, our endeavours from now on will be in keeping with the follow up to the European Council in Lisbon. In a few weeks, my fellow Commissioner, Mrs Reding, is to issue a draft memorandum on lifelong education and training to the Commission.

This document will be sent to you before the end of October.

You will appreciate that today, at this stage, it is difficult for me to go any further into the details of this memo, but the link with employment, which your rapporteur, Mrs Gutiérrez-Cortines, called for, will of course be a key element of the memo, although the aspect of the rounded development of each individual, which remains one of the prime functions of education, will not be neglected.

The Commission will continue the debate on lifelong education and training with you, with this House, in that context. When I speak of the Commission, I am, of course, not only referring to the Commissioner directly responsible for matters of education, Viviane Reding.

I mean, rather, that we feel concerned, many of us very directly, by this challenge, particularly, let me tell you, as Commissioner for Regional Policy, when I am signing agreements and working with the Member States and the regions on the content and the quality of programming documents in each of the Member States. I am entirely prepared to make room for the question of lifelong education and training and, in general, educational matters, in Structural Fund programmes.

Just now, I think it was Mr Seppänen who brought up a subject which I consider to be an absolute priority, i.e. access to the information society, not just for young people or students, but also for the older elements of the general public, and sections of the population that are often forgotten, such as farmers or small- and medium-sized businesses.

Let me repeat what I have already told this House: I shall not sign any programming document for any European region in relation to regional policy, for which I am responsible, unless it includes a very clear plan for access to the information society for this region and for each region, and I do not mean access programmes exclusively for people of primary, secondary or higher education age.

I hope, on a lighter note, that the response I have just given you on behalf of the European Commission in my mother tongue will provide an additional resource for Mr Rübig in his enthusiastic learning of the French language throughout his life as a European Member of Parliament.

We shall now proceed to the vote.

Mr President, I voted for this important document, and its importance has been stressed by all the speakers, particularly by Mrs Echerer who said: 'You are never too old to learn', by Mr Posselt, who is so eager to support the elderly that I could give him a Pensioners' Party membership card, and by Commissioner Barnier himself, who has assured us of his strong commitment in this area.

However, Mr President, as representative of the Pensioners' Party to the European Parliament, I call for words to be translated into action.

The elderly in the Member States have no opportunity learn, have no help from national states and are not even allowed to use school buildings, which accommodate children in the morning and could accommodate old people in the afternoon.

Mr President, my reference to Communist dictatorships has clearly triggered feelings of great agitation in an MEP from the extreme left.

I should therefore like to say that today' s vote has been very important.

The people in his party, the PDS, are clearly determined not to learn anything new for the rest of their lives.

I am therefore very pleased that we have adopted this report by a large majority.

Mr President, lifelong learning must be a responsibility not only of the European Commission and the European institutions but also, and especially, of the Member States.

I voted in favour because I believe that tax advantages for professional and private education must be placed centre-stage so that educational sponsorship, in particular, becomes a possibility, too.

Incentives must be created so that, in order to take some of the pressure off the system, foundations can take over educational establishments and sponsorship can be broadly based.

I also believe, however, that we ought to set an example at European level.

Every year, we ought to devise and evaluate training and further education syllabuses for our officials and politicians to enable us to measure how we are meeting our own needs for professional development.

Mr President, the Communist Party of Greece is in favour of a state lifelong learning system, since it will give workers the chance to improve their knowledge and professional skills as well as their contribution to society as a whole and their standard of living.

However, the model being promoted by the European Union merely attempts to patch over the shortcomings in an education system which turns out disposable workers who are unable to keep up with developments in the productive process.

Workers are forced to pass their entire lives in a vicious circle of work, unemployment, training and so on and so forth.

Despite identifying certain shortcomings in the system, Mr Gutiérrez-Cortines' report fails to go far enough in analysing the causes or suggesting remedies, which is why the MEPs of the Communist Party of Greece abstained from the vote.

. (FR) I should like to begin by stressing that access to a good level of education and training is the right of every individual in order to develop his potential and ability to fit into the economic, social and cultural environment.

This fundamental fact has fuelled debates at the European Council meetings in Lisbon and Feira.

We further acknowledged that this right must be adapted to cater for the advent of the information society.

New information and communications technology do indeed have serious repercussions on teaching methodology.

It is now acknowledged that education and training should be a lifelong process and so, throughout these summit meetings, the Commission and the Member States have been encouraged to define coherent strategies and practical measures in order to make lifelong education and training accessible to all.

Some parties had, however, begun to consider this subject well before that, since, even in 1996, the Commission proposed to the Council and to Parliament that the year 1996 be declared the 'European Year of Lifelong Learning' .

The purpose of this year was to make European citizens aware of new concepts in academic and vocational education and to conduct joint discussions with all the operators involved in the role and the stakes of education and training at the dawn of the twenty-first century.

Given the high stakes involved, I can only, like our rapporteur, deplore the fact that the budget for the European Year of Lifelong Learning was limited to EUR 8.4 million for the fifteen Member States and their three partners in the EEA.

By the same token, we must deplore the flagrant lack of qualitative data in the Commission report.

The Commission should therefore improve the quality of its reports in future.

In future programmes, their work should concentrate on defining with greater precision the various concepts and aspects of vocational and lifelong training.

They should also speedily implement action programmes and specific measures in the context of a lifelong education and training strategy.

The implementation of such measures must be coordinated with the Socrates II and Leonardo programmes.

It is up to us to ensure that all citizens can benefit from this training in new technologies, as there is a great danger of seeing a 'digital divide' being established between the men and women who have the means to access this technology and those who do not.

The entire debate on the place of universal public service in new telecommunications networks is also involved.

I declare the session of the European Parliament adjourned.

(The sitting was closed at 10.10 a.m.)

Approval of the Minutes of the previous sitting

Madam President, sadly, there was another incident of violence in Italy yesterday: a teacher who is Christian by religion but of Jewish origin was attacked and beaten up by a group of skinheads in Verona.

Incidents of this nature must be condemned immediately by Parliament and others, for it is unthinkable that any hint of anti-Semitism and xenophobia should still be allowed to exist within our Union.

I therefore feel that, laying aside political differences, this House should send a signal, a message expressing our solidarity, to the teacher who was attacked simply because he is of the Jewish race.

Madam President, I would like to thank you, and indeed all the Members of Parliament, in advance, for your message of solidarity.

We shall consider the best way of passing on this entirely justified protest.

Madam President, I asked for the floor to raise the same point.

I would be grateful if you could pass on Parliament' s concerns, its fierce condemnation of this act and its sympathy to the young Catholic teacher who was so brutally attacked because of his Jewish origins.

I shall be very happy to do that.

Madam President, I too would like to support Mr Tajani and all the other Members who have spoken on the subject in their condemnation of the racist attack on a Christian teacher of Jewish origin which has taken place in my country, in Verona to be precise.

These incidents are incomprehensible, and not only must they be condemned but the perpetrators severely punished.

Madam President, I too would like to support Mr Tajani' s statement, which has been echoed in speeches from a number of different quarters and parties.

On behalf of the party which I represent, the Alleanza Nazionale, I therefore join you all with the utmost solidarity in severely condemning incidents which make us ashamed to be European.

I feel that the sensitivity of this Parliament, in which right and left are united on this matter, will contribute to combating such shameful incidents and eradicating them once and for all.

I would like to raise as a point of order the fact that the Quaestors have made a recommendation that during constituency weeks next year MEPs should be allowed a daily allowance if they are in Brussels.

I would like to urge you, Madam President and the Bureau members - I understand this is coming on your agenda very soon - to think very carefully before taking this decision because constituency weeks are a very good idea.

There is a desperate need for MEPs to communicate with the electorate in a much more effective way.

The fact that we had such a poor turnout in the European elections proves that this is the case and, if we allow people to sign in during constituency weeks, we are undermining the whole point of them.

We are giving fuel to the Eurosceptics who think that we are pumping up our own expenses and we look like hypocrites at a time when we are asking the Commission to reform.

Madam President, I urge you and the Bureau members to consider this issue very carefully and turn down the request by the Quaestors.

I have not yet received this recommendation by the Quaestors.

That is why it has not yet been placed on our Bureau' s agenda.

Once I have received it, the Bureau will, of course, examine it very carefully indeed.

I wish to draw our fellow MEPs' attention to a demonstration which is leaving Brussels today for Paris and to ask them to exercise the utmost vigilance where this is concerned.

The demonstration has been organised by scientologists and is supposed to be a marathon against the religious intolerance practised in France.

I think this is an extremely dangerous demonstration, given that France is a country in which the fight against religious cults has had some very significant successes. Europe still needs to be inspired by such successes, informed as they are by the values of secularism and tolerance, by which I mean true tolerance and not that practised by religious cults.

Thank you for that information and clarification.

Since the matter has been raised in the public arena, could I place on record the reason for the Quaestors' recommendation?

We believe that the term "constituency weeks" was an unfortunate one.

They are weeks without meetings but they are weeks when the Commission, the Council and all other agents of this Parliament, including the political groups, are hard at work.

If we are going to Nice to ask for more powers for this Parliament it is hardly a good precedent for us to send the whole Parliament off for four weeks, away from the place where they are elected to do their duty.

Consequently, we believe that those Members - and there are many of them - who are writing reports, chairing committees, running groups and have legitimate reasons to be here should, on declaration of those objectives, be able to come and do their work in the place that they were elected to do it.

I do not think this is the time and place to enter into a debate on this issue.

As I said in my reply to Mrs Morgan, as soon as I have officially received the recommendation by the Quaestors, the Bureau will examine it most carefully, together with all its implications.

Madam President, in a moment, we will be listening to a communication from the Commission on the fuel crisis, and I am pleased that the Commissioner is able to attend.

We all know that she will not be staying for very long as she is leaving for Luxembourg later on this evening to visit the Transport Council.

This should not prevent us, however, from entering into an extensive and searching debate on this issue and going over the short hour that was originally scheduled.

Madam President, I express the view of many MEPs when I say that I regret that we have to deal with this issue in such a short space of time.

The issue concerned has thrown the whole of Europe into commotion and may well do so for the foreseeable future.

The time allocated is really far too short and, on behalf of many MEPs, I felt I had to express my dissatisfaction in public.

Of course. It is a source of regret to me, too.

Madam President, I would just like to return to the problems associated with the constituency weeks.

What I find very strange is not so much the payments, but the fact that a constituency week has been scheduled just before spring half-term in certain Member States or just before carnival week in a number of other Member States when people are off work on the Monday and Tuesday.

In opting for a constituency week at this stage, you ought to have made it coincide with carnival week instead of the week prior to it.

I would ask the Bureau to reconsider this.

Madam President, a fellow honourable Member has just drawn attention to an anti-Semitic incident.

The issue of racism was heavily debated in Germany over the summer, and I would now like to tell you about several extremely disturbing incidents that have taken place there since the last part-session, in order to raise awareness of what is going on.

Three cases in point: on 2 September, a fifty-year-old waiter of Chinese origin was beaten up and called a 'foreign pig' .

On 13 September, a homeless person was found dead.

Two skinheads have admitted to beating him up.

He had subsequently died from their kicks and punches.

Thirdly, on 4 September, right-wing extremists beat up a person whose parents are of Tunisian origin.

I would ask that since we mourn other deaths here, could we not do the same for those whom we never knew, and especially those who were murdered for political, specifically racist, reasons?

I would like to raise awareness about this issue in this House, particularly as we had a debate about it in Germany.

These incidents are wholly to be regretted and condemned, and they cannot but encourage us to be extremely vigilant.

Mr President, you have just said that we will be starting at half past eleven tomorrow.

That is a most unpleasant surprise because many of us have flights which we can only just make with the earlier voting time, the standard voting time here in the House.

It is a huge problem, it is immensely difficult to find seats on other flights in the evening or even on the following day.

I should therefore like to request that we either keep to a standard voting time or, if not, that we be given more notice.

I should like to request that we keep to a standard voting time, i.e. eleven o' clock.

An alternative proposition is that we start half an hour earlier at 8.30 and then have the voting time at 11 o' clock.

There is no need to vote perhaps, if everyone agrees with this proposal to begin tomorrow at 8.30 a.m. and hold the votes at 11 a.m.

Madam President, you asked if any Members wished to make any comments on the agenda.

I did in fact want to take this opportunity to tell you that I had no objection to Parliament discussing the racist crimes and offences committed against foreigners by people of European origin.

If I am to believe the relevant committee in my own country, they amount to approximately thirty per year out of a total of almost four million crimes and offences, including a million committed by foreigners against native Europeans.

I suggest that the two issues be examined concurrently.

I think it is really a question of equity.

Since racism is unfortunately a universal phenomenon, racist crimes and offences committed by foreigners against Europeans ought also to be investigated.

Yes, I think that would be best.

Madam President, not only do I think it is important we keep tomorrow' s debate on the fight against racism in the form proposed, but in addition, many of our fellow MEPs are now well aware of the fact that no country in Europe is immune from the increase in the xenophobic and populist vote.

In the course of tomorrow' s debate, I should like us, on the basis of what many of our fellow MEPs have said today, to be able to agree upon at least one amendment, namely that, within the confines of this Parliament, no MEP may make racist remarks.

If we succeed in ensuring that, at least in this Parliament, no one can stoop to making racist remarks, then our words and our actions will carry much more weight outside Parliament.

I think that is the best way to respond to Mr Gollnisch.

Measures to be taken following the fuel crisis and the rise in oil prices

The next item is the Commission statement on the measures to be taken following the oil crisis and the increase in the price of oil.

Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, I am grateful for the opportunity to speak to the whole House after having spoken yesterday for two hours with the Energy Committee.

Recent times have been marked by the fact that oil prices have been rising for the last 18 months, and the European public is feeling the full effect.

Clearly, the people who will suffer most as a result of this rise will be the least-favoured social groups and also certain specific sectors which are particularly affected.

At the beginning of 1999, the price of a barrel of crude oil stood at around 10 dollars, whereas today it stands at around 33 to 35 dollars.

This is the highest level since the Gulf war, and is a level which most experts believed could only happen in cases of geopolitical crisis.

The reason for this rise is very clear: the restriction on production on the part of the OPEC countries which coincides with a world economic recovery and the resulting increase in demand.

The impact of this rise has been particularly great in the European Union and especially in the euro zone, owing to the euro' s value against the dollar.

We cannot ignore the consequences of this rise on Europe' s economic development.

In specific terms, we estimate that, at the moment, this accounts for 1% of our inflation and a reduction of around 0.3% of our growth. Some specific professional sectors - farming, fishing and transport - are in situations which are at times frankly difficult.

However, both the producing countries and the consumer countries share a common interest, that of stability and the predictability of prices.

We would all benefit from prices being established in a market of free competition and not, as is happening now, in accordance with a monopolistic situation in a market which to be honest is less than transparent.

Furthermore, the European Union' s level of dependency currently stands at around 50%.

However, unless we introduce new measures, we will reach more or less 70% by 2020.

In the specific case of oil, our dependency on external sources stands at between 85% and 90%.

This must clearly lead us to a debate on the increase in our energy dependency on external sources and, therefore, on our vulnerability in this respect.

We must grasp our responsibility and our destiny with both hands.

Although the European Union' s competence in the field of energy is limited, we must not remain passive in the face of such a situation and allow it to get worse, but rather we must find answers.

That is why ensuring a sufficient level of independence and, above all, of availability in the European Union' s energy supplies, must be a priority policy and furthermore a policy on a Community scale.

Little more than a year ago, when I first came into contact with this House as future Commissioner with responsibility for energy, I indicated very clearly that, from the Commission' s point of view, there were two crucial elements which needed to be considered in the coming years.

On the one hand, the need to strategically promote dialogue on energy policy in international fora, and especially with the large producing and consumer countries, and, on the other, the need to adapt our priorities so that we can better focus our changes in the face of adverse energy situations such as the current one.

The Commission intends to fulfil these fundamental objectives and has been working on them for several months.

The Commission has practically finished the preparation of a Green Paper on the security of supply and on the Kyoto commitments, that is to say, the conditions for emissions in the energy sector. This Green Paper will be adopted before the end of the year.

I hope it will serve as a starting point for a broad debate amongst the interested parties to examine the role and place of each of our energy sources over the next twenty or thirty years.

Furthermore, we must promote international dialogue in the short term and step up this dialogue with the producing countries in order to convince them of our common interest in price stability - an issue which they themselves have raised - putting forward the objective of a price band.

At the same time, we have to take account of the geopolitical context in which we are moving, especially of the peace process in the Middle East and the complex political situation in the whole area.

The European Union must send a clear and forceful message to all the OPEC countries and highlight the need for appropriate measures to be taken in order to fulfil what they have indicated to be their objective, that is to say, for oil prices to return to a reasonable band.

We must say that we are the main net importer and the second largest consumer of oil in the world.

The European Union therefore has the means and reasons justifying its voice to be heard but perhaps political means are not sufficient.

As well as this dialogue with OPEC, however, we must not forget that we need to maintain and strengthen our strategic relations with Russia and we should consider the necessary means to modernise production and distribution conditions in that country which is, let us not forget, the third largest producer of oil in the world and, if we take account of gas, their position is absolutely vital.

The European Union must maintain a united front and speak with one voice.

Disparate initiatives by individual Member States will always be incomplete and, what is more, less productive than those on which we stand united.

As for the fiscal aspect, an issue that has been much discussed in recent times, the Commission understands the concerns of the professional sectors most affected by the sudden increase in oil prices.

In this respect we encourage the Member States to enter into and maintain social dialogue with all the interested parties in order to find solutions which are suitable and conform to Community law.

One of the lessons we can learn from the blockades which have paralysed economic activity in various States, is the need to raise the level of coordination between Member States and, of course, with the support of the Commission.

To this end, Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, in a few minutes I will leave this meeting to depart for Luxembourg, where a special Council of Transport Ministers is taking place.

For both environmental and economic reasons, Member States must not give in to pressure and change their overall medium-term policy on oil.

A reduction in taxation or subsidies over an extended period would simply amount to a transfer of the fiscal income towards the OPEC countries and would send them an inappropriate message.

However, the very difficult situation we are in at the moment probably requires, in the short term, the adoption of aid measures by the competent public authorities.

In fact, there are already some agreements on the table.

I must point out though that these measures must be purely transitional and in all cases must conform to competition rules and not violate the internal rules of the single market.

We must seek consensus on the approach to fuel taxation and prevent the kind of cacophony which results from the actions and statements of the different States of the Union.

For example, what is the point of talking about ecological taxes on a European scale if we cannot quickly harmonise the rates of the special taxes and VAT within the Union?

Ladies and gentlemen, in this context I must say that a reduction in the special taxes in favour of road transport can only be considered as a very short-term measure, lasting no more than a few months. In no event can it be extended, since that would run directly counter to the objectives to promote other types of alternative transport, such as the railways, it would go against our Kyoto objectives and would undoubtedly contradict what have been our guiding principles in European Union transport policy until now.

The Commission is extremely concerned about the serious attacks on free movement which have taken place recently on various occasions.

We believe, and I wish to say this once again, that no one social category should be allowed to hold the whole of society to ransom.

I was talking about aid, however, and I wish to say that we must break up and end anti-competitive practices and these practices are clearly taking place in the fuel sector.

Why should there be such a considerable difference in the prices - before tax - of oil derivatives as there is at the moment in the European Union, in some cases just across the border in the next country?

The Commission intends to continue the contacts established with Member States in order to detect any practices which contravene competition rules.

Any agreements between companies or abuses of dominant positions must be severely penalised.

We will also have to examine the question of competition between intermodal sectors in order to find solutions on a European scale.

But we must not fool ourselves, ladies and gentlemen. We are talking about short-term actions which may alleviate the current crisis, but in no way change the undeniable fact that our economy is vulnerable to energy fluctuations.

It is true that the economy is less vulnerable than it was 25 years ago, but at the end of the day it is still vulnerable.

Oil consumption in the European Union stands at 12 million barrels per day and is expected to reach just over 13 million in 2020.

It is probable that the barrel price, in normal economic circumstances, will not in the long term return to below 20 dollars - and, of course, in no event to what it was 18 months ago, that is to say, 10 dollars.

We must tackle this dependency and this situation through two fundamental fields of action: diversifying our sources and saving energy.

The discussion of diversification requires a long-term debate.

The future Green Paper on supply will contribute to it.

I wish to state very clearly that, when talking about diversification of energy sources, sustainable energy has a clear and decisive contribution to make for the future, but at the moment we cannot ignore any type of energy.

The management of demand and energy saving is the other area on which we must focus for the long term.

With regard to oil, we are today 50% more efficient that 25 years ago, but it must be said that the transport sector still has to make a special effort in this area.

More than 90% of the increase in oil consumption in the Union from now until 2020 will be absorbed in principle by the transport sector.

That is why we need a White Paper on transport policy which seeks to readjust modes of transport, to improve the Trans-European Networks, to eliminate points of congestion, to promote the railways, river transport, short haul sea shipping, to promote effective and less polluting urban transport, with the rationalisation of the use of the traditional car and the promotion of innovative research projects into clean fuels, and to improve the awareness and education of drivers.

Measures must also be adopted for construction and savings in this sector, which is one of the fields that consumes most energy, not to mention the promotion of competition in the gas sector and the emergence of gas as a competitor and alternative to oil.

In conclusion, Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, it is clear that we will only overcome the current crisis through coherent strategies which are well coordinated and multi-faceted.

Unfortunately, we do not have access to a panacea to resolve this situation in the short term, but luckily this current crisis has shown us the only way to overcome it: to promote competition in our markets, consolidate our common presence at an international level, coordinate our actions, adapt our priorities to the new energy objectives and act together in the fiscal field.

In the difficult situation we find ourselves in, the citizens expect us to turn these objectives into tangible realities, thinking not only of the immediate future but also of the medium and long term.

Madam President, Commissioner de Palacio, I would like to thank the Members of the Commission for the position they adopted, which showed realism.

We must ask ourselves whether it is necessary to get caught up in a crisis before we start to speak about better strategies.

Nothing would now be easier than calling on all Member States of the Union to substantially decrease taxation on oil products up until the price of a barrel of crude hopefully returns to the 22 - 25 US dollar mark, or thereabouts.

And it would be just as easy now for the Member States and their Ministers of Finance to declare that taxes should not be touched at all.

The reason for this is the difficulty of replacing tax revenue in the short term, and the long-term consumption-curbing effect of taxes whereby we aim to have an impact on the future state of our environment.

However, something has to be done.

People have had enough, and above all the livelihood of people in certain occupations is directly and badly endangered, as the Commissioner said, to mention just the fishermen, farmers and people who drive for a living.

In the longer term, fuel prices will bump up inflation still further and threaten the whole EU area with an economic setback.

The Member States now have to find a common approach in both the short and the long term.

Measures taken separately by individual countries under pressure from the protests will only make the situation more problematic and will distort competition.

The responsibility for action clearly lies with national governments.

Short-term measures will be the hardest.

Naturally it is essential to have intensive negotiations with the OPEC countries to increase oil production, if that is possible in general, thus easing the situation by ensuring steady supplies.

It will be difficult to get a quick result, however.

This means that very precise measures with regard to taxes on diesel and heating oil, for example, within the realms of possibility, will be a good solution, if they are implemented generally.

The reasons for the crisis can be found, not just in problems with supply, but also possibly in the refinery chain structure, the nature of the fuel market, futures market practices, and storage policies in certain countries and areas.

It is claimed that the refinery chain is in the hands of so few that a cartel-like situation has developed in the market.

I myself am not claiming that this is the case, but we need to look into the situation.

One question is this: is the Union in a position to negotiate strategies for vital stocks of oil both within its own territory and with the United States, as, apparently, the decline in US stocks and now their need for replenishment are pushing up the spot price of oil even further.

The Commissioner has already mentioned the dilapidated state of production machinery in Russia, a large oil producer.

Is it not time - the question is obviously mainly directed at Russia, but it is for us to consider also - that we embarked on measures that would persuade people to invest in Russian oil production?

In the long term, as the former Saudi Oil Minister, Sheikh Yamani, suggested, the permanently high price of oil will lead to other forms of energy.

With a glint in his eye, he said that the Stone Age did not end because people ran out of stones.

What is essential now, however, is the ability on the part of the countries of the Union to react in the short term.

Is it actually so that a reduction in the relatively same rate of tax on liquid fuel until the middle of next year by national governments throughout the Union is impossible?

Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, Vice-President of the Commission, on this issue there is a European problem: we do not have a European policy in this area and the Vice-President has recognised this fact.

Furthermore, this is a policy which requires much perseverance as well as investment and resources, because the problem, in relation to energy, is that 'we only remember Santa Bárbara when it thunders' , that is to say, in normal conditions, as Mrs de Palacio has pointed out, consumption tends to increase, and in a society where the car is king, this means a trend towards greater dependency.

In the medium and long term, I believe that the course of action described by the Commissioner, in line with what the Commission had proposed, should be maintained, monitored and strengthened, taking advantage of the development of sustainable energy, reducing dependency on oil, managing, for example, to break up the compartmentalisation of certain national markets and I am thinking, for instance, of the development of the railways as a complement and an alternative to the development of road transport.

None of this, however, is going to resolve the current situation.

That is to say, we need a virtuous policy, but at the same time we are now facing a particularly complex situation in that there are a series of professions who are in a very difficult position and which, as forms of Community-scale protests are developing in Europe, has lead to blockades and disorder and disparate reactions from our governments.

I would like very briefly to point out that, in recent times, thanks to more rigorous budgetary management, there has been talk of lightening the tax burden.

The people do not therefore understand why this cannot extend to oil products.

We must be able to understand this reaction and, at the same time, we must explain to our citizens the reasons for our decisions.

It is true that compensatory measures are required.

It is very important that we manage to improve the situation of transparency as well as anti-monopoly measures, which are the responsibility of the Commission, because somebody is benefiting: OPEC has increased the price, but does not take more than 5 or 6 dollars per barrel.

Above all, we must try to see to it that our governments react jointly and that, finally, we create a European energy policy that is in keeping with the common economic and social area.

Madam President, Commissioner, you made it quite plain: we remain vulnerable.

We seem to have forgotten that, once upon a time, we paid as little as USD 10 for a barrel of oil.

We did not ask ourselves the questions which we probably should have asked and which we are asking ourselves today.

Commissioner, you also mentioned that we have seen prices rise for the past eighteen months.

I wonder why the European experts and powers that be did not meet sooner to establish, when prices first started to rise, how things would develop, how this could be prevented from continuing and how we could avoid getting to the point where we are today.

Commissioner, you also stated that we should respond as a united front but we now see that every country has caught "the French flu" .

There is a lack of internal coherence, both in the reactions to the protests - protests which I can often understand very well - and in defending the currency, as well as a lack of external coherence in our attitude to OPEC.

We have to admit that a price of USD 10 per barrel of oil is just as abnormal as one of USD 35 and you are well aware that, while a price of USD 10 may be attractive to ourselves, it is not viable globally.

These are facts which we all seem to have forgotten for the time being.

I believe we ought not to do this in future.

You have listed the main strands in your communication which you published in the first week of September.

They are sound, and cover transport policy, energy policy and environmental policy.

I hope that, this evening in Luxembourg, you will manage to persuade people to adopt the same line because we need to emerge from this crisis now. We need to ensure that the next crisis is not as deep and can be held off for longer than we might anticipate.

At any rate, initiatives should be tabled at European level and a minimum level of cooperation guaranteed in order to help the most needy, as you stated yourself.

This is why I believe that a cut in the general tax burden, as proposed by my party in Belgium, is to be preferred to a specific tax burden on fuel.

What we must not do, whatever happens, is to say to people that energy could become cheap, as this would be the wrong message altogether.

Mr President, we should not wonder at all that we are once again in the midst of a fuel crisis.

This is the third one, and since 1979 energy policy has been little more than a series of failures.

A lot has been said about switching to a sustainable energy policy, but precious little has been done about it.

I welcome the ideas that have been put forward here today by the Commissioner.

Now transport ministers really do have the opportunity to make a definite U-turn in energy policy in the direction of a sustainable energy economy.

Road transport has increased from a 50% share of all transport in 1980 to an 85% share in 2000.

If we were now to reduce fuel taxation generally, this would be very much like lowering the price of heroine on the drugs market.

The end result would surely be that there would be more drug addicts than before and a greater crisis.

We should not be making these kinds of mistakes now.

Nuclear power is not an alternative either in this situation, as only 10% of electricity is produced using oil, and, besides, all the development work going on with regard to new vehicles, for example, is based on the idea that the cars of the future are perhaps more likely to run on hydrogen, but certainly not on nuclear energy.

Our group has today proposed an integrated programme such as this to serve as the European Union' s new energy policy programme.

We want to start implementing this also with regard to the budget, and we are proposing a new budget policy called " New Energy Sources" .

We want to promote energy saving, for example, and better construction technology for homes and buildings.

We also want the European Union to have powers to manage the new energy policy.

We require the issue of energy to be included in the Treaty and have its own chapter there, and we want to stress how important it is to rid ourselves of the requirement of unanimity with regard to taxation.

For almost ten years, we have been trying to establish a common energy tax in the European Union.

Commission Members have come and gone, but this problem has always remained unsolved.

In the short term we have to help the direct victims of this oil crisis, but it has to be done with the proper care and focus.

Mr President, Commissioner, it is my impression that this so-called fuel crisis reveals a number of structural problems which the European Union and the fifteen Member States should be dare to examine in every possible aspect.

The first of these problems concerns our relations with the South, in the event the producer countries.

Did Europe worry, at the beginning of last year, about the disastrous consequences for the economies and populations of a number of these countries when the price of a barrel of oil fell to less than USD 10?

This was hailed as good news when, in fact, the situation was just as worrying as an increase in the price to USD 34.

We need to establish a genuine long-term partnership between these countries and ourselves.

And then, all the other root causes of the current situation need to be looked at: cases of speculation, the inadequate stocks in the United States and the fall in the value of the euro.

The second problem revealed, in my view, by this crisis is the lack of coherence between our strategy choices within the Union.

The talk nowadays is of giving priority to rail over road transport and going in for piggybacking.

That is basic, a real social choice and an ecologically responsible act in the strongest sense of the term.

But for how long has exactly the opposite strategy been adopted, with road transport being pushed hard at the expense of rail?

Europe is so little prepared for this development that, today, you still have to change trains between France and Italy because the value of electrical current supply in the two countries are incompatible.

The third fundamental problem illustrated spectacularly by this crisis is the extreme difficulty many European leaders have in making an accurate assessment of grass-root demands.

They have not seen, or have not wanted to see, the serious problems which this rise in fuel costs presented for people obliged to use their cars or dependent upon domestic fuel oil.

Our fellow citizens are not prepared to shoulder the burden of this economic crisis, and they are protesting at the way in which countries have indulged the oil companies, even though the latter have been quite shameless in the profits they have been making. More and more pressure is going to be exerted in favour of a reduction in fuel tax and an appropriate levy on oil companies' profits.

The majority of my group is of the view that the Fifteen ought to take radical environmental measures, effectively promoting rail transport while responding, in the present context, to this legitimate social expectation.

In so doing, they would also do Europe what I think is a currently much needed service.

Mr President, the excessive rise in the price of oil is not without its causes, but there is a risk that, because of its own large share of responsibility for these causes, Europe will not take account of them.

The prime cause is the increase in production prices due to the oligopoly carefully organised by the oil-producing countries.

The short supply of oil has been exacerbated by the sanctions against Iraq, the unjust and immoral continuation of which may be in the interests of the American oil companies but is contrary to the interests of Europe.

The second cause is the depreciation of the euro and, therefore, of all the participating European currencies.

It was valued at USD 1.18 when it was launched.

It is now valued at only USD 0.85.

We were promised a strong currency.

It was a lie, and now we are having to foot a much higher bill.

The third cause is the excessive, even insane, taxation practised by the Member States, and this proto-socialist policy has been continued, if not actually initiated, by conservative governments. It is maintained under pressure from green organisations which are hostile to the motor car because it represents freedom for the individual.

It is taxation of this kind which multiplies the increase in farm gate prices by a factor of 3, 4 or 5.

The alignment of our foreign policy with that of the United States, the depreciation of the euro as a currency and the increase in taxation due to pressure from green campaigners are the three causes of the increase, which we deplore but for which our institutions bear a very heavy responsibility.

Mr President, Commissioner, in the last fortnight, we have seen a real euro-shambles where transport is concerned, with a petrol shortage, road blockades, mass protests and governments disabled.

You really would have thought you were back in 1973 after the first oil crisis.

And that is not counting the plummeting euro and the explosion in the price of a barrel of crude oil, factors not anticipated in the past oracular pronouncements by self-styled experts on Europe.

Largely predictable though it was, this crisis is as much the responsibility of the oil producers as of government.

Many varied solutions have been put forward, for the situations and the reasons for them are different from one country to another.

Many of these solutions are perfectly rational and obvious and, occasionally, ideological such as restrictions on vehicles or the eco-tax but, as you reminded us, none of these is a panacea that will in itself sort out the situation.

It should be remembered that what chiefly distinguishes the fuel question is its relation to currency and taxation issues and the way it goes on to affect urban and rural planning.

For, if this crisis affects people in their working lives, it also affects people in their private lives, especially in rural areas where the car is still too often the main means of transport and communication and the one to which people resort.

It is a situation resulting from the gradual withdrawal of public services which has not been offset by private operators, who are much too concerned with maximising their profits.

Strategies relating to taxation, the currency and urban and rural planning are matters for each Member State and each Member State alone, in accordance with the sacrosanct principle of subsidiarity.

To conclude, we want to see lower fuel tax because, at present, it is too much of a burden on the people of Europe, in both their private and working lives.

However, there are additional strategies open to our Member States.

The European Union must leave the latter free to exercise their sovereignty in making judicious strategy choices when it comes to energy savings, supplementary forms of renewable energy, the redistribution of freight to the railways and rivers and the development of public transport and the opening up of rural areas.

Mr President, this is actually the third oil crisis we have had, but it contrasts sharply with the other two.

They were political crises of man-made origin, and they came about in 1973 and 1979 with the fall of the Shah regime.

For fifteen years now there have clear indications and studies - for example, Global 2000, the report compiled for Jimmy Carter - to the effect that there would be a real shortage in raw materials by the turn of the century.

In other words, the third oil crisis we are experiencing now, is here to stay.

Whether the price drops again in the short term is of no consequence because there will be a steady upward trend in the long term.

It even says in Colin Campbell' s study - anyone interested in having a copy can get one from me - that there will be a shortage of raw materials, i.e. oil, in the early years of the 21st century, the reason being that the production curve has passed its peak.

I therefore believe that even demonstrations are onto a loser, because you can only squeeze so much juice from a lemon.

We will still have oil, but it will not come cheap.

In other words, the price of oil will rise to between USD 40 and 60 in the future.

There are enough studies to this effect.

Even if they should prove to be wrong, now is the time to consider and analyse them.

Nor is it an OPEC crisis, because only 40% of the oil produced comes from OPEC countries; the remaining 60% comes from non-OPEC countries.

If this was just a man-made crisis, the other oil producers could redress the balance.

Mr President, let us put this matter in perspective.

This is not as much of a crisis as the 1970s.

It is as much a taxpayer' s crisis as an energy crisis.

It is not acceptable for governments to put the blame on OPEC, on oil companies, on peaceful protesters, on other political parties, or even on the European Union for protests about levels of taxation that are too high.

In the UK, tax takes 75% or three-quarters of the price of a litre of petrol or diesel and that is the responsibility of the government, no one else.

Energy supply is more elastic than demand.

We learned this in the 1970s, when higher prices brought more oil fields into production yet did not reduce consumption in the transport sector.

High taxation raises revenue, but fails to cut consumption.

Nevertheless, the price increases and the tax protests are timely, to remind us both about our dependence in Europe on imported energy and about the difficulties we face in achieving environmental objectives such as CO2 emission reduction.

If taxation of energy is to be used for pursuing environmental aids, then the policy has to be transparent and consistent so as to carry public opinion with us.

Where policies are perceived as unfair and inconsistent, as in the UK, then protests will enjoy widespread popular support.

To put fuel taxes up so much as to make industry uncompetitive while reducing taxes on domestic household energy consumption, is crazy politics and bad economics.

Let us not be beguiled by arguments about harmonising taxation, because harmonised taxes under socialists have only one way to go and that is up.

That is not what the taxpayers and consumers of Europe want.

Mr President, the explosion in the prices of oil products illustrates the need to make the euro into a genuinely international currency.

The Americans, like ourselves, are suffering an explosion in farm gate prices.

Since barrels of oil are paid for in dollars, the increase has a greater impact upon countries whose currencies have lost ground against the dollar.

Among these currencies are the euro, the Danish krone, the British pound and a lot of other currencies.

Mrs de Palacio has just emphasised that Europe is the world' s biggest oil importer.

Given this status, it is not right that it should continue to pay for its imports in dollars.

The Socialists are asking the Commission to encourage European oil importers to sign contracts in euros.

An initiative of that kind has a chance of succeeding.

Producers know that the dollar will be certain to lose value against the euro.

For producers, contracts made out in euros could become an insurance against an inevitable economic downturn in the United States.

The ECB has recently justified keeping tight control of its key interest rates by referring to the inflationary pressure created by the increase in oil prices and in rates of exchange.

According to the ECB, monetary policy cannot remedy this situation in the short term.

Economic policy cannot offer a solution to the rise in oil prices either, and must, in addition, be subject to a rise in the cost of capital.

The ECB says that imported inflation is also a form of inflation to be combated.

I would conclude by saying that the price of oil will be brought down neither by increasing the cost of investments nor by reducing the purchasing power of the people of Europe.

Rather than soothing inflationary fever, is not the ECB' s treatment in danger of damaging the health of the European economy?

Mr President, current petrol and diesel prices strike at the very heart of transport companies and threaten their existence. Such prices are unacceptable.

I believe we must temporarily reduce the various tax burdens to an economically and socially sustainable level.

Bear in mind that we are not the ones that set the tax rates.

As a European Union, we have set minimum rates of taxation for motor vehicle and mineral oil.

It is the Member States that have the room for manoeuvre.

They have pushed it to the limit, and now we are facing this crisis of high oil prices, they must drop these prices and coordinate them.

We cannot have a situation where, rightly or wrongly, one government caves in but another does not, and where companies in one country have distortions in competition to contend with that companies from another country do not. They get the same prices in the same market but their costs are different.

This is an intolerable state of affairs for the transport sector.

Madam Vice-President, I would suggest that you go to Luxembourg and tell the Transport Ministers, firstly that we need concerted action, and secondly, that we need to see a reduction in costs for the transport sector. Thirdly, we do not want the Transport Ministers to make empty promises that will be scotched by the Finance Ministers in two weeks' time.

The decisions reached by the 15 Member States this evening, or in the course of the next few days, must be upheld.

Some Ministers bemoan the fate of the transport sector, whilst others refuse to reduce or amend taxes. Such two-faced behaviour is unsupportable!

Mr President, we have been sleepwalking for decades.

British Conservatives still are but it is time to wake up.

One is a bad choice and that is to adopt a short-term fix and cut taxes, abdicate our government responsibilities.

We cannot avoid the other choice and the real question which is: How do we use a finite resource when demand is increasing and we have environmental promises?

The rational choice is to stop the profligate use of petrol and diesel and to change the behaviour of the public and of those involved in transport.

Let us lower and enforce speed limits.

We must lower our dependency on imported petroleum products.

We must adopt alternative fuels - biodiesel, fuel cells, gas and electric cars.

Let us realign the Fifth Frame Work Programme in its mid-term towards much more research into and development of those alternatives.

Let us put more money in the budget, change the decision on programmes like SAVE and Altener.

We do not need a new budget heading.

Let us put more money in them.

Let us negotiate - but as the European Union - because stability is in the interests not only of oil - importing countries but also of oil - exporting countries.

Good luck, Commissioner, when you go to Luxembourg.

Mr President, yes, Mrs Palacio, you are absolutely right - what we need is dialogue.

Yes, we must increase the financial support, and yes, we oppose cartels and monopolies.

But reducing taxation and other things - which, funnily enough, is what certain Members to my left have suggested - is no way to solve the problem.

OPEC and the oil producing countries will immediately move in to close this gap.

They have a political and economic hold over us.

What chance do we stand against this?

(Heckling from Mr Jarzembowski) Have we reduced our consumption? No.

Mr Jarzembowski, who has just spoken - he can shout loudly, and so can I as it happens - says that there must be a paradigm shift where traffic is concerned.

There is more road transport than there was ten years ago. It is high time this was changed.

We need a paradigm shift where transport is concerned.

There needs to be more transport via rail and water - let us make it happen.

We need to be less dependent.

Let us pursue a common energy policy, for example.

You, Mrs Palacio, and we MEPs, should call for a common energy policy to be incorporated into the Treaty.

We are still lacking such a policy.

So who is guilty of blocking it to date?

For example, what we need to do, Mrs Palacio, is to get rid of the link between gas and oil prices.

You could do that in tandem with the Commission.

Why are gas prices linked to oil prices?

There is no reason why they should be.

You are the obvious person to bring this about.

We can do all of these things.

There are many things we can do, which the Member States have failed to do so far.

Unfortunately, I am speaking too fast for the interpreter, and I apologise for this.

Right now, there must be no falling out between groups on the right, and those on the left or in the centre, above or below.

The OPEC States will watch from the sidelines, smile indulgently, and put the prices up.

We must show a united front, and the same goes for the Ministers meeting in the Transport Council - and you, Mr Jarzembowski, would do well to shout less loudly and at last get round to doing something in your transport committee.

Mr President, I would to thank all the Members who have spoken in the debate and point out that there is largely a broad consensus on our approach to this issue.

Ten dollars per barrel of oil was far too low a price and, furthermore, it had negative effects on our economies, although this seems more complicated to explain.

On the other hand, 35 dollars is too high a price for us to bear.

That is why we have to try immediately to persuade OPEC to increase production in order to lower the tension over prices, so that we can really fulfil that "target band" and make the markets more stable.

We should not once again - as the spokesman of the Socialist Group said a moment ago - forget the problem and 'only remember Santa Bárbara when it thunders' , but we should maintain our action over time.

In the Directorate-General for Energy we have been working since November on the medium-term strategy for energy, and I therefore hope that we will be able to present a quality document in the coming weeks.

We are seeking a medium-term view, which is combined with a review of the Union' s transport policy because it is a fact that energy is a crucial component in transport.

Much of our energy is destined for this specific sector in particular.

This means coordinating the energy policy.

I would like us to try to communitise this, but, in the mean time, we must coordinate the energy policy of the Member States.

It is also necessary to continue making progress on transport policies and we must avoid, as a result of a crisis such as this, suddenly changing our transport policy and energy policy which has been established over recent years.

We must not therefore use the method of lowering taxes as a solution to this circumstantial rise in oil prices.

Perhaps, in a very limited way, some countries may resort to that method, above all because there may be an exception in the directive on hydrocarbons.

We could probably consider certain proposals such as postponing the ecotax, but what we cannot do is propose one thing and then its complete opposite.

I repeat that we must have a minimum degree of internal coherence in our policies.

Energy and transport policies are medium- and long-term policies, which cannot be modified under pressure from very specific circumstances, which I am sure are going to change within a year and a half or two years although, no doubt, we will not return to prices of 10 dollars per barrel.

However, they are going to change simply for market reasons, even if OPEC does nothing. Furthermore, OPEC is prepared to act and I hope that it does so and does so well.

Nevertheless, these long-term measures cannot absolve us of our current responsibilities, responsibilities, which we all share, which range from safeguarding the freedom of movement to complying with Community rules.

But it is also the responsibility of the governments to take measures to alleviate the difficulties and provide solutions for the sectors that are most affected.

We are talking specifically of the transport sector and now, in the Council of Transport Ministers, I hope we will reach some agreements.

There are also problems in the fishing and agricultural sectors, without forgetting that there is another whole series of sectors affected by these difficulties.

We must work on issues such as energy saving, renewable energies, research into biofuels and the use of biomass.

Before the end of the year we will produce a regulation on buildings which this House can deal with.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I must now leave you because I am running a little late for the Council of Ministers in Luxembourg.

So you keep a few Ministers waiting - it could be worse!

The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 a.m.

Secretariat for joint supervisory data protection bodies

The next item is the report (A5-0225/2000) on behalf of the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs, on the initiative of the Portuguese Republic with a view to the adoption of a Council Decision [7381/2000 - C5-0230/2000 - 2000/0804(CNS)] establishing a Secretariat for the Joint Supervisory Data Protection Bodies set up by the Convention on the Establishment of a European Police Office (Europol Convention), the Convention on the Use of Information Technology for Customs Purposes and the Convention implementing the Schengen Agreement on the gradual abolition of checks at the common borders (Schengen Convention).

Mr President, I have no doubt that in the age of new communications technologies, in the age of the Internet, which is well under way at the beginning of this new century, we legislators are faced with a very exciting challenge: to protect people from intrusion and from attacks on their private life, their dignity or their reputation.

The protection of these rights is recognised in numerous legislative texts of a universal nature, such as the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, of a transnational nature, such as the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Liberties, or of a national nature, such as the constitutions of the Member States, but the legislative diversity in this area requires that efforts be made in terms of the harmonisation and unification of criteria.

The majority of countries are beginning a legislative process to prevent violations of people' s fundamental rights, such as the right to private life, and this right is also expressly included in Article 8 of the draft Charter of Fundamental Rights.

We are therefore facing a legislative challenge of unquestionable importance, which must regulate to ensure that this right is respected and the exceptions which, in a democratic society, it is necessary to establish in order, as the Convention of the Protection of Human Rights says, to safeguard public security, defend public order and prevent crime.

The report which I am presenting to Parliament aims to analyse one of the many aspects involved in this legislative task: the creation of a single secretariat for the three supervisory bodies for the protection of data from Europol, Schengen and customs information, within the framework of the third pillar and in the field of police and judicial cooperation in criminal matters enshrined in Chapter VI of the Treaty.

The Council' s proposal for a decision is correct but is, in my view, timid and does not go far enough.

In this delicate field of data protection we must achieve two fundamental objectives: transparency in the future functioning of the secretariat and the independence of its work.

I do not believe that either objective is fully guaranteed in the Council' s proposal, hence the content of the amendments I am proposing, which have been accepted practically unanimously in the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights.

Justice and Home Affairs. I wonder whether it is a positive thing, in terms of transparency, to have three joint data protection bodies within the third pillar?

I therefore believe that the final objective should be the establishment of a single body corresponding to a single legal framework within the European Union and that that body be provided with its own budget and staff, even exceeding the normal distribution between pillars, taking advantage of the option provided for in Article 42 of the Treaty of the European Union.

Ladies and gentlemen, this Parliament is currently examining and debating the consequences for personal and economic relations in the European Union of the discovery of a possible spying network known as the Echelon system, and is also studying a regulation on the protection of physical persons in the processing of data by the institutions of the Community.

We are furthermore now examining this proposal for the third pillar.

As we will see, these are different aspects of the same problem.

I therefore believe that this Parliament must go further than the Council' s decision, which, as I have said, falls short on aspects such as the election and appointment of the secretariat, its dismissal or the guarantee of professional secrecy in its functioning.

Independence is another basic element which is not sufficiently guaranteed in the Council' s proposal.

Parliament is the institution which must guarantee its independence, by means of the democratic control which legitimately corresponds to it.

That is why in the future the body should be appointed by Parliament and the secretariat of the three bodies would enjoy more independence if the costs of staffing and the resources needed for its funding were to be included in section 8B of the general European Union budget, as I propose, and not in the Council' s budget.

Let us not fool ourselves, financial independence is essential to guaranteeing functional independence.

Ladies and gentlemen, we are legislating in a field which is fundamental to the future of our interpersonal, economic and commercial relations.

Our challenge is to create a balance and compatibility between the right to privacy and the right of free access to information.

The introduction of new technologies, computers and telecommunications has broken down barriers and transcended borders.

There has been a genuine revolution in commercial, social and personal relations which have a real effect on the daily lives of citizens: health, advertising, banking transactions, or even aspects which relate to the security and defence of citizens, and of States themselves, can be jeopardised if there are no rules to guarantee the correct transmission and storage of the data which today circulate with total freedom and which are not immune to the serious danger of indiscriminate use.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I should like to begin by congratulating Mr Hernández Mollar on the excellent report he has presented to us, which the Group of the European People's Party endorses and which gained the almost unanimous support of the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs.

This is a small step forward, but one which signals the beginnings of a strategy for harmonisation which, we hope, will be enacted under the third pillar.

We are thus beginning to move towards harmonisation, with the creation of a joint secretariat for the various supervisory bodies.

We hope that a set of common regulations for supervision and for a single supervisory body can be adopted in the medium term.

This is crucial if we are to guarantee that the public' s fundamental right to privacy is respected, safeguarding the legal principle of fair and equal treatment for all citizens. Laws must be applied and interpreted according to the same criteria, providing the same level of data protection.

In fact, there is no justification for the existence of three separate joint supervisory bodies.

Today, in addition to national supervisory bodies, there are also these three joint supervisory bodies, each with its own secretariat.

The question is: can this system really guarantee effective protection?

I do not think it can.

These bodies therefore need to be merged into one single entity as soon as possible, with legal personality and its own budget, which will ensure that it is impartial and independent from the other institutions, as Mr Hernández Mollar has just said, and he is quite right.

This is a matter of protecting the interests and rights of our citizens.

There is also a vital need to create a single legal framework in the European Union to provide citizens with sufficient guarantees, essentially by preventing the improper use or dissemination of personal data and by remedying the shortcomings in the current system of protection.

The constitutions in force in the various Member States recognise the right to privacy. Furthermore, Article 8 of the Union' s draft Charter of Fundamental Rights also expressly upholds every citizen' s right to the protection of personal data concerning him or her.

The very fact that different laws exist in each country, however, raises various problems that can be overcome by adopting minimum standards which will make it possible to harmonise these national laws, thereby guaranteeing that citizens' fundamental rights are respected, and specifically the right to privacy and the right to freedom of expression and of information.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, the increasingly complex nature of society and of economic life, backed up by ever more powerful technology, is creating new situations which threaten the individual rights of our citizens and leave them unprotected. This requires us to establish appropriate mechanisms for protecting our citizens from potential abuses of these rights.

The current system, which is designed to protect people' s privacy and which guarantees all citizens' inalienable right to privacy with regard to the computerised processing of their personal data, is widely considered to be inefficient. This is because in addition to national data protection supervisory bodies there are still three joint supervisory bodies in the European Union, each with its own secretariat.

In order to combat this duplication of supervisory bodies, which leads to inefficiency, the Portuguese have drawn up an initiative for a proposal with a view to the adoption of a Council Decision to create a single secretariat for the three joint data protection supervisory bodies.

In the current circumstances, it is generally accepted that this is a viable solution which would reduce the problems caused by the existence of three data protection supervisory bodies within the Union.

The rapporteur' s suggestion that a single data protection supervisory body should be created, with a single secretariat, with legal personality and its own budget is also to be welcomed.

This would create ideal conditions for achieving our stated aims of protecting our citizens' private life and individual freedoms, without, on the other hand, impeding the free flow of information, which is the hallmark of modern societies.

The rapporteur recognises that it is not feasible to set up this single body in the European Union in the short term, and refers in his report to establishing it in the medium term, under the third pillar.

Whilst I congratulate the rapporteur on his work, I should also like to draw your attention to the risk of postponing the creation of this authority for years and years.

It might have been wiser for the report to have set a fixed and reasonable deadline for this body to be established, which would give more force to the proposal put forward by the rapporteur and the European Parliament.

Mr President, rapporteur, I welcome any initiative that aims to improve data protection for the people of the European Union.

However, there are serious problems with the EUROPOL and Schengen Conventions, and as regards customs cooperation.

One of these is the inadequate level of protection for data collated and processed in the institutions.

As far as I am concerned, it goes without saying that the proposed secretariat must be independent of the institutions requiring monitoring, as is borne out by the fact that it has its own budget.

Yet still I cannot vote in favour of Mr Hernández Mollar' s report.

I ask myself this: why should bringing all those who have been responsible for data protection hitherto, together in one secretariat headed by one General Secretary, lead to improvements in data protection merely because it is certain to lead to savings in this sphere?

Bringing these officials together under one roof will not guarantee better data protection.

Taking an overall political view, I see Portugal' s initiative, together with the report, as being one more step along the way towards improving coordination between Schengen and EUROPOL.

When it comes to the problems associated with the aforesaid conventions, inadequate data protection is the least of our worries.

Both EUROPOL and Schengen will add hugely to the construction of fortress Europe.

Fundamental human rights such as the right to freedom of movement, the right to asylum, or in many cases, even the simple right to human dignity, will be compromised, and these institutions will support and control this.

Therefore, I cannot vote in favour of an initiative that may bring about a mild improvement, when it will also help legitimise these institutions as a result.

Since I am basically critical of EUROPOL, and Schengen in general, and I believe that having one General Secretary instead of three does not equal better data protection, I intend to abstain.

Mr President, this report deals with issues which are of very great importance to personal privacy and data protection.

Within the EU, extensive registers of personal data are now being compiled in which very sensitive personal information is stored.

At the same time, it is obvious that these registers are inadequately supervised and insufficiently secure.

Those of us in the Confederal Group of the European United Left/Nordic Green Left are obviously keen to improve data protection and supervision.

We therefore support the idea of introducing a single independent supervisory authority with proper powers and resources.

To that extent, we are in favour of the basic ideas in this report but we wish, however, to point out that it is important to construct this supervisory authority on the basis of the skills possessed by the Member States in this area.

A new supervisory authority must be able to cover all the relevant registers, including the Eurodac register which has a major role to play in the EU' s asylum policy.

Refugees are an especially vulnerable group, and information contained on a register can be a direct reason for deporting people and so have serious consequences for an asylum seeker.

It is therefore especially important to be able to see to it that the register contains accurate information, that the asylum seeker is provided with information about his or her rights and that there are opportunities for appeal.

Moreover, the Sirene organisation established under the Schengen agreement must be covered by a new supervisory authority.

By and large, the relatively little known Sirene can send any personal data at all between Member States at short notice, as well as combine data relating to ordinary police matters with that concerning state security and policy on refugees.

The whole of the Sirene organisation suffers from a palpable lack of public and parliamentary control.

We already have significant experience in this area when it comes to dealing with the Schengen agreement' s large register of personal data, SIS.

That experience is unfortunately very disheartening.

The Joint Supervisory Authority, or JSA, has had quite inadequate resources.

Moreover, it has been denied access to important information in SIS.

This may be seen from the JSA' s first annual reports.

In spite of the difficult working conditions, the JSA reveals serious deficiencies in SIS, for example incorrect information on file, instances of Member States' illegally copying information and inadequate procedures for gaining access to registers.

In order to obtain effective data protection, more than effective supervision is required.

More basic changes are needed when it comes to the rules governing the registers.

One requirement is that registers of criminals be distinguished from registers of refugees and registers kept to protect state security.

These different areas must not be covered by joint organisations and registers.

Public and parliamentary control must be reinforced, especially when it comes to Sirene and Schengen.

Moreover, clear limits must be set for what may be recorded in Europol' s investigation register, founded upon Article 10.1 of the Europol Convention.

At present, the scope of the register goes far beyond what is necessary.

People who are not suspected of crimes may be registered, and sensitive personal data about political views, religious affiliation and sexual orientation may be recorded.

A central place must be given to personal privacy and legal rights.

Mr President, I would like to thank my colleague, Mr Hernández Mollar, for his valuable work in drafting this report.

In matters of data protection we have to make the difficult compromise between the protection of privacy, the safety of our citizens, and the stability of the Single Market.

A basic pre-condition of a market in a Europe with no internal borders is that information flows unhindered and fast.

As the visible supervision of the movement of goods and services has come to an end, the importance of so-called invisible supervision has grown year after year.

The rapid exchange of information between official bodies is the only chance we have of preventing criminal exploitation of the benefits of this free movement.

The level of data protection in today' s bit streams is still not adequate in the European Union.

The fundamental human right of confidentiality as far as mail is concerned is being jeopardised, for example through criminal activity and inquiries carried out using email systems.

The rapid growth in ecommerce in particular is posing new threats to the protection of data concerning our citizens.

For example, the theft of credit card information and the abuse of personal ID are growing dramatically in the information networks.

In addition, databases established for purposes of marketing, which contain details of people' s way of life and consumer habits, are often in conflict with basic rights which are there to protect privacy.

It is reasonable to suppose that the work of the various data protection bodies working now in the EU area can be made more effective through centralisation.

The founding of a joint body with respect to the work of Europol, customs control and the ordinary fundamental rights of EU citizens is an excellent idea.

At the same time, however, we must ensure that there are adequate resources available.

The workload is increasing at a ferocious rate.

And one must clarify ways of making data protection cooperation more effective between the Secretariat to be created and the national authorities.

The independence of data protection bodies is the key to success here.

Supervision always leads to difficult interpretations of a situation, the outcome of which many players may well wish to influence, owing to purely financial interests.

Because of this, the bodies will have to work in close cooperation with the EU and national courts of justice.

The European Parliament must monitor closely the work and accountability of the official Secretariat to be set up from a position of impartiality.

Mr President, ladies and gentleman, first of all, the Commission wishes to thank the rapporteur, Mr Hernández Mollar, for the excellent report that he has presented and acknowledge that our participation in this debate has been made easier by the fact that we broadly agree with and support the approach he has proposed.

The Commission is pleased with the initiative that has been taken by the Portuguese Government, as we feel that it will contribute to our efforts to rationalise, in a sensible way, the administrative support provided to the bodies responsible for supervising and guaranteeing data protection established by the Europol Convention, the Convention on the Use of Information Technology for Customs Purposes and the Convention implementing the Schengen Agreement.

The Commission shares the rapporteur' s view that a single supervisory body needs to be created for these three instruments, because a single supervisory body would ensure that the principles of data protection are applied more coherently, both under the Schengen Convention and the Convention on the Use of Information Technology for Customs Purposes. The creation of a single supervisory body would also prevent an undesirable duplication of work.

Similarly, the Commission agrees with the idea that a range of common essential principles on data protection needs to be established and can be implemented as uniformly as possible throughout the third pillar.

It is true that there are currently shortcomings in the Community legal framework in this area.

We are pleased that a specialist Council Group has initiated the debate on these common general principles and also that the French Presidency has already made it clear that this issue is one of its priorities.

We must recognise that this is not an easy task, not only because of the sophistication of the technology, but also because it is particularly important for us to find a solution that strikes a balance between safeguarding citizens' rights and freedoms on the one hand and on the other, having the instruments needed to ensure that the democratic rule of law is respected and that we can effectively fight transnational and organised crime.

I feel sure that our first task must be to define these common principles, which can then be translated into the various legislative instruments that we will need to adopt in the coming years under the third pillar.

This approach also involves - as various speakers have already pointed out - introducing, either under the Europol Convention or under new laws based on the Schengen Convention, clear and transparent principles of democratic and judicial supervision, which will guarantee the fundamental values on which a Union governed by the rule of law must be based.

Perhaps the most difficult issue that this report raises is the problem of deciding whether a separate budget heading should be created for the joint secretariat.

The Commission agrees with the rapporteur' s assertion that it is extremely important to guarantee the independence of this secretariat in relation to the Council itself.

The idea that we are therefore advocating, even if this issue can potentially only be resolved in the long term, is to create a separate budget heading.

Nevertheless, we understand that for the moment, the Council' s prime concern is that the creation of a new budget heading could cause delays in setting up a joint secretariat.

So in practical terms the Commission understands the Council' s desire to use existing financial structures, but only as a provisional measure.

In the event that the Council decides to uphold its position, the Commission will back Mr Hernández Mollar' s proposal, which is to reiterate the recitals put forward by the rapporteur so as to make it quite clear that these are merely provisional financial arrangements pending the creation of a single supervisory body responsible for data protection under the three conventions.

To conclude, I am delighted that this report and its underlying principles have received such widespread support in the European Parliament.

The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 a.m.

The next item is the report (A5-0219/2000) by Mr Pirker, on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs, on the proposal for a Council Regulation concerning the establishment of 'Eurodac' for the comparison of finger prints for the effective application of the Dublin Convention (renewed consultation) [8417/2000 - C5-0256/2000 - 1999/0116(CNS)].

Mr President, Commissioner, honourable Members, we are able to celebrate a ten-year anniversary almost exactly to the day.

Almost exactly ten years ago to the day, we started discussing which country should in fact be responsible for processing asylum applications.

Then the Dublin Convention came into force.

Yet, to this day, we have failed to make Dublin truly enforceable, in other words, we have been unable to establish a suitable instrument of control.

We have been discussing the fact that we need an instrument of this kind, for years, but so far to no avail, and tomorrow we will have our one and only chance to actually complete Eurodac. I would be delighted if we could.

A great many Council Presidents, who have held office in the intervening period, would be delighted too, and everyone has promised that they will make it an absolute priority to try and make Eurodac a reality.

This has been a long, drawn-out business, and it concerns an important issue.

Why do we need Eurodac and what can it do?

Eurodac is a system that will enable us to compare fingerprints and ascertain in an appropriate manner, which country was the first point of contact for the refugee, and, as such, which country is responsible for processing the asylum application. This will also allow for a distribution of the burden amongst the Member States.

And, of course, it is also an instrument that will be used to establish if an applicant has submitted asylum applications before.

In other words, it is also an instrument for fighting abuse and illegal activity. It is an instrument that we both want, and need, to have at all costs.

As I said, it has been a long, drawn-out business and the last time we discussed it in Parliament was December 1999.

The vast majority of us were agreed, firstly on the fact that we must get Eurodac up and running, and secondly, on the conditions under which it should be implemented.

Above all, we have seen eye to eye with Commissioner Vitorino throughout, and I would like to thank him, because he has moved heaven and earth to enable Eurodac to at last become a reality.

Parliament established that the implementing powers would be conferred on the Commission, in accordance with the provisions of the EC Treaty.

However, immediately after we had taken this decision, the Council met in December and, for reasons which we do not understand at all, shelved these joint proposals from Parliament and the Commission, and reserved the most important implementing powers for itself.

Consequently, because there had been a substantial amendment, this required reconsultation of Parliament, i.e. we have had to review the situation, albeit only in respect of the relevant points, i.e. Articles 22 and 23 alone.

We confined ourselves to these areas in committee, with the exception of Mrs Boumediene-Thiery, who sparked off a new discussion.

I do not know what she was hoping to achieve in this way. The object of the exercise was simply to deal with Articles 22 and 23.

The new proposal relating to these articles accommodates the Council' s wish to retain sole responsibility for the most important implementing powers, i.e. those regarding the collection, transmission and comparison of fingerprints, those for the blocking of the data concerning applicants for asylum, and those for drawing up statistics on asylum applicants.

There was unanimous agreement in committee that we should stand by our original proposal and reject that of the Council.

Firstly, the Council' s move is contrary to Article 202 of the EC Treaty, which establishes the principle that the implementation of the rules which the Council lays down shall be conferred on the Commission.

This is particularly important in this case.

The Commission could take a far more impartial - i.e. it would be less likely to accommodate specific national interests - and objective line when it comes to implementing this regulation.

Therefore we as a Parliament support this.

There is also a second reason as to why we oppose the Council' s proposal.

It works against Parliament because it excludes us, because there is no longer a comitology procedure, and because we will no longer have access or entitlement to the information we need.

This proposal would whittle away Parliament' s rights.

For these two highly convincing reasons, we are in favour of the proposal submitted by the Commission and Commissioner Vitorino, to the effect that implementing powers should be bestowed on the Commission, and I would urge you all to attend tomorrow' s vote.

This will be our opportunity to make Europe a safer place, and to take action against abuse.

Let us seize this opportunity and use this chance to at last make Eurodac a reality.

I should very much like to support what Mr Pirker has just said.

As a past Minister for Immigration and Asylum in the United Kingdom, I am well aware that the confusion with regard to determining which country should deal with any particular application has been an immense problem and one that has created a considerable level of friction between Members of the European Union.

Unless it is tackled urgently, it will continue to be an area of friction as we look at the enlargement process.

The Dublin Convention in itself has always been important but it is the flaws in the Dublin Convention and our failure to administer the Dublin Convention properly, which has caused issues to arise which could even threaten the human rights of some of the applicants and individuals concerned.

All the countries that are signatories to the United Nations Convention of 1951 are well aware of the criteria for determining whether someone should be granted the extremely valuable and significant status of a refugee and I hope that nothing we ever do here would affect the right to make an application within those criteria.

However - with new technology, with new travelling arrangements, and indeed with people who want to abuse the system using that technology - it has become more and more difficult for the authorities to treat people in an appropriate and fair manner in handling their cases.

Eurodac has to run hand in hand with the reform of the Dublin Convention and I am somewhat concerned at the attitude that the Council has adopted in the past.

Mr Pirker has spoken of the delays that have occurred and the numerous times that this vital issue has been reconsidered.

My feelings are clear: if the Council wishes to reserve powers to itself when the information from Eurodac should be available to this democratic body, Parliament, then that is unacceptable.

That is all the more reason why we need to treat this matter with urgency, why we need to resolve it, and why Parliament should continue to play a strong role in the future in the superintendence and monitoring of vital issues relating to the granting refugee status to those who might apply.

I fully support Mr Pirker and I hope we make strong moves now to conclude this matter in the interests of everybody.

Mr President, as the rapporteur, Mr Pirker, has said, this Parliament has already expressed its opinion more than once on the proposed Eurodac Agreement.

Last time it expressed its opinion on the proposal as a whole and I believe that the position Parliament adopted was very close to what the Socialist Group wanted.

I wish to defend Parliament' s position, which this House voted for a few months ago in relation to the Eurodac Agreement.

I therefore believe that we are now being consulted on an amendment which the Council is introducing in this communication, and that it affects the allocation of competences for this action by the Council.

The Treaty established that the Commission must have responsibility for implementation - for Eurodac also, we believe - and also established that Parliament can supervise what the Commission does.

This still does not seem sufficient to us, and we hope that, at least in the legislative and supervisory field, we can have further competences.

For this reason, my Group is tomorrow going to abstain in the vote on all the amendments which do not relate to this change to the Council' s communication.

We are going to abstain on those amendments which we feel have already been approved by Parliament and which are already included in this Parliament' s previous report.

We are going to abstain for reasons which I imagine are very different from Mr Pirker' s reasons for voting against it, but we are going to abstain in order to maintain the position which Parliament has already expressed.

However, on behalf of my group, I would like to express my support for the amendments proposed by Mr Pirker, for the reasons which I have already expressed, because I believe that the previous proposal was better and because I believe that the Commission must take this project forward.

I hope that it does so taking account of Parliament' s decision and it is important that tomorrow' s vote shows Parliament' s strong support for the previous proposal.

Mr President, we are developing a third pillar on the basis of policies which have been intergovernmental and which must become Community policies.

I believe it is very important for Parliament to support these first actions we are taking and also to support the Commission so that it can play the role accorded it by the Treaty.

The ELDR Group fully supports Mr Pirker in his insistence that Article 202 of the Treaty should be followed in its general rule that implementation powers for this regulation should be conferred on the Commission.

He is absolutely right to argue that the Commission is in a stronger position to take an impartial view which does not bend to accommodate specific national interests and therefore it is arguably more capable of drawing up adequate data-protection safeguards.

Secondly, although Parliament may have its arguments with the Commission from time to time, we do have a much better chance of exercising democratic supervision if the Commission has the implementing powers than if the Council has them.

This is because the regulatory committee procedure, coupled with the interinstitutional agreement, entitles Parliament to receive draft implementing measures.

And when - rather than if - we achieve codecision in this area, this will enable Parliament to require the Commission to re-examine the measures if the implementing measures are exceeded.

We would be foolish, as a Parliament, to rely on the Council' s goodwill rather than on rights which we possess if the Commission has the implementing powers.

That is why my group will abstain on some of the amendments of substance which would alter the substantive details of the Eurodac regulation.

My group supported these amendments when the focus was on the substance but at this stage it is better to concentrate on the issue of whether the Commission or Council has implementing powers so that we in Parliament state loudly and in unison that our interests lie in backing the Commission.

That is the only issue that we ought to concentrate on now and, perhaps with some slight regret, we feel that Parliament' s position needs to be slimmed down to Mr Pirker' s points on comitology.

Ladies and gentlemen, we are now facing a fairly unusual procedure which deserves a detailed explanation so that everyone can vote in the full knowledge of what is explicitly and implicitly at stake in this matter.

Last November, the majority of the European Parliament adopted a report on the creation of the Eurodac system.

Following this vote, the Council modified its proposal for a regulation, stating that the Eurodac system for comparing fingerprints should be established and administered by the Council rather than the Commission.

This important change is the reason why this report is being re-examined by this Chamber.

In the opinion of our Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs, it was the Commission rather than the Council that should be given responsibility for administering this new facility, Eurodac.

Indeed, the Commission quite rightly emphasised that, as the only Community institution of the Union, it ought to have responsibility for administering a Community programme like Eurodac, and not in any circumstances the Council, which is an intergovernmental body.

We wholly support the Commission on this.

However, the new proposal being examined today has not taken any account whatsoever of the amendments Parliament has voted in favour of.

Whether it be about specifying 18 years as the minimum age at which an applicant for asylum can be registered on the Eurodac database, about erasing personal data once legally recognised status has been acquired or about substituting the expression 'third-country national' for 'alien' , the Council has not seen fit to take account of Parliament' s opinion and has been supported in this by the Commission, which has also declined to take account of it.

It is in view of this situation that I am today asking you again to uphold the vote which Parliament wisely held last year.

This means voting on the text adopted by the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs, which includes the amendments relating to the lower age limit of 18 years, the erasing of personal data in the case of any applicant who has achieved legal status and the use of the expression 'third-country national' rather than 'alien' .

The amendments to the report proposed by the Group of the European People' s Party, to which the rapporteur belongs, should therefore be rejected.

I really find it difficult to understand how anyone can remain silent and avoid taking sides and consider taking fingerprints from 14-year-old adolescents to be a legitimate action, when it is something which contravenes all the international treaties in force, particularly those on the rights of the child.

When it comes to erasing personal data, it is just a question of being sensible.

Once the applicant concerned has obtained legal status, there is in fact no justification for retaining the personal data and fingerprints of someone whose situation has been regularised in law.

That would be to view him as a potential criminal.

It is not solely in the future Charter that the protection of fundamental rights, close to our hearts as it is, becomes an issue, but also in every European text, where we must be vigilant in their defence.

What is at stake is Parliament' s credibility in the eyes of those who already have a lot of difficulty putting their trust in us.

The people of Europe find it incomprehensible, and surprising to say the least, that the European Parliament should one day come out in favour of a report only, a few months later, to go back on its decision and vote in favour of a radically different report.

How can our electorate have confidence in a Parliament which changes its views according to the way the wind blows and which is incapable of facing up to the Commission and the Council which do not, for all that, have the democratic legitimacy with which we have as an institution.

That is why, ladies and gentlemen, I would today ask you to vote in such a way as to reaffirm last November' s vote and to adopt the report in the form presented to you by the committee.

It is in adopting coherent and consistent positions that Parliament will enhance its stature.

Mr President, today' s debate has its pitfalls inasmuch as we are being asked to amend, or to refuse to amend, a system, namely the Eurodac system, which our group has comprehensively rejected.

The Eurodac system is part and parcel of a general tendency to criminalise and penalise immigrants and those who are being persecuted the world over.

It reveals the true face of liberal Europe, which is setting itself up as a besieged fortress.

How can anyone imagine that it is by means of repressive laws that the starving of the earth are to be prevented from coming to Europe, even at the risk of their lives, as has been seen recently at Dover and in Gibraltar.

On the contrary, it is, as we all know, these combined weapons of criminalisation which force thousands of foreigners to become illegal immigrants who then fall victim to smugglers, slave merchants or unscrupulous bosses who grossly exploit them.

Regularising the status of illegal immigrants en masse is the way to put a spoke in the wheels of all these dealers in human misery.

It is these combined weapons of criminalisation which will erode our own freedoms, as witness the French Presidency' s plan, which we shall have to express our opinion on. This plan is aimed at cracking down on anyone who comes to the aid of an immigrant without the proper papers.

It is because of these weapons and because of this strategy that, today in France, a boy of Tamil origin is imprisoned with his mother in the Aranc detention centre waiting for a judgement from the Minister of the Interior and, in all likelihood, his expulsion from the country.

Recording people' s fingerprints on computer is an attack on individual freedom.

It systematically treats asylum seekers as suspects and puts a question mark over the confidentiality of the documents held by the bodies responsible for examining their applications.

It infringes the legal protection due to refugees in being applied even to 14-year-olds.

It contravenes the International Declaration on the Rights of the Child and, in particular, Article 10 of this.

Who, among you here, would dare take the fingerprints of a young lad of 14?

The Eurodac project makes criminals of immigrants without proper papers, often deprived of legal status because of the differences in the laws between one European country and another.

It fundamentally violates all the international conventions protecting human rights.

With this project, Fortress Europe is guilty of failing to assist refugees who are in danger.

This is hardly a surprise coming from a liberal Europe which equips the Ankara dictatorship with combat helicopters at the same time as rejecting Kurdish refugees.

At a time when a wave of racism and xenophobia is forming across Europe and when consideration is being given to drawing up a Charter of Fundamental Rights, you ought to reject Eurodac, with or without amendments.

It is our own freedoms that are at stake.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, on behalf of the Radical Members of the Bonino List, I would like to express concern and strong opposition to a Europe which, especially in its gradual creation of a so-called Area of Freedom, Justice and Security, is following the intergovernmental road, which only incorporates elements that are repressive and destroy freedoms and trample underfoot the rights of the citizens of the European Union and the Member States.

The Eurodac incident is an example of this: without having defined any kind of European political asylum policy at all, the Member States, through the Council, created the Dublin Convention, which legalises mutual backscratching as regards applicants for asylum and the examination of their applications for political asylum in our Member States.

At this point, in order to bring the Convention into operation, the Council promoted the creation of the Eurodac system, and initially made the Commission responsible for its implementation.

However, it then decided to go further and extend electronic fingerprinting to illegal immigrants, removed the management responsibilities from the Commission, and took them directly upon itself.

In the face of this confusion, the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs is right, through Mr Pirker' s report, to restore these responsibilities to the Commission and to make other amendments of substance which we fully support.

Having said that, since we do not, however, support the basic bureaucratic, repressive approach sustained by the Council and abetted by the Commission, which is reflected in the Dublin Convention and the EURODAC system, we will vote for the amendments of substance tabled by the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs but against the legislative resolution, for it leaves the way almost completely open for this absurd piece of legislation which introduces the systematic compilation of police records on refugees and illegal immigrants at European level: a legal, political and humanitarian atrocity.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I am not going to speak about the issues underlying the proposal for a regulation, which have been so thoroughly studied and discussed in committee and in this Chamber, a process that culminated in the vote on Parliament' s opinion last November.

It is nevertheless worthwhile saying, in line with the views of the rapporteur Mr Pirker and of the Commission itself, how incomprehensible we find it that in the new text, the Council proposes to reserve to itself responsibility for implementing the Eurodac regulation, which departs from the system previously envisaged, in which these powers would fall to the Commission.

We are unhappy with this, firstly because Parliament, as has already been pointed out, is seeing its rights diminished, specifically its right to remain informed.

In fact, the Commission is, in general terms, obliged, under the terms of Article 7 of the decision on comitology, to keep Parliament informed of committee proceedings and whenever the Commission transmits relevant measures or proposals to the Council.

With this new text, this prerogative is clearly undermined.

Secondly, there is a lack of legal coherence and above all a lack of legal justification in these transfers of competence.

Article 1 of the decision on comitology has not been respected and therefore this course of action breaches Article 202 of the Treaty, since this article contains no provisions that would justify this procedure being adopted in this specific case.

Our view is that the generally accepted status of the Commission is still valid: it is the guardian of the treaties, equidistant from each of the Member States; it is autonomous, independent and the defender of the common good. It is the Commission rather than the Member States that is responsible - transcending borders and national peculiarities - for drafting laws that provide adequate protection on issues involving fundamental freedoms.

The Council has demonstrated its lack of confidence in the Commission.

Without wishing to appear perverse, perhaps the Council is looking for a legal fight over this issue, which would clear the way for an almost certain application to the European Court of Justice to delay the universal implementation of the new Community legislation in progress on the right to asylum.

Sometimes in politics, things are indeed what they seem!

Unfortunately, Commissioner, and this is not your fault, this is a matter on which you cannot allay our fears.

Mr President, I am grateful to Commissioner Vitorino for his work.

I speak for some Members on this side of the House in saying that there are concerns about this report.

We are not one hundred percent happy.

We wish we were not at this stage today, but I look at this from the point of view - which I share with several colleagues, that we do not want asylum seekers to be seen as criminals.

Criminals have their fingerprints taken and we need not automatically or in any way assume that asylum seekers ought to be put into this category.

Many of them are escaping from terror, from torture, from other experiences.

We want to make certain that at our frontiers they are not put through similar experiences and practices again.

I accept what Mr Kirkhope said a few minutes ago, that there are frictions and difficulties with the system which need to be sorted out.

Other colleagues have referred to the issue of fingerprinting 14-year-olds, which has been very sensitive and very emotive.

On this side of the House we are realistic.

That is why we are looking for the safeguards that have been put into the report.

It is why we would prefer that there be parliamentary scrutiny in the question of Commission versus Council.

We believe that Parliament is there to safeguard citizens and make certain that the asylum policy is carried out in the fairest possible way.

With those reservations and I know I speak on behalf of several colleagues - I will be following Mrs Terrón' s line.

We wish the Commission well in this work.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, first of all the Commission wishes to thank the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs, and especially Mr Pirker, for the speed with which the renewed consultation on the Eurodac project has proceeded, as well as for the quality of the proposals that have been presented.

I should like to begin by reminding honourable Members that the Tampere European Council requested that the Eurodac system be completed as quickly as possible.

We can conclude from this report that the Commission and the European Parliament have played their part in this task most speedily.

What is under discussion today is merely a new consultation on the specific issue of comitology.

I am not going to comment again on the fundamentals of the Eurodac system, but I would like to remind you, and particularly Mrs Boumediene-Thiery, that following the debate in the European Parliament the Commission submitted an amended proposal.

Although it is true that this amended proposal did not include all the amendments approved by the European Parliament, it must at least be recognised that some of the suggestions made by Parliament were incorporated.

Therefore, on the only issue which is still under discussion - comitology - the Commission wishes to remind Parliament of the position it adopted towards the Council: we disagree with the Council' s decision to reserve to itself the power to lay down most of the implementing rules here.

This factor was crucial in the commitments that the Commission made to you, the European Parliament, with regard to our reasons for being prepared to participate in a Eurodac system.

One of the crucial factors is that, if the system is managed and implemented by the Commission, there is a guarantee of effective control by the European Parliament.

Some of the doubts as to the legitimacy of the Eurodac system could be dispelled by bringing these two elements together, with responsibility for the management and implementation of the system falling to the Commission and democratic control to the European Parliament.

Secondly, it is our view that the Council' s decision is not properly underpinned by the principles and criteria governing the actual comitology rules.

We will therefore continue to state our position to the Council, which is that we would have a win-win situation if the solution adopted were the one for which the Commission has always fought.

Lastly, I should like once more to make it clear to Parliament that we have not used these doubts or this quarrel about interpretation in relation to Eurodac as an excuse for inaction: the Commission has already submitted a working paper on revising the Dublin Convention, which it has in fact sent to the European Parliament.

It is our view that the shortcomings and errors in the workings of the Dublin Convention show precisely why we need a European asylum policy.

I am particularly pleased to be able to tell you that the Commission has today given substance to a key aspect of the Tampere mandate on asylum by approving a proposal for a directive on minimum rules for a common procedure for requests for asylum.

This shows that we are not working on a piecemeal basis; we are putting together a jigsaw puzzle, a jigsaw that involves revising the Dublin Convention.

Another piece of this jigsaw is the decision that we have adopted today, to propose a directive on minimum standards for a common asylum procedure, and another piece is the preparatory technical work on the Eurodac system, which has not stood still, but is continuing. This work can, of course, only be carried out when there is a clear and unassailable legal basis for developing the Eurodac system.

Once again, I would like to thank you - even the honourable Members who have criticised the Commission - for the support expressed by various political groups for the Commission to manage and implement the Eurodac system.

We are prepared to take on this challenge, in the hope that the Council will listen to us.

Commissioner, before you leave the Chamber I invite you to come here so that I can take your fingerprints, perhaps, together with Mr Pirker.

The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 a.m.

Minimum safety and health requirements for the use of work equipment

The next item is the report (A5-0222/2000) by Mr Skinner, on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs, on the Proposal for a European Parliament and Council Directive amending for the second time Directive 89/655/EEC concerning the minimum safety and health requirements for the use of work equipment by workers at work (2nd individual Directive within the meaning of Article 16 of Directive 89/391/EEC) (important text for the EEA) [COM(1998) 678 - C4-0707/1998 - 1998/0327(COD)]

Mr President, the first question to be asked about this report is: Why do we need this directive?

It is very interesting when you look at the statistics because the exact reasons become clear.

Almost 10% of all occupational accidents involve falls from heights. One in ten of those involves permanent invalidity or death.

Across the European Union in any one year there are approximately half a million falls from heights in the workplace. 300 000 of those result in absences from the workplace of more than three days and 40 000 result in serious injury.

Many of these accidents - many of which can be avoided - come about because of the poor use of scaffolding or ladders.

In the UK, the Health and Safety Executive, the body looking at accidents in the workplace has estimated that some 30% of all prohibition notices in the United Kingdom are issued for unsafe scaffolding alone.

In fact, 90% of all accidents on ladders come about because of the misuse of ladders.

These are statistics gathered by industry groups and others and not because of equipment failure.

Figures published recently by the European Agency for Health and Safety in Bilbao suggest enormous variations between Member States in the incidence of falls from heights.

Such variations suggest that health and safety levels are not the same for all workers across the European Union.

That is why we need to establish minimum requirements with a view to protecting workers from falls from heights.

The current cost, both in personal terms and those of the workers and families affected and in terms of economic costs to industry and the social and health protection systems, warrants legislation in this area.

Billions of pounds are spent caring for workers who have been injured or become ill.

The background to this proposal suggests additional reasons for having this legislation.

This is an amendment to an existing directive on the general minimum requirements for work equipment at work.

A proposal to include scaffolding in an earlier amendment to the directive was rejected by Parliament, thanks to many of my colleagues on the other side of the House.

The directive finally adopted covered only two specific types of work equipment: mobile equipment and equipment for lifting loads which are very important areas in their own right.

This directive will rectify this serious omission.

If we do not include falls from heights, the only certainty is that there will be more and the rate will increase.

If Parliament rejects this addition, then it must hold itself responsible for the consequences.

The Commission' s original intention was to present a proposal for a scaffolding directive.

However, because serious falls from heights do not occur only from scaffolding, the scope has been widened to include protection for workers from all manner of falls from heights.

Although falls from heights occur in circumstances where ladders and scaffolding are not present, the main focus of the proposal is on scaffolding, ladders and rope access, as you will see as you read.

The current rules in many Member States apply only to the building industry, so another important factor is that the scope is extended to other sectors.

Also it is important to stress as some seem mildly confused about this, that this proposal is based on Article 138, previously Article 118a, which laid down the minimum requirements for ensuring a better level of protection for workers health and safety.

We are not dealing with the construction, the concept or the design or work equipment, but with the risks to the health and safety of workers using the equipment.

It does seem to me that there are some people in this House who are a little bit dim in grasping that.

The importance of working at heights and having this directive is clear also.

Some have questioned the validity of this legislation and they are free to do so.

However, contrary to what has been suggested, this proposal does not merely suggest training people to use ladders, nor does it outlaw the use of ladders.

What it does is provide for safe use of ladders and other equipment.

I wonder whether the critics of this report have ever worked on construction sites as many of us have.

I wonder whether they would accept that there are many people who know exactly what this legislation can bring about.

Finally, concerning the amendments tabled, which I have only just seen today, I welcome Amendments Nos 22 and 25: Amendment No 22 as a second choice if Amendment No 5 falls and Amendment No 25 as a recital as it hits the tone of my report very well.

However, for consistency' s sake and with regard to the framework directive which is the basis of this whole legislative approach, I cannot accept the others at present.

Mr President, I feel obliged, and I would like to do so courteously, to begin by congratulating the rapporteur, Mr Skinner, on his sensitivity, his excellent report and his willingness to accept the proposals - which I believe are well put together - of the Group on whose behalf I have the honour of speaking.

All of this means that we have a text which enjoys broad consensus, and not only amongst the two main Groups, since this consensus has been forged through constant communication with social operators, entrepreneurs and workers, via the trade unions.

I believe that consensus is necessary in a field in which the safety, health, integrity and the very lives of workers are at stake.

Very recently I was going for a walk around my town, Vigo, in Galicia, in the north west of Spain, when I happened to see a large works sign.

The works involved the renovation of an old square in the town' s historic quarter, and the sign said: "This company respects the law.

It uses safety equipment and devices.

If you are not familiar with them, do not enter the site.

Inform us of any situation of risk.

Please help us to fulfil the legal obligations for protecting the safety and health of workers" .

I mention the contents of this works sign and the advice, legal requirements for third parties and those with an interest in the works, because I believe that it represents a summary of the requirements of a good policy on health at work.

A good policy on health at work must begin by being preventive and the idea of prevention must to a large extent include awareness, not only on the part of workers and employers, but also on the part of society as a whole.

Unfortunately, every day we hear news of accidents at work.

We know very well there is no such thing as zero risk, but we are also aware that society must not cease in its efforts to prevent risk being turned into accidents.

When an accident happens, the responsibility may perhaps fall to the employer, because they have still not been convinced that money spent on safety is an investment.

Or perhaps it may fall to the worker, because they ignore the risks, or because of a lack of caution, or because adequate measures or precautions have not been taken, mainly in activities such as construction, in which the temporary nature of works and of the sector itself - a bridging sector, between primary activity, mainly agricultural, and the industrial and service sectors - require even more precautionary measures.

Or it may perhaps fall to the administration itself through the insufficiency, and therefore ineffectiveness, of the inspection, advisory and control services responsible for informing, advising and, where necessary, penalising non-compliance with the employment legislation.

Health and safety at work, especially where the risk is very high, is the responsibility of society and of all the sectors concerned, and the whole of society must assume its fair share of responsibility and commitment.

The employer should consider money spent on safety at work as an investment.

The worker should take full precautions, demanding and arguing for the use of preventive and protective mechanisms, as well as the good practices of companies.

States and governments should amend the measures for the promotion of preventive actions, for the inspection of the measures to prevent accidents, and also for the replacement of the administrative and political methods for combating accidents at work.

The old model of penalties, which has shown itself to be insufficient and ineffective, should be replaced with a method providing stimulus and incentive, by intensifying action in all companies or activities with the highest number of accidents, and also by offering benefits and advantages to companies with the lowest number of accidents and the highest spending on prevention and awareness.

Furthermore, the Commission and the Council should set minimum conditions which may seem strict to some, but which will allow working conditions to be improved and the health and safety of workers to be protected, harmonising legislation in a market operating with the free movement of workers.

In this way, European citizens will see Europe as being closer to them, a Europe that addresses their problems, concerns and interests.

Mr President, I wish, first of all, to congratulate the rapporteur, Mr Skinner, for his efforts in moderating and reconciling the various interests so that Parliament can make a positive, consensual contribution to improving this excellent Commission proposal.

Negligence in work organisation, a lack of appropriate equipment for personal and collective safety, the low level of training and the high number of self-employed workers are the main causes of the high level of injuries and deaths in the workplace.

The risks inherent in the building industry are even greater when compared with other, similar sectors.

Over the last 50 years, business activity has increased apace, and immigrant workers and sub-contractors are used to a great extent.

Apart from the aspects that have already been mentioned, the problems of communication and organisation are getting worse, and there is a tendency for the safety of everyone on building sites to be neglected, and for responsibility to be watered down.

It can never be stated too strongly that all the directives relating to the health and safety of workers and particularly the definition of responsibility contained in Directive 89/655/EEC are in force. These state that the employer, the owner of the site, is responsible for any accidents that happen there, and also for preventing them.

The person responsible for the safety of the site is obliged to carry out a risk assessment and to ensure that checks on safety equipment used by everyone with access to the site, regardless of their job, employment status or length of service, have been carried out.

The risk assessment has been carried out at a snail' s pace in the European Union, and this second revision is a positive sign that we really want to support and encourage.

Even looking at the matter from a purely economic point of view, it is extremely worrying to note that in the European Union, in 1996, out of every 100 000 workers, 4 229 took more than three days' sick leave as a result of accidents in the workplace.

In that year, four million seven hundred thousand accidents took place.

Although fatal accidents have decreased by 13%, which is to some extent linked to Community action between 1994 and 1996, there were still 5 549 deaths in 1996.

It is estimated that the damage caused to the European economy in that year was around 146 million working days lost.

It is particularly relevant to the debate on the directive that I mentioned earlier that, although the construction industry does not have the highest number of accidents, it does have the greatest number of fatal accidents, comparable only with the road haulage sector.

Europe cannot at the same time consider itself to be the world' s leading social model and yet allow people to count for little and for their lives to be reduced to mere statistics.

Men, especially young men under the age of 25, are the main victims of accidents in the workplace, but the probability of death as a result of an accident increases with age and is highest for those between 55 and 64 years old. This probability is highest in smaller companies - with up to 50 employees - and for self-employed workers, for whom the accident rate stands at 73.1% of all accidents in the workplace.

This illustrates the need for measures to be adopted in professions with a high turnover of workers: measures which focus on young people' s qualifications, multidisciplinary solutions involving training and qualifications and the quality of SMEs in some sectors.

Since the famous survey conducted in 1907 in the United States, when identification, compulsory registration, cause of death, the employer' s age, the worker' s age, name, circumstances and the accident itself were studied to establish costs and duties enabling workers to be better protected...

(The President cut the speaker off)

Mr President, as a number of speakers have already mentioned, falls from heights are among the most serious categories of industrial accident and, by means of this report which is a stage in the elaboration of the directive on minimum safety and health requirements for the use of work equipment, we are setting to work on doing something about the problem.

On behalf of the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party, I should like to say that, overall, we regard the result as progress.

The main features of the rules we are proposing to introduce in this area seem to be clear and, at the same time, appear to take due account of the fact that businesses will have to be able to make the rules work in practice and on a day-to-day basis.

For we need to remember that, however commendable and laudable the purpose behind what we are adopting, the consequences will not necessarily always be as we hope, and our objective must therefore always be to formulate rules which are as simple and precise as possible and to ensure that there is room for the flexibility needed in the labour market.

I believe that our rapporteur, Peter Skinner, has striven to find this balance between the desire for clear rules and the need for flexibility and diversity. He deserves a lot of thanks for this, as well as for his method of working. aimed at building consensus.

However, I believe that it will also be important in the future to work on reducing the risk of accidents by acquiring greater knowledge of how such accidents happen.

How many accidents are we talking about?

What can we do to prevent them?

I believe that the work begun with the European Agency for Health and Safety in Bilbao will make a positive contribution to a reduction in the accident figures as we find the answers to these questions and use them constructively.

This is a proper path to go down: the authorities cooperating with the two sides of industry.

Mr President, Commissioner, the report before us has been commended by everyone as being useful and necessary.

It concerns the use of ladders, scaffolding and ropes, working at heights, and, from time to time, alongside dangerous drops.

The background to this report is, of course, the many accidents which have occurred in the past and the inadequacy of directives to date.

This is why it is useful and necessary to have this report, although it has been a long time coming. However, all credit to Mr Skinner for finally managing to complete it.

Despite this, it is a problem report in a way, not because it is causing something to be done, but because the sector we are dealing with is extremely diverse.

It covers people working in the service sector, maintenance sector, painters, window cleaners, etc.

Working at heights is not always for long periods of time but often for short spells.

This means that the definitions we use should be specific rather than vague, and that the provisions we make should be enforceable, which is far from always being the case.

I have already indicated that some descriptions are vague, including those describing "short duration" and "low level of risk" , for example, whilst the assessing of risks involving only a couple of people has been over-regulated.

We have managed to discuss some of these instances within the committee and these sections have been deleted from the report, which has led to an improvement.

I welcome the progress made and we should be able to continue in the same vein.

Let us examine a number of aspects, such as scaffold bearing surfaces. Needless to say, they should be securely fixed but it is not always possible to brace them against movement, as long as they do not slip.

Mobile scaffolds must be prevented from moving about, but this cannot always be legislated for sufficiently.

You cannot have red lights everywhere.

Portable ladders must be anchored down and be solid, but they must remain serviceable.

This is why we have proposed requesting split voting for a number of amendments. In this way, everyone will have the opportunity to propose improvements on the vulnerable sections of the directive.

Mr President, I think it outrageous that the problem of accidents due to falls at work can give rise to some much opposition and cannot be sorted out more quickly.

Yet, the rapporteur himself reminds us how urgent the matter is when he quotes a figure of 500 000 accidents per year in this sphere alone, leading to at least 40 000 cases of seriously injury and around a thousand deaths.

As the rapporteur is careful to point out, however, building firms are opposed to regulation of any kind and, as a result, the report carefully avoids implicating them.

Technical defects in scaffolding and other systems do cause accidents in the workplace, but the main cause is production rates, working hours and poor conditions.

The report asks for employers to make arrangements at least to limit the carnage, if not to put an end to it.

If emergency measures were to be agreed, forcing employers to make such arrangements, then I should immediately be all in favour of them. I doubt, however, if that would be possible, so respectful is this Parliament of employers' interests.

Meanwhile, capitalist exploitation continues to exact a heavy toll among tens of thousands of employees in terms of their health and, sometimes, their lives.

Mr President, we support and value Mr Skinner' s work, although we do feel that, given the premises and, above all, the implications of the issue, he could have been a little more incisive, in view, moreover, of the fact that eleven years have passed since the first directive on the subject was produced and of the shortcomings of its amending directive which entered into force five years ago.

Of course, we are aware of the greater or lesser sensitivity towards these issues shown in the positions adopted within this very Parliament and elsewhere, and of the concerns raised regarding legislation which is more stringent or would involve greater costs for businesses.

However, as the rapporteur points out, we must consider just how much a worker' s life and health is worth.

In effect, occupational accidents continue to be the scourge of the world of employment in all the countries of the European Union, although there is a higher incidence in certain sectors.

This can certainly be explained by the many factors which contribute in various ways to increasing or reducing the size of the phenomenon, but we are now faced with an indisputable cause of injury, which is present in all the Member States, and which is sadly responsible for as much as ten percent of all occupational accidents, namely falls from heights.

It must be said that the Economic and Social Committee' s opinion certainly laid out, clearly and precisely, not only the scale of the problem but also and above all the solutions to be adopted: Mr Skinner has not failed to build on this foundation, taking as a starting point the need to consolidate the relevant terminology used, to improve the way work is organised and to provide specific training and information for the workers involved.

It must also be pointed out, however, that the solution should nevertheless be implemented via the preparation and issuing of more precise, and more stringent guidelines on prevention by the Commission, making it possible, among other things, to overcome the problem of the fragmentation of responsibilities in this area and, at the same time, to provide, along with more binding controls, for a system of incentives, particularly where small- and medium-sized businesses are concerned, to ensure that occupational safety rules are implemented efficiently and effectively.

Mr President, first of all, I would like to thank Mr Skinner for his commendable report on this complex issue of health and safety requirements for the use of work equipment, and also for being willing to adopt important proposals put forward by the PPE-DE Group.

Mr Perez Alvarez has already gone into this.

I am not happy on every count.

A certain amount of amendment will be necessary prior to the second reading, but the PPE-DE Group is prepared to accept the report overall.

The report in its present form even takes account of objections raised by small- and medium-sized enterprises, and calls for experts to be involved, but, of course, only where the setting up of ladders and scaffolding equipment at the workplace is concerned.

As is surely the case with all legal texts at national - and at regional level for that matter - some of the phraseology might raise a smile, if you can call any of it a laughing matter that is.

The smile certainly drained from my face when I read the European-wide statistics on accidents in the workplace, and on hearing them just now.

I do not intend to go further into the facts and figures, as we have already heard a great deal on that score.

But there is one fundamental point I would like to make.

Safety measures are not the only things that cost.

Continued payment of wages, sick pay, invalidity, widows' and orphans' allowances are a drain on business and on the national economy.

This is how productive a moderate social policy is.

Preventive action is also better, cheaper and more humane than a social policy that deals with the consequences.

It is no good shutting the stable door when the horse has bolted; you need to make sure it is shut to start with.

'But what about subsidiarity?' , goes the common cry.

This principle is not meant to render Europe completely inert!

I like the definition provided in Quadragesimo anno the best: subsidiarity - gives right of way in cases of doubt to smaller living entities and to solutions reached by social partners, in the face of State, or - I might well add - EU rulings.

But if the smaller entity is unable to perform its tasks in the interests of the public good, then the larger entity must step in.

This explains why so many European minimum standards were laid down in the EU Treaties in the eighties, when Christian Democrats and Conservatives had the monopoly on power in Europe; in other words, it is a Christian Democrat affair.

Incidentally, health and safety regulations have been organised at international level since the industrial revolution in the 19th century.

The great Conservative British statesman Benjamin Disraeli was one of the pioneers of health and safety regulations.

Continental Europe took its cue from England, adopted these laws and also enshrined them in international conventions, doing so from the very outset. In view of globalisation and Europeanisation, there is without doubt a need for the European social dimension in the 21st century.

We want to Europeanise the economy.

It cannot be the answer to deal with social policy at a purely regional, or even provincial, level.

Each country can frame its own health and safety regulations provided that European minimum standards are observed.

We PPE-DE Group Members are opposed to European maximum standards.

In Germany the picture is completed by legal acts introduced by the social partners.

There are German standards and health and safety regulations for the workplace.

We also have statutes such as legal acts governing professional trade associations, not to mention the accident prevention law.

Incidentally, it is all very well for people to be critical - for stylistic reasons among others - of the fact that we have a whole host of detailed regulations.

I tell you this though; a fraction of these practical regulations would do the citizens and workers of the Member States a greater service than reams and reams of fancy talk and great ideologies.

Mr President, as the rapporteur' s fine report points out, the figures recently published by the European Agency for Health and Safety at Work, whose headquarters are in Bilbao, indicate very differing results in relation to work accidents between the various Member States, owing to the fact that the States are not applying uniform statistical criteria.

It is therefore urgent that we establish harmonised standards at Community level so that we can have comparable data and assess the results of preventive policies in each European State, community or region. We must do this to ensure that we do not have first- or second-class workers, or lower, but that all workers are protected by safety regulations and requirements of the same quality.

It is also the case that we need more site inspectors so that companies will sufficiently respect the regulations, but it is just as true that the public institutions and companies must begin by setting an example in all of this. Nevertheless, even today, many activities and workplaces of public bodies do not have the required plans for prevention of work-related risk that are laid down in Community directives.

I would therefore like to call on all the European public managers to make an effort to be the first to comply with the regulations, so that managers in the private sector cannot use institutional laziness as an excuse.

The Commission has proposed an amended directive on health and safety at work.

This report suggests it should be longer and more detailed.

UK Conservatives believe that we should vote against it for that very reason.

This is not a question of whether or not health and safety at work is an important issue.

It is not a question of whether or not the recommendations in the report are sound.

Many of them are and Peter Skinner has put a lot of thought into his work.

It is a question of how the European Parliament should be spending its time and be seen to be spending its time.

It is a question of what Parliament should be looking at as its priorities.

It is a question of whether it should be for the Commission and for the European Parliament to prescribe the fine detail of people' s working and waking lives.

There is a problem in the UK, but not confined to the UK.

The EU is seen to be interfering.

The European Parliament is often seen to be interfering even more.

It is not seen as focusing on the big issues.

Our constituents ask us why they should vote for anybody at the European elections.

They ask: what are you doing for us?

We have the opportunity to tell our people that we do care about the big issues that they care about, that we can help deliver a better peace, security, prosperity, environment and quality of life - issues that can genuinely be helped best at a European level.

Or we can answer that the EU, through the Commission and Parliament, is about deciding whether or not it should be legal for one person to stand at the bottom of a ladder holding on to it while another person climbs up it.

This is the issue that we are discussing today.

Let us oppose this latest example of red tape from the top.

At some time or other, Parliament must give a clear signal as to its true sense of purpose, its true priorities.

I say: Let it be now.

I am very grateful to be able to follow my colleague, Philip Bushill-Matthews, because I share many of the concerns he has expressed.

I think that this proposal reflects no credit on the European Union or on this House.

I think if the European Union - and indeed if the European Parliament - wishes to be taken seriously by the people of Europe then this is exactly the sort of legislation which it should cease to enact because we all know that health and safety and workers' safety is a priority for all Member States, and so it should be.

But there is no justification for a Europe-wide standard on this issue.

There can be no reason why Member States, acting in a uniform way, would necessarily be able to tackle this problem more effectively than individual Member States and, above all, there can be no reason for taking such a close interest in ordinary aspects of people' s working lives.

It can make no sense to legislate on how Europeans are permitted to climb ladders.

This should not be the priority for this House.

It is too great a level of detail for this House to involve itself in and it will merely lead to the ridiculing of the European Union because this is just the sort of interference which is deeply unpopular with many citizens across the European Union.

Instead of engaging in this sort of interference, we should be addressing those issues where it is constructive for Member States to work together and develop some common standards.

A common and uniform and centralised standard on how you climb a ladder is not necessary and it is an undesirable interference with the way people run their work environment.

We can trust the people of Europe to decide for themselves how they climb ladders.

I believe that it is not necessary to conduct a risk assessment every time it is proposed to use a ladder.

As anyone working in the home can tell you, ladders are used very commonly and very frequently and, yes, there are accidents but I do not believe this kind of directive will ever eliminate those accidents.

All it will do is add yet another layer of European bureaucracy and red tape to be dealt with by a business community already suffocated by the weight of red tape.

As my colleague has said, it is time for a change.

It is time for this Parliament to start addressing the issues which are of concern to the citizens of Europe and to stop addressing itself to detailed questions where it can be of no assistance in actually securing worker protection.

In fact, all it is doing is bringing itself and the European Union into disrepute and burdening European businesses with a layer of cost and bureaucracy that they can ill afford.

I have to express amazement at the two speeches we have just heard, one from Mr Bushill-Matthews and the other from Mrs Villiers.

They seem to be engaging in a self-fulfilling prophecy.

They deplore the fact that the European Parliament is regarded as involving itself in trivia and generating red tape and yet they spend their time issuing press releases describing very important pieces of health and safety legislation as nothing but trivia and red tape.

It is hardly surprising that the British media project the sort of image that they describe.

This is a very important piece of health and safety legislation, building upon the corpus of such legislation that we have adopted at European level over the last twenty years.

It is not trivial for the families of the 500 000 people who fall from heights at work every year.

300 000 of those accidents are serious enough to cause the employees to be absent from work more than three days.

40 000 of those falls are very serious and 1 000 result in deaths.

Try to explain to the families concerned that this is a trivial issue.

It is a very important issue and survey after survey, including those in Eurobarometer, and surveys of SMEs including by the last British Government have shown that SMEs themselves recognise the importance of good health and safety legislation.

I deplore the fact that the consensus we have had in this important area of policy has been broken in this way by a small minority in the EPP.

It really is absolutely deplorable and we should all - right across the political spectrum - make it clear that we will not tolerate that sort of behaviour from that minority.

But read the directive itself, read the proposal.

Does it require detailed voluminous risk assessments before work is carried out a height?

No, it does not, it is a very easily understood, readable, implementable directive and it should be described in that way.

It should be described as making a valuable contribution to preventing injury and deaths within the European Union.

Please do not engage in this trivialisation and then come along here and hypocritically express surprise that this institution is being held in ridicule.

You are the people who are causing that.

Mr President, first of all I would like to say that my delegation intends to back the Skinner report on the Proposal for a European Parliament and Council Directive amending for the second time the Directive concerning minimum health and safety requirements.

The key issue of health and safety protection for workers is a matter of concern to us all.

No one is prepared to expose themselves to the accusation that they are anti-social, and it is undoubtedly justifiable to have minimum regulations in the European area.

It also accords with the EU Treaty, and so we will give the rapporteur the respect due to him.

But I am at a loss as to why MEPs manoeuvre themselves time and again into predicaments where they either face the accusation of being of an anti-social disposition, or else risk becoming a laughing stock.

I certainly cannot see why mature adults should be dictated to on how they should climb ladders, or get down them, or why a risk assessment should have to be completed before a ladder is used; or why there should be an instruction to the effect that, two people should not climb a ladder at the same time, if at all possible, or even one stating that time spent up a ladder should not exceed half an hour, or - a peculiar refinement - 25% of total working hours.

The Skinner report will go down in parliamentary lore as 'the ladder report' , and the people of the European Union will justifiably ask themselves whether we do not have anything better to do than produce legislation on things they take for granted, which should in fact be a matter for in-house experts and have no place either in an EU directive or an associated report produced by the codecision-making Parliament!

In fact this is not the first time that a report with a social component has contained such absurdities.

When MEPs have to rack their brains over matters such as the physical constitution of Europeans, in order to establish standards for the average size of tractor seat, or the conditions under which panicled tomatoes - the Austrian word is Rispenparadeiser - can enter the market, this shows an MEP' s job description, but also the raison d' être of the European institutions, in a poor light, to say nothing of the fact that such detailed provisions and over-regulation can become counter-productive.

The same applies to national legislation on protection for workers, incidentally.

Despite all the financial incentives, protective measures of this kind are apt to deter employers from taking on apprentices, thereby contributing to youth unemployment rather than helping to alleviate it.

In addition, however, the Skinner report raises the fundamental question as to what Europe should do and what it should not do.

In other words, it is about competences and the judicious application of the subsidiarity principle.

We cannot, and must not, evade the issue any longer.

This is not just because of the Intergovernmental Conference and the organisational form of the European Union, which must find a satisfactory solution in view of the forthcoming enlargement.

This issue has to do with the acceptance of the Union by the people, which is the subject of much complaint.

We need more Europe where internal and external security is concerned, more Europe when it comes to looking after our interests in the global competition, in currency policy and in the completion of the single market.

But what we do not need is a Europe that makes inroads on the autonomy of governments, regional administrative bodies, and lastly, the individual, and which takes away the individual' s right to an opinion.

I therefore intend to use this report as an opportunity to highlight the demand for a debate on competences after the Intergovernmental Conference.

Mr President, let us be absolutely clear about the fact that there is no one in this Parliament who wants anything other than the best.

Let us make it clear that no one in this Parliament wants anything other than that the number of accidents, especially fatal accidents, should fall in all workplaces around our splendid continent and in our Member States.

Let us, however, at the same time make it absolutely clear to one other - and I am addressing a number of speakers here - that different answers can be arrived at to the question of what is the correct level of political decision-making at which to make these important decisions.

After listening to Mr Hughes, to the British Labour Government and also to others in Britain, I am extremely confident that they are deeply committed to finding answers to these questions.

After listening to Mr Menrad, I am very confident that the German Christian Democratic Party is thoroughly engaged with these issues in Germany.

I can guarantee that all seven parliamentary parties in Sweden, especially my own Christian Democratic Party, are concerned about the matter.

I can also assure you that public opinion and the trade unions are very committed to the issue and want to enact laws which will lead to a very significant reduction in the number of deaths due to industrial accidents.

What is it, then, which leads us to believe that it is at the level of the European Parliament, representing countries with more than 15 national parliaments, that the right forum for decision-making is to be found?

In the light of the subsidiarity or proximity principle, allow me to express my doubts about the extent to which this issue is suited to being dealt with specifically in the European Parliament.

Amendment 14, paragraph 4.2.2, for example, reads as follows: 'Before portable ladders are brought into service, their feet shall be prevented from slipping by securing the stiles at or near their upper or lower ends, by any anti-slip device or by any other arrangement of equivalent effectiveness.

As a priority, ladders should be secured firmly using all possible means.

Ladders used for access should be long enough for their uprights to protrude sufficiently beyond the access platform.

Ladders in several sections shall be so used as to ensure that they are secure.

The holding of the ladder by another person as a safety measure shall not be allowed.'

This text is well meant and perfectly in order legally.

I can absolutely assure you that, at home in Mora in Dalarna, where I live, as well as in the Swedish Parliament and also in all other national parliaments, these matters are being carefully looked into.

In view of the subsidiarity principle in the Treaties of Maastricht and Amsterdam, is it right of the European Parliament to legislate at this very high level of detail?

Instead what we ought to be doing is aiming for a directive which specifies our objectives.

In that way, we can allow the Member States themselves, their people and their elected representatives in national parliaments and governments to be responsible for the existence of regulations ensuring that working life does not involve unnecessary risks.

Allow them to determine how to frame the rules so as to fulfil the requirements of the directive in the best way.

National legislation is being enacted in this area to add to the existing national laws.

The two sides of industry are also extremely active in this area.

We Swedish Christian Democrats shall be voting against this report on the basis of the subsidiarity principle.

I should like to congratulate Mr Skinner for skilfully managing to formulate a series of compromises which strike a good balance between the different interests involved.

This has led to a document that has clearly won considerable approval, which is quite an achievement on this very important political issue.

This text is a good answer to Mr Bushill-Matthews' voters and what Europe does for them.

It is something concrete and it concerns people is every day lives.

Using the enterprises' language, I should like to say that this directive is based not only on social solidarity and social justice, but on competition issues as well.

That is why we try to help applicant countries to develop and implement health and safety policies.

These health and safety policies are the Commission' s first priority in the social agenda.

Apart from undertaking the specific commitments set out in this agenda, we are starting to prepare a communication on health and safety and future strategies for health and safety.

The European Parliament has many new ideas and we expect your contribution to this communication.

If we turn to the current text, this is the second amendment of Directive 89/655 EEC concerning the minimum safety and health requirements for work equipment.

It aims to prevent falls from heights by setting minimum requirements for the use of the relevant work equipment such as ladders and scaffolding.

Falls from heights account for more than 10% of occupational accidents and one in ten of such falls results in permanent invalidity or death.

This is a particularly serious problem, which is costly for business and society and which, more importantly, causes suffering and human tragedy for the people directly involved and their families.

The current proposal is a very important step towards doing something concrete about this.

It is obvious it is something more than bureaucracy.

Since my reply must deal with the technical details because of the rules of this procedure, I have to stick to the written text.

On your amendments and the ideas behind the amendments, we are happy to accept Amendments Nos 2, 3, 4, 9, 11, 15, 20 and 22 as they stand.

On the text of Amendments Nos 10, 13, 14, 18, the Commission agrees with the principles behind the changes proposed and can agree with most of the texts put forward.

However, we do propose a few changes or additions, mainly to be sure that we take account of all possible situations and do not create any unintended holes in the safety net we intend to provide with this initiative.

On Amendment No 10, we agree with the inclusion of a reference to a prior risk assessment, but would prefer different wording in order to specify the circumstances for the use of ladders.

Similarly, on Amendment No 13 we share the desire to ensure that there is no implied obligation to use mobile platforms, but we believe that this is best achieved by the original wording with the possible addition of the phrase "of adequate dimensions" .

Also, Amendment No 14 will improve the directive, but in order to avoid any risk of a different interpretation in the future, we would prefer a slight change to the wording, which would include retaining the requirement to prevent the sections of a multi-section ladder from moving relative to each other.

This is because even slight sudden movements that do not threaten the security of the ladder may cause the worker to lose balance and fall.

We agree with the main idea behind Amendment No 18 and the references to the securing of the decks and the prevention of unintentional movement.

However, we must oppose the reference to "load-bearing surfaces" as they will cause confusion over what is meant by "deck" .

We also must oppose the reference to planks forming the scaffold deck as this implies that scaffolding systems that use prefabricated boards are not covered.

Likewise Amendments Nos 16 and 19 need only slight modification to avoid difficulties in interpretation later on.

Finally, we cannot accept Amendments Nos 1, 5, 6, 7, 8, 21, 23, 24, 25 and 26.

This is not a question of a political disagreement but simply that Amendments Nos 6 and 7 change accepted standard texts while the other amendments repeat what is stated elsewhere.

We must endeavour to keep Community legislation as straightforward as possible and avoid any inconsistencies in the overall framework.

This is especially important in the field of health and safety where businesses sometimes have in implementing rules because of their complexities.

With regard to Amendment No 1, the issue is already covered by the text.

In the same way, the definition of "collective fall protection safeguards" given in Amendment No 8 is not necessary.

These safeguards have already been mentioned in the basic directive and there is no risk of confusion.

Also Amendment No 21 is unnecessary as this area is already covered by Directive 92/57/EEC and it refers to a specific paragraph.

Here again, if we repeat something that has already been defined, it is a potential for conflicting interpretations.

Amendment No 5 is covered by Amendment No 22, which is accepted as it stands.

Amendment No 6 covers training, which is already incorporated in Recital 7, and research, which is beyond the scope of this directive.

Furthermore, Recital 7 uses a standard form of words.

There are thus several reasons for not accepting Amendment No 6.

Amendment No 7 advocates a change in Article 2(3).

This is established standard wording and the Commission therefore cannot accept a change to it.

Amendment No 23 cannot be supported by the Commission as the issue of health and safety committees in enterprises has been appropriately addressed in the framework directive and according to it, detailed regulation is a matter of subsidiarity for all Member States.

Amendments Nos 24 and 25 must be rejected because training is already adequately covered, especially following Amendments Nos 16, 19 and 22.

In spite of its simplicity, the Commission cannot support Amendment No 26 as we prefer to specify the circumstances for the use of ladders.

To sum up, I am happy that we agree on all main issues and our differences lie in a few technical points.

I repeat my appreciation of your extensive work and it will improve the protection of workers in this field.

We will improve the protection we intend to provide with this initiative.

Mr President, I am glad to see the tradition of speaking to the Commissioner is still alive and well.

I am particularly pleased with the comments she has made.

I hope that Parliament' s amendments will be adopted tomorrow as I am sure they will be, despite the elements in this Parliament which do not seem to want to join in and that we will have an interesting discussion with the Council.

I wonder if the Commissioner would join me in deploring the way in which this report has been treated, with parts - notably the ladders - being isolated and suggestions made - by Mr Bushill-Matthews for one - that this is something that is futile if not childish.

Commissioner, I hope you will agree that this is a Treaty obligation for us all to look at.

The basis is Article 138, which was previously Article 118a - and if I am right, we must look into the costs - administrative and otherwise - for small-to-medium-sized businesses, as laid down in the Treaty already.

This is a small-to-medium-sized-business-friendly piece of legislation, but more importantly it is friendly to the workers who have to use this equipment.

That is why the legislation is there and is to be applied across the European Union.

If only Mr Bushill-Matthews had been here when I first started, he would have heard some of the arguments which I wish to place before this House as to why it is important to have EU legislation.

It is a great problem when you do not hear the arguments, but you merely come in with your own loaded thoughts.

Indeed, it is a great shame, and I hope that Mrs Villiers will come back some time and perhaps pay a visit to our committee so she can hear some of the debate about this report as well - because I noticed that she disappeared soon after she made her point - maybe we will read about that in the papers as well.

Finally, I would like to say to Mr Bushill-Matthews, who is here, that the journalist on the Daily Mail, to which you sent your press releases on this report, rang me back and asked me about a specific amendment that contained your phraseology and your words, which he said was the nonsense part of this whole directive.

Perhaps you can correct him instead of correcting us.

The vote will take place tomorrow, Thursday, at 11 a.m.

The next item is the debate on the report (A5-0217/2000) by Mr Evans, on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, on the Commission communication on competition rules relating to horizontal cooperation agreements [C5-0304/2000 - 2000/2154(COS)].

Mr President, perhaps I can begin by saying the introduction of the title of our debate no doubt had many Daily Mail journalists salivating, but the issues that we are considering are fundamental issues that go to the heart of what the European Union is all about.

That is the development of a true, single market; because if we were able to achieve a true, single market, not only might we find more unanimity within this Chamber, but we should be well on the way to serving our constituents by ensuring that we achieve real economic progress in Europe.

Therefore, this particular piece of legislation falls within that context.

There are a number of ways in which competition policy is important in driving this agenda forward.

The Commissioner, and I congratulate him for it, has seized the initiative in terms of the application of state-aid policy; we will be debating that in the second session in Strasbourg in connection with another report which I am currently taking before the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs.

The other major area that Commissioner Monti has been busy with is the modernisation of competition policy itself.

We are awaiting the outcome of the Commissioner' s review of over 100 responses to his White Paper on the reform of restrictive trade practices and the abuse of market power.

Earlier today I heard that we may receive the result before the end of this month; perhaps we will hear more from the Commissioner about that in due course.

The reform that we are looking at, according to the Commission itself, forms part of the overall agenda of reform.

Within that context, I want to say to the Commissioner that business is looking for a number of things.

It is certainly looking for the things that the Commission was seeking consultees from about whether the current regulations have become too legalistic, too bureaucratic and could be simplified.

I have no doubt that the Commissioner' s proposals will achieve that simplification.

Business is looking for the development of confidence in the whole range of new mechanisms which the Commissioner is seeking to bring forward as part of its overall reform package.

I would therefore ask the Commission how he sees this specific reform, which is not controversial, in the context of his wider reform of competition policy which, as he well knows, might be generously said to be slightly more controversial.

May I turn to some of the detailed areas in the particular proposals that the Commission has asked Parliament to comment upon.

The Commissioner is inviting Parliament to express its views in relation to the paper that was produced in April of this year.

In essence there are a number of areas where, having agreed with the thrust of the reform being taken forward, I feel that the Commission might give the matter further thought.

Firstly, I would like the Commissioner to explain why there is a contrast between the treatment of horizontal restraints and vertical restraints.

I would like the Commissioner to indicate whether, in due course, it is his intention to see further exemption categories specified in the legislation.

I have indicated that businesses are strongly of the view that the duration of exemption in the cases of research and development should be expanded up to a period of ten years.

Since the Commission' s own papers make it clear that horizontal cooperation agreements are generally not made in order to work against the interests of consumers, I would be grateful to see what the Commissioner' s response is in that particular area.

I would also be grateful to have clarification of the position regarding trade supplies, not least because that is an issue that troubles Mr Berenguer Fuster.

I know he has tabled amendments in relation to that.

I am particularly concerned to ensure that we take all steps to avoid a re-nationalisation of EU competition law and I would be grateful to hear what reassurances we can have from the Commissioner in that area.

Finally, business would prefer a lengthier transition period; they would also prefer the Commission to look at more than just the market share in assessing market power.

For these purposes what the Commission proposes may be appropriate, but deciding market power solely by assessing market share is too inexact a science.

Mr President, Commissioner, rapporteur, ladies and gentlemen, I would like to begin by thanking Mr Evans warmly for his report, and also for his statement just now, which has already placed this report and the Commission' s statement in the wider context of the necessary reform of competition policy.

We know how rapidly the world economy is changing and so we are also aware of the increasing importance of research and development, the value of cooperation between companies, and the need for companies to specialise, and hence also the need for specialisation agreements.

Competition is not an end in itself, as far as we are concerned, it is a means of achieving growth and employment, and if, like the Commissioner and ourselves, you champion a functioning single market organised along the lines of the social market economy, you do not favour unlimited competition, but competition governed by the necessary principles of political organisation, keeping in mind that we have a responsibility towards the future and our fellow human beings.

The point has already been made today that these are very welcome reforms, that there is a need for companies to work together, and that the statement affords companies greater freedom as regards their cooperation agreements, and will allow for simplification, flexibilisation and liberalisation.

That is what we have on the plus side.

We are also critical of some aspects, and there are certain things we would like to see.

The rapporteur touched on some of them, and I would like to explore them again.

Firstly, Commissioner, we believe that, in view of increasing autonomy, the people hanker after legal certainty.

I therefore ask myself whether treating horizontal restraints and vertical restraints differently will really lead to greater legal certainty, or whether it would not be better for both, to have a block exemption regulation.

Secondly, it is our wish that the exploitation of the results should not be restricted to five years, but should be extended to ten.

We urge you to make it perfectly clear, by including them in the guidelines, that reciprocal, or unilateral agreements on supply - 'trade supplies' for short - are not affected by the ban laid down in Article 81(2), and we take the view - which is also expressed in the report by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs - that you ought to consider the definition of market share.

The buying market, the selling market, the national market, the regional market?

We all know that the market is in a constant state of flux for the businesses concerned, and we also fear that guidelines 122 and 141 will set an arbitrary market power threshold of 15%.

We feel it is important to increase this threshold, just as we believe that the length of the transitional period for introduction of these regulations should be increased to at least two years, so that your aspirations are fully realised.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, first of all I would like to congratulate Mr Evans on his wonderful report and point out once again the large extent to which we have agreed on analysing the reforms of Community competition law as a whole, as well as the social consequences of competition.

It is true that the great beneficiaries of an appropriate competition policy are the consumers, the citizens as a whole.

We should not see this regulation as something that exclusively concerns companies; it is of interest to all of us as citizens.

We also agree on our positive assessment of the Commission' s attempts to modernise and reform Community competition law.

We must congratulate Mr Monti and the whole of the Commission on having the courage and bravery to complete a reform - which the Commission is determined to do - a reform that was started years ago.

I have said in other interventions that, in my opinion, it is not only necessary but also takes us in the right direction.

The Commission' s chosen path is the right one.

Having been in force for 40 years, Community competition law had begun to show signs of exhaustion.

There is no doubt whatsoever that the competition rules included in the Treaty, and in the law derived from it, have contributed significantly to the growth of a culture of competition, and have been fundamental to the creation of the single market.

On the other hand, the Commission' s decisions and the judgments of the Court of Justice have enjoyed well-earned prestige in terms of achieving this aim.

We must not forget, however, that those rules were initially alien to European law.

The European legal tradition, especially the continental tradition, concentrated more on aspects relating to unfair competition; the free competition elements were imported from the United States.

A Spanish business academic - Professor Garrigues - explained very graphically that the American soldiers who came to Europe to fight in the Second World War brought 'antitrust' legislation in their rucksacks.

Now, those positive aspects could not disguise certain deficiencies which had traditionally been demonstrated by the experts.

Perhaps the best-founded criticism referred to the rigidity of the rules.

It is true that it was perhaps necessary at the beginning to apply the rules so rigidly, because new rules had to be applied, imported from the United States, in accordance with the continental legal tradition.

I must add here that it is no surprise that Mr Evans' assessment and concern does not coincide exactly with that of his colleague in the Group of the European People' s Party, Mr Karas.

Mr Evans is behaving more like an Anglo-Saxon lawyer, while Mr Karas has demonstrated the usual preoccupations of continental lawyers.

I believe that this reform is more along the lines of Anglo-Saxon law and, despite being a continental lawyer, I agree with it.

I am not so concerned about legal certainty as some people.

Nevertheless, it is true that what was acceptable twenty or thirty years ago is not necessarily acceptable today.

Today, the single market is a reality and the culture of competition is sufficiently widespread.

It is no longer possible to apply competition rules which do not take account of the economic analysis and a consideration of the market' s power.

In the field of vertical restrictions, the new regulations on exemption by category and the guidelines for their application have been approved.

The time has now come to introduce reform in the field of horizontal restrictions.

In this area, the Commission is now presenting us with two proposals for regulations, one on research and development agreements, and the other on the regulation of specialisation agreements, accompanied by guidelines.

It should be noted, as the report does, that there is now an noticeable difference with regard to the treatment of vertical and horizontal restrictions since, in the case of vertical restrictions, there was a single regulation and guidelines which covered all the possibilities to which that regulation applied.

With regard to horizontal restrictions, however, there are guidelines which are, to a large extent, broader than the two specific aspects regulated by the two proposals for regulations.

The Group of the Party of European Socialists has presented Parliament with five amendments which express some of our concerns.

Of these, I would draw your attention to our concern at the fact that crisis cartels are not dealt with. They were included in the previous legislation and have disappeared here without sufficient justification.

I would therefore ask you to vote in favour of these amendments.

Finally, ladies and gentlemen, as a result of the reform, the Commission will be able to focus on tackling the conduct of those who hold power in the market, because it is that conduct which is genuinely anti-competitive and damaging to the market.

I repeat that in this sense we are in agreement.

It seems that we will finally be able to say goodbye to an over-rigorous and over-formal approach and welcome economic analysis into European competition law.

Mr President, in the proposals which he has formulated in the report under discussion, our rapporteur, Mr Evans, is calling for the Commission to relax the competition rules for horizontal cooperation agreements between companies operating at the same market level.

It would therefore appear that the Commission has a keener sense of fair trading than the European Parliament, despite the fact that, logically-speaking, the opposite should apply.

It is the European Parliament which should be more sensitive to the social impact of competition policy.

Especially as, even though we have the most stringent fair trading legislation, the real world in which we live is a world in which large monopolies abuse dominant market positions, in which mergers, take-overs and acquisitions by corporate behemoths are a daily occurrence, giving rise to monopolies of global proportions which almost always lay off thousands of workers and have a huge impact on employment and which then monopolise wealth-producing resources, markets and consumers.

It is precisely because the real world is thus that we should be more careful and stricter when it comes to ensuring that horizontal cooperation agreements are treated and controlled in the same manner as mergers and vertical restraints.

This being so, we are unable to vote in favour of the proposals calling for policy restrictions to be relaxed, as proposed by the Commission.

Mr President, I would like to start by congratulating Mr Evans on the quality and weight of his report.

I would also like to express the Commission' s appreciation of Parliament' s consistently constructive attitude to competition issues, which we consider to be an important tool in the framework of the social market economy to which Mr Karas referred, the ultimate aim of which, as Mr Berenguer Fuster stressed, is to protect the consumer.

Mr Berenguer has also grasped perfectly the line which the Commission intends to take, which is to focus more on economic analysis in developing competition policy, but, at the same time, as Mr Karas, Mr Evans and others have requested, we are endeavouring to provide the greatest possible legal certainty for businesses.

Today' s debate concerns a major aspect of our attempts to modernise competition policy.

On the one hand, the Commission has drawn up a revised version of the block exemption regulations on research and development and specialisation agreements, and, on the other hand, it has prepared draft guidelines on the applicability of article 81 to horizontal cooperation agreements.

In this way, it is the Commission' s intention to codify the relevant case law and working practice as they have developed on the basis the evaluation of individual cases over all these years, without making any major changes to the criteria for evaluating horizontal cooperation agreements on the basis of Community law.

These documents are therefore intended to clarify the criteria used to implement competition policy in this field, certainly not to alter them.

I would like to stress this aspect, because there has been some criticism of the Commission' s proposal that it is masking a thorough revision of the line taken regarding the horizontal cooperation agreements.

It is generally understood that agreements signed between competitors are likely to restrict competition to a much greater degree than other types of agreement.

This is certainly the case where agreements between competitors are intended to set prices, divide up the market or limit production.

We are certainly not attempting to make anybody think that horizontal agreements, which have severely negative implications for competition, will in the future be regulated less rigorously.

However, in the absence of basic restrictions, it is necessary for the agreements to be examined in their economic context, so that it can be ascertained whether they would have a negative effect on the market.

There is, however, clearly a need to update and clarify the regulations on horizontal agreements for two fundamental reasons: firstly, because these regulations represent a response to the present economic reality, for businesses have to react to increasing pressure from competition and adapt to a market which is in a constant state of flux.

Cooperation can often be a way to share risks, save on expenditure, pool expertise and speed up the launching of innovations onto the market.

It is an important tool, particularly for small- and medium-sized businesses.

Consumers will benefit from these economic advantages, but only if effective competition is maintained on the market.

Our second reason for revising the legislation in this area is the fact that clarification of the norms is essential for the success of our undertaking to modernise competition policy, an undertaking whose scope the rapporteur, Mr Evans, has grasped fully, and for this I am grateful to him, as I am for his reference to state aid, which is another, no less important element of competition policy.

The line taken is similar to that recently adopted on vertical agreements, and primarily responds to two objectives: preventing the Directorate-General for Competition having to examine cases which have no bearing on competition policy, and enabling the businesses themselves to establish whether or not an agreement would restrict competition and whether it would be eligible for an exemption.

The draft resolution shows that Parliament supports the aims of the reform.

The questions raised by you and others contain extremely valuable suggestions.

I am now, already, able to inform you that I intend to incorporate the majority of these suggestions.

I shall, in particular, recommend to the Commission that it adheres to your opinion on three major points in respect of the block exemption regulations. Firstly, the maximum duration of the exemption for research and development agreements should be extended beyond the current limit of five years.

However, a compromise does need to be reached between the businesses' interests in exploiting the results of their own research and the public interest, in guaranteeing competition on the new markets.

I shall therefore propose to limit the duration of the exemption not to ten but to seven years.

Secondly, the restrictions concerning the possibility of parties exploiting the results of research and development projects carried out jointly should be as few as possible, in order to encourage the movement of knowledge, which is instrumental in both technical and economic progress.

I shall therefore propose, on the basis of your comments, that, as a rule, these restrictions be allowed to intervene only where they are to be applied to businesses which are not in direct competition.

Thirdly, the transitional period should be extended.

In this we can take the block exemption regulations on vertical agreements as an example and set a period of 18 months.

Then, with regard to the guidelines, we will certainly be able to comply with your request to operate a clearer distinction between the guidelines for horizontal agreements and those for vertical agreements, and to be clearer in our handling of industrial supply agreements.

The Commission intends to adopt the definitive version of the block exemption regulations and guidelines before the end of the year.

This would avoid a legal gap forming after the current regulations expire, but it would also contribute considerably to keeping Community policy up to date.

Mr President, this debate has touched on a number of other important, interesting points.

I do not have the time to comment on all of them, but I would just like to make a couple of observations.

Mr Theonas, you raised the question of mergers.

The care with which the Commission has exercised its powers in the area of merger control cannot have escaped you.

As we are required to do by the regulation, we are adhering rigorously to the criterion of prohibiting mergers where they would lead to the creation or consolidation of a dominant position.

Often, this is not the case - there is no danger of it happening - partly because the businesses are aware of this requirement and propose remedies which can, on occasions, be extremely effective.

Mr Evans raised the question of trade supplies.

I agree that the treatment of industrial supply agreements needs to be elaborated in the guidelines.

This will be done in the chapter on production agreements.

Crisis cartels, Mr Berenguer, aim directly at reducing output and raising prices; they therefore always have a restrictive effect on competition.

That does not exclude the possibility of such cartels being exempt under Article 81(3).

It would, however, only be possible after an individual examination of the case and the merits of the agreement.

That is why it would be inappropriate to include these agreements in the guidelines.

Finally, how does this all fit into the broader modernisation effort?

First of all I can confirm to Mr Evans that I expect the Commission to be able to adopt a proposal for a regulation to reform Regulation 17 of 1962 before the end of this month.

That reform involves the elimination of the notification system.

This, however, Mr Karas, should not reduce the legal certainty for companies.

In order to ensure this, the Commission is clarifying its present substantive rules.

We have already done so for distribution - vertical agreements - and we are now doing it for horizontal agreements.

Our block exemption regulations and notices will give companies more certainty on the contents of our rules and in self-assessing their agreements in the spirit of an overall modernisation effort.

This cannot be considered a renationalisation of competition policy but, more than in the past, it will benefit from the cooperation of the national in the cooperation of the national competition authorities and the national courts in the general effort of applying EC competition rules.

The vote will take place tomorrow, Thursday, at 11 a.m.

Environmental dimension in the development process

The next item is the debate on the report (A5-0215/2000) by Mr Wijkman, on behalf of the Parliament Delegation to the Conciliation Committee, on the Commission' s opinion on the European Parliament' s amendments to the joint position of the Council on the proposed European Parliament and Council regulation on measures to promote the full integration of the environmental dimension in the development process of developing countries (amending the Commission' s proposal) [C5-0283/2000 - 1999/0020(COD)].

Mr President, the regulation we are now to be discussing concerns the prior conditions for ensuring that, under the European Union's aid policy, better account is taken of the physical environment and of basic natural resources in conjunction with various development projects.

This is an important issue because we know that economic growth can often have damaging consequences for the natural environment, either when natural resources are exploited, in the course of industrial production itself or when products are used.

Environmental damage has harmful effects on public health.

It is in danger of destroying biological diversity and may also entail damage which jeopardises the long-term productive capacity of natural systems.

When and if that happens, the health of our economies is also affected.

By thinking in preventive terms and by choosing methods and techniques which interfere with the environment as little as possible, growth can be combined with proper consideration for the environment.

That is important in our own countries, but we still have a long way to go throughout the European Union.

It is also important, of course, in the developing countries, especially in connection with the development cooperation initiated by the European Union.

The requirements for integrating environmental considerations include extensive method development work and demonstration projects, as well as education and training, both of the Commission' s staff and of affected personnel in the recipient countries.

The regulation we are discussing lays down detailed rules for this and makes a nice large sum of money available.

This matter has been debated by Parliament twice before.

At the last reading, there were significant differences between our own points of view and the proposal adopted by the Council.

Conciliation was initiated, and we are now seeing the result of this.

From Parliament' s point of view, I think we should greet the result of this conciliation with great satisfaction.

We have achieved what we were aiming for in a number of important areas.

Allow me to mention three important examples of these.

First of all, the budget is near enough double the size of the original amount.

We have gone from EUR 50 million to EUR 93 million.

Secondly, the degree to which the Member States were to be involved in the implementation itself was a major issue.

Parliament' s approach to this question was to opt for the least possible involvement, that is to say to make the Commission chiefly responsible for the implementation itself and to evaluate it subsequently.

The compromise we have reached means that there is to be joint decision-making only in the case of activities involving more than EUR 2.5 million, when active participation on the part of the Member States is actually required.

That is a good thing, in my view.

If, as it ought to be, our aim is to simplify the provision of aid, remove the bureaucracy surrounding it and, in that way, close the gap between promises and commitments, on the one hand, and the activities carried out, on the other, it is essential that the Member States should interfere less in operational activity.

With the conciliation we have achieved, we have taken a welcome step in that direction.

Thirdly, we demanded at the second reading that the regulation should not be limited in time, that is to say that this type of activity should be planned on a very long-term basis.

Now that the development process is to be evaluated after four years and decisions then taken about the future, I think, however, that we should be satisfied.

Once the evaluation has taken place, we shall have every opportunity to establish guidelines, and more detailed guidelines than today' s, for this important activity.

I therefore recommend that Parliament approve the result of the conciliation.

Mr President, this draft regulation is one of the first regulations in the sphere of development policy to be adopted by means of the codecision procedure.

The European Parliament has done justice to the weightier responsibility it bears by virtue of its increased decision-making powers.

Many people felt that this regulation should be passed as quickly as possible, which has meant Parliament having to distance itself from many of its proposed amendments.

The path we chose was undoubtedly the right one. We were able to make a few improvements to this draft regulation.

One of the most important improvements - the rapporteur has already mentioned it - is that the potential activities provided for by this regulation are to be adequately funded.

It was a great achievement on our part to secure an increase in the funding from EUR 54.4 million to EUR 93 million - i.e. it was practically doubled - even though we know that we would need a much larger amount to do justice to the importance of this issue in terms of our common future.

But that would lead to a general political discussion, which would of course be beyond the scope of this regulation.

Our proposed amendments enabled us to make a number of changes to Article 3, which is concerned with the nature of the measures to be carried out.

I am disappointed that Parliament' s proposed amendment was not adopted, because it advocated dispensing with bank guarantees or credit safeguards if need be, in order to make the range of applicants and the target group as large as possible.

Despite everything, I believe this represents a great achievement on Parliament' s part, and also on the part of the rapporteur.

Mr President, eight years after the Rio conference, where the countries of the United Nations acknowledged that development and the environment were inextricably linked, the European Union is finally adopting regulations to ensure that the environment is integrated into the development projects of developing countries.

Although we have cause to congratulate ourselves on the financial contribution agreed in the course of the conciliation - and I should like to thank the rapporteur on behalf of my group - the budget in question is still modest, given the considerable needs and still greater expectations of the populations concerned.

Are we not merely salving our consciences by granting just a little more than EUR 15 million over a period of six years to developing countries in Africa, the Caribbean and South America when we are aware of the social, economic and ecological conditions in these underprivileged lands?

This budget line, designed to promote the full integration of the environmental dimension in the development process, will be of no significance whatsoever if the environmental dimension is neglected in the case of other projects.

I would like to remind you that sustainable development which integrates the environmental dimension fully is still, more than ever, the only model of development able to meet the requirements both of the underprivileged countries of the South and the polluted countries of the North.

On behalf of the Commission, I wish to congratulate the rapporteur, Mr Wijkman, and the members of the conciliation delegation on having put together a compromise package which the Council has already formally adopted.

The Commission supports the proposed regulation currently before you.

It considers it a valuable instrument for carrying out strategic and pilot activities in the field of the environment.

It is, of course, a supplementary instrument to the others at the disposal of the Commission.

Fortunately, our activities in the field of environment and development are not limited to actions funded under this regulation.

We are mainstreaming the environment in everything we do.

Hence, we intend to use it in a strategic fashion focusing, in particular, on support for the various international environmental conventions.

Plans to finance projects which will meet the objectives of the regulation are already advanced.

Once it has been formally adopted and funds made available we will proceed to finalise agreements for their implementation.

However, time will be against us since we are fast approaching the end of the financial year.

Once more, I wish to thank Parliament for their work in ensuring the passage of this regulation and the interest that many Members have shown.

I am confident that the regulation will provide us with a useful tool for ensuring that the environmental dimension is fully taken into account in our development cooperation.

Sustainable management of forests in developing countries

The next item is the report (A5-0216/2000) by Mr Fernández Martín, on behalf of the Parliamentary delegation to the Conciliation Committee, on a joint text, approved by the Conciliation Committee, for a European Parliament and Council regulation on measures designed to promote the conservation and sustainable management of forests in developing countries [C5­0284/2000 - 1999/0015(COS)].

Mr President, with this report on the regulation on the conservation and sustainable management of tropical forests and other types of forest in developing countries, and with the previous report by Mr Wijkman, Parliament is reaching the high point today, with the corresponding vote tomorrow, of its first exercise of its new codecision competences in the field of cooperation and development.

It has taken the procedure a long time to come to an end, since we have spent almost three years on the first and second readings and on the debate in conciliation.

As rapporteur, I would like to express my satisfaction that such a long period has been fruitful and has enabled us to reach an agreement on the text of the regulation which I am today asking Parliament to vote in favour of.

We started from very different positions.

Basically, the differences between Parliament and the Council concerned the budgetary funding of the programme, the timetable and commitology.

Parliament had proposed, in previous stages of the procedure, numerous amendments which the Council and the Commission have accepted and I must say - it is fair to recognise this - that the Commission' s management of the previous programme, its high level of execution and its good results, have meant that the rapporteur, with the support of the Committee on Development and Cooperation, has been able to persuade the Council of the need to maintain the programme with a sufficient degree of funding to guarantee its success.

The tropical forests and their various functions and usefulness to humanity can contribute to a large extent to the achievement of the Union' s aims, not only in terms of development and the environment, but also with regard to its objectives of fighting poverty and sustainable economic and social development.

With the regulation, the European Union provides appropriate financial and technical aid with a view to promoting conservation and the sustainable management of tropical forests and other types of forest in developing countries, so that the forests may play their role as generators of wealth and social development with the sustainable environmental criteria which is expected of them at local, national and international levels.

The regulation says that the sustainable management of the forests must seek to improve the living conditions and well-being of the populations within the limits of the capacity of the ecosystems, maintaining the natural heritage and its biological diversity.

This must be done by promoting the active participation of the populations which depend on the forests and the local communities in the creation of policies and planning in the field of development.

To this end, it is necessary to improve coordination and the flow of information between Commission projects - those that the Commission will present in the coming years - and those of the Member States, in order to achieve more coherent actions and therefore a more efficient use of resources.

In terms of the budget, we should be pleased that, after the restrictions which, in general, have resulted from the plans for reconstruction in Kosovo, we now have a contribution of EUR 249 million, having started with an initial Council proposal of EUR 9 million, for a period of 6 years, from now until 2006.

This will provide sufficient funding to fulfil the objectives, at least with the same efficiency with which they have been fulfilled during the period which is coming to an end now.

Nevertheless, in the field of commitology the differing positions of Parliament, especially the Committee on Development and Cooperation, and the Council are well known.

Our position is more inclined towards giving greater competences to the Commission in this area.

We have not managed to reach an agreement, since this agreement is waiting for the problem to be dealt with globally.

However, at least the Committee on Development and Cooperation can feel satisfied because, on this question of commitology, an agreement has been reached which will allow us to establish the necessary budgetary estimates and a precise timetable for maintaining up-to-date information on the strategic guidelines and the priorities for implementing actions for the coming years.

To sum up, Mr President, this is a sound agreement for a sound programme for the conservation of the tropical forests.

Mr President, not only is the present draft regulation on measures to promote the sustainable management of tropical forests and other forests in developing countries, very closely associated with the previous regulation in terms of subject matter, the political pressure and the political arguments used to rail-road this regulation through as quickly as possible are also reminiscent of what happened the last time round.

In this case too, we opted for a conciliation procedure, notwithstanding all the prophecies of doom, and I believe we substantially improved the content of the regulation in the process.

The active participation of the local communities and those who are directly affected, in the development of the national forestry policy and development planning, is now one of the objectives of the regulation, and this represents a major step forwards in terms of content, to my mind.

Parliament has managed to secure adequate funding.

The Council' s proposal earmarked a ridiculously low sum of EUR 63 million for the period between 2000 and 2006.

Parliament demanded EUR 249 million for the same period and achieved it, making the point very clearly in so doing that it is unacceptable as far as we are concerned to play the reconstruction in the Balkans - as important as it is - off against EU development policy and development cooperation.

It is vital that the Commission reports back to Parliament annually on the guidelines and priorities it has worked out.

Together with Article 11 of this regulation, which lays down an annual reporting obligation in respect of financed projects and measures, this provides us with the basic tools we will need to draw attention, in good time, to disturbing trends.

Mr President, my feeling is that the conservation of tropical forests should certainly be brought about through funding, contributions etc., but above all - and this is why the report appealed to me - it should involve the participation of the local peoples, providing them with ideas for a future for the forest and genuinely sustainable forest management.

A few years ago, the magazine 'Nature' featured a study into a Peruvian forest and the best way to exploit it.

This forest, like all tropical forests, boasted remarkable biodiversity: it contained a good 270 plant species in a single hectare, whereas a European forest can have as few as six or seven species per hectare.

Now, this rich biodiversity - which, moreover, is not confined to plant species - has a financial consequence which is in itself truly impressive.

However, there are different ways of accessing this potential source of revenue: for example, it is possible to cut down all the trees and sell the wood, which would bring in FF 5 000 plus another FF 15 000 from using the land as pastureland - which is what usually happens - or for crops.

In this scenario, the land becomes poor in humus and desertification soon follows.

On the other hand, another approach could be to exploit the produce of the land, such as fruit and the produce of the underwood, and to operate a system of controlled tree felling, which would produce an annual income of FF 2 000. In this case, the income would be regular, practically perennial.

This is just one example to illustrate that I am a firm believer in the principle of providing services, technical information and advice on a modus operandi to these peoples, so that they can sustain their forests themselves, for I am sure that it is in their interest to operate in this way rather than conducting mass tree-felling operations and laying waste to vast numbers of these areas which are so valuable for our planet' s atmosphere.

I would like to end by quoting an aphorism from Chairman Mao' s Little Red Book - which, although it is no longer popular can still be useful on occasions. It reads: "Do not give a fisherman fish; teach him how to fish better" .

On behalf of the Commission, I wish to congratulate the rapporteur for his work on this regulation.

I congratulate Mr Fernández Martín and the other members of the conciliation delegation for their efforts to achieve a satisfactory conclusion on the tropical forests regulation.

The Commission supports the proposed text before you.

As with the environment budget heading we intend to use the tropical forests budget heading strategically and in coordination with actions funded under the other instruments at the disposal of the Commission.

At international level I envisage this regulation to be an important tool for the Community to promote the conclusions of the UN intergovernmental forum on forests.

This area, as has been clearly expressed in these contributions, is crucial for biodiversity, for climate, and for our conscience in handing over an Earth that has these qualities to future generations.

Anybody who has had the thrill of being in a real tropical forest will never forget the experience and we should certainly not deny our children that.

Once more, I offer my congratulations to Parliament for this successful conclusion and I also wish to express my appreciation for the input it has made during the first and second readings of the regulation.

Thank you very much, Commissioner Nielson.

The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 a.m.

The next item is the report (A5-0227/2000) by Mrs Ferrer, on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation, on the communication from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament on complementarity between Community and Member States' policies on development cooperation [COM(1999)218 - C5-0179/1999 - 1999/2156(COS)].

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, the increase in poverty, despite the gradual growth of world GDP over recent decades, the current tendency of Member States to reduce the funds intended for official aid to development in favour of direct investment, of which only 1% goes to the least-developed countries - which increases the gulf which separates those countries from the rich or developing countries - and the conviction that the globalisation process may increase the difficulties of the poor countries, are all factors which demonstrate the urgent need to improve the effectiveness of policies on development cooperation.

In the field of democracy and respect for human rights we are also very far from the desirable parameters: coups d' états, violence, wars and violations of human rights are still realities in the least-developed countries. We must therefore contribute to correcting this situation.

In this context, it is essential to strengthen the complementarity of policies on development cooperation implemented by the Community and the Member States.

Firstly, because complementarity enables us to take advantage of the synergy resulting from a coordinated approach in the actions to be implemented, not only by the European Union but also by all the international donors, which will improve the impact of those actions.

Secondly, because it contributes an element of added value to the Member States' interventions, which will help to optimise the resources destined for development aid and to achieve better results.

Thirdly, because it would improve the visibility of the European Union and make its development policy more credible, which will allow it to exert the political influence it deserves as the main provider of funds - let us remember that between half and two thirds of development aid comes from the European Union - and both the NGOs and the recipient countries would like this influence to be greater given that nobody is more sensitive than the European Union in the field of social justice and human development.

Lastly, improving complementarity is important because the Treaty on European Union clearly establishes that the Member States and the Community must coordinate their policies on development cooperation and harmonise their aid programmes.

That is why we must take a positive view of the Commission' s presentation of the communication on the complementarity of Community and Member States' policies on development cooperation, since the measures it proposes may contribute to removing the obstacles which hinder significant advances in this area.

In general terms, it can be said that the Committee on Development and Cooperation, and myself, are in agreement on the broad approach of the document and on the measures it proposes.

Nevertheless, I would like to make some specific points. The first is that I consider that the Commission should have taken account of the fact that complementarity is not an isolated element, but should rather be dealt with within a context of a global strategy which also addresses the issues of coordination and coherence, since coherence is inseparable from coordination and complementarity, and, without coordination, complementarity is not possible.

Therefore, I believe that, in order to really improve the impact of European development policies and safeguard the credibility of the Union, it would have been much more appropriate and would have made things much clearer if these aspects had been tackled jointly within the framework of the communication on development policy, since that would have better highlighted the essential and inseparable nature of these elements in relation to the formulation of a development policy in accordance with the Union' s objectives.

My second point relates to the very concept of complementarity, which must not be viewed as a protective principle for preserving the competences of the Member States in this field, but as a manifestation of a political will to unite our efforts to improve and contribute more effectively to implementing the objectives of our policies on development cooperation.

Furthermore, the need to ensure the unity, coherence and effectiveness of Union action in the field of external policy - which is also laid down in the Treaty - must extend to development policies, since these are an integral part of the Union' s external action.

The Commission should therefore take the initiative and make a qualitative leap in that direction in order to allow the European Union to establish its strategic priorities in the field of development aid.

Thirdly, I must say that it will be difficult for measures to strengthen complementarity, alone, to achieve the desired results.

For that, the political will of the Council must, as a precondition, make progress towards greater integration in the field of cooperation, because what has hindered the progress of complementarity has been above all the fact that the Member States define their development cooperation policies more in accordance with their geo-strategic economic interests and their colonial pasts than with the objectives of the Union in relation to development.

Lastly, we should repeat that, as well as the operative measures to improve the management of programmes, with which - as I have said - the Committee on Development and Cooperation is in agreement in principle, we believe that the Commission should take the responsibility for reflecting and making proposals, which is an essential requirement if the Union wants to direct aid not only towards promoting the economic growth of the beneficiary countries but also so that that growth will reach all sections of the population, thereby fulfilling its commitment to the development of peoples and, therefore, its commitment to peace, since, without development, peace will always be difficult to attain.

In any event, and to sum up, I would like to reiterate the timeliness of this communication - even though we would have liked it to have been part of a global package - and say how fitting the measures are and that, together with the measures also proposed by the Committee on Development and Cooperation in my report, we hope that they will help to guide our action, providing better operational management.

I should repeat once again that the Council must show signs of political will, without which it will be very difficult to make the principle of complementarity a reality.

Mr President, I would like to congratulate Mrs Ferrer on having produced a balanced report.

It is important that we recognise the role of the EU and the extent of its influence.

I would similarly like to say how satisfied I am that the importance of the work of NGOs, which work independently of governments, is being acknowledged and taken into account in development cooperation with the express purpose of strengthening civil society as a result of such cooperation.

I also think that the recommendation that coordination should take place within the framework of the strategies selected by the target countries themselves is a healthy approach to the issue.

When we speak of development cooperation, in the same breath it is a salutary exercise to remind ourselves that development cooperation is not an objective in itself.

The objective is for the less developed countries to be able to sort out their affairs themselves, take responsibility for their own development, and act as societies in a manner that is just. And instead of hindering these opportunities, we should try to help put things right.

At EU level, this means, for example, that our policy should not encourage countries to survive on the basis of just one product.

Only those countries whose economy is in decent shape can benefit from globalisation.

Those developing countries that struggle along on the basis of one product will run into difficulties.

At EU level, we must also see to it that our values are reflected in our policy on development cooperation.

Thus, we cannot aid countries that show no interest in their citizens' human rights or democracy.

In other cases we have to confine ourselves just to humanitarian aid.

I would also say it was vital that the EU should have a human rights secretary, in the manner of the Ombudsman, whose job would include observing the human rights situation in the less developed countries.

At EU level we must really be aware of the political effects of aid, as we already know from experience that aid can be damaging.

In fact the risk is considerable.

We have to develop the sort of aid that by its nature prevents conflicts, and does not fuel them.

Aid must be directed in such a way that it brings benefit to the worst-off of all.

Crises caused by environmental problems must be able to be predicted, and aid should not be given in such a way that it stirs up conflict over natural resources.

We have to learn to recognise those societies in which the risk of violence is associated with state-induced terror.

In channelling aid we have to see to it that it does not prop up undemocratic state structures.

Through the conditionality of aid we can prevent corruption and the oppression of certain groups.

I know that the issue is not simple and that conditionality is an arduous and cumbersome exercise, but positive conditionality, as it is referred to, can achieve a lot.

For that reason the EU should not shy away from it.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, before this debate we would have liked to ask the Council a question on the policy of complementarity. We tried to, but we were unable to.

It has not been possible, and we regret this because the truth is, Commissioner, that on this matter you are not alone. There are also the Member States and the Council.

In any event, I believe that the report which Mrs Ferrer has presented this afternoon is a sound report and, as she too has said, we would have liked to have a joint text.

We are dealing with development policy in a piecemeal way and this prevents us from having an overview.

Her report can, however, be considered to be an important contribution.

This report is of an importance which transcends the material scope of development aid policy.

As well as being a requirement of the Treaty, complementarity between Community aid policy and that of the Member States, is an invaluable instrument for helping the Union and the Member States to progress along a common path in the field of aid.

We Socialists believe that development aid policy in general must be the flagship of Community external action and yet there is no such complementarity, apart from a few pilot projects.

We are failing to use a mechanism which would to such a large extent maximise the resources, which are becoming scarcer, dedicated to aid as the political result of a joint effort, despite the repeated requests of this Parliament and the repeated resolutions of the Council itself, which basically has ultimate responsibility in this area.

Complementarity is currently expressed in operational coordination on the ground and in the commitology procedure in Brussels.

With regard to the former, I have already said that it is only applied in certain pilot projects. As for commitology, I will give you an example of how this is not working either: the Latin America committee has only met twice this year, instead of on a monthly basis which used to be the case and which would be necessary for it to work.

Some of the programmes approved by this committee, such as the regional programme for the reconstruction of Central America in relation to Hurricane Mitch, are still to be implemented.

There is a clear lack of political will to implement the measures which we decide on in Parliament, and that leads to inefficiency in the achievement of our political objectives, to a gradual paralysis of the functioning of the European institutions and to a bad image which, as the previous speaker said, is sometimes projected to the public.

Complementarity with the Member States, coherence between Community policies and coordination between departments must form the basis of development aid policy if this policy is to fulfil this Parliament' s minimum requirements in terms of efficiency.

There are problems with the diversity of instruments and the duplication of procedures, but the real problem is the lack of political will.

As has been said before, the States must overcome their individual tendencies - which often reflect their concerns about former colonial relationships or other factors - and commit themselves to a common European project.

If we do not adopt this policy, we will not be efficient in terms of development cooperation.

The Commission now has the opportunity to include these elements in its reform and the Council has the historic responsibility to involve itself in the definition and implementation of Community policies.

Both institutions can rely on the strong support of the Socialist Group in Parliament in relation to development aid policy.

The policy of complementarity between national and Community policies has a total of 16 players (15+1).

Coherence between Community policies and coordination between departments within the Commission are intended to create what we wish to be the Union' s development aid policy, with the aim of improving the efficiency of European aid by helping to optimise the use of resources, both human and financial, and to make the European Union more visible, thereby making it more efficient and giving it a greater presence in the international community.

We hope that all of this will be introduced with the reform and that we will have coherent, complementary and coordinated policies in order to achieve greater efficiency.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, Mrs Ferrer' s report deals with the Commission communication on complementarity between Community and Member State policies on development cooperation.

I share her disappointment that we are discussing this in isolation.

Instead, we should be having a searching debate on a global strategy for our cooperation with the Southern countries, which involves the triptych of complementarity, coordination and cohesion, also known as the three Cs, where Europe continues to fail so miserably. This, in fact, also goes for the Member States, because the European Member States simply refuse to take these values on board and prefer to stick to their own neo-colonial ideas.

The lack of efficient Community development cooperation therefore serve the Member States as an excellent alibi for not having to attain complementarity, and certainly not coordination and cohesion.

Some Member States make the bold claim that the Community should not adopt development policy but should delegate everything to the Member States.

We certainly do not share this view.

Anyone who is genuinely concerned about fair-minded world relations in terms of development must admit that, all too often, the Member States' own strategic and economic interests prevail over development interests.

At best, they try to mitigate or alleviate the effects of economic policy pursued by the rich countries in the fields of globalisation, our need for raw materials, minerals, oil, etc.

There is no doubt that we want poor countries to be included in the general economic and cultural developments in the world in the interests of the populations concerned and not only in the interests of the industrialised world.

This is why we need to free ourselves from these neo-colonial dynamics and relations which feed dependency and destroy the environment.

We need to abolish poverty in the world.

This requires a global, multilateral strategy, which, first and foremost relies on the coordination of Member State and Community development policy in every country, in every recipient country and at international level.

This is more important than complementarity.

There is no doubt that a more coordinated policy would have a far greater impact.

The contrast between the high level of European aid, which accounts for more than half of all aid globally, and the little political impact, for example upon ending armed conflict and severe violations of human rights, is really poignant.

If coordination and complementarity were already in place in the recipient countries, donor countries would prefer to hoist their national flags there too. Is the Council actually prepared to change the system of comitology?

This, in my opinion, is a sine qua non.

It will be a real challenge for the Commission to delegate EU responsibilites to our delegations based out there.

If this fails, then opponents of the joint development policy are bound to press for abolition full stop.

With regard to coordination at international level, we would welcome a European approach which can be different from that of the IMF and the World Bank.

We do not want to be an extension of the Bretton Woods institutions.

We want to play a leading role in the world.

This is why these Member States should stop telling their electorate that nothing in Europe ever works.

It is high time they acknowledged their own share of responsibility for these failures, but we should do the same.

Mr President, we share the rapporteur' s view that, pursuant to Article 177 of the Treaty establishing the European Community, the European Union fulfils an auxiliary role in the field of development cooperation.

From this article, it is clear that there is no question of replacing the Member States' development policy.

The EU aid policy is determined by the fifteen Member States and financed by contributions from the Member States, as established in the EU Treaty.

In theory, this is a solid basis for a decisive and clear DC policy, with implementation to match.

In practice, however, both leave something to be desired.

The payments, for example, pose a problem.

On the whole, two visions are to be distinguished between in the DC Council: that of the Northern Member States, which consider DC to be a valuable area of policy and which are, by and large, of the opinion that the EU DC is lacking in terms of quality, and that of the Southern Member States which consider DC to be merely an instrument of foreign and economic relations.

These discrepancies are marginalised all too easily by the EU in the complementarity and coordination proposed by the rapporteur and the Commission.

The reason why the Council and Member States suffer from a lack of 'political will' , as highlighted by the rapporteur and Commission, can therefore be found in this fundamental difference in approach to development cooperation.

This is why at EU level, it is impossible to develop cohesive policy in this area.

Finally, the Treaty terms the EU' s DC as supplementary to the aid from Member States.

In our opinion, this means that the Commission should provide the added value over and above what the Member States can offer, such as granting emergency aid in emergency situations such as natural disasters and wars.

Long-term programmes, on the other hand, fare better within bilateral, often historical relations between developing countries and Member States.

In any case, the Commission should not act as the sixteenth bilateral donor, which is the case in practice.

The European Union could, however, help coordinate Member State aid and intervene if the Member States fail to take any action.

We therefore partly endorse the view that European coordination and complementarity are important, but we do not conclude from that that EU DC coordination adds something to what should be the actual objective, namely coordination which unites all relevant donors, preferably under the guidance of the recipient country or, if this is not possible, under the guidance of the UN or the World Bank.

We will take a stance to this effect in the discussion on coordination and complementarity.

Mr President, the fine report which my compatriot, Mrs Ferrer, is presenting us with today addresses a problem which has been highlighted on numerous occasions and, at the same time, the urgent need to resolve it and open up new avenues in the relations between the united Europe and the third world.

The problem I am referring to is the notable lack of harmony and coordination in development cooperation action and policy between the European Union and its Member States, on the one hand, and between some of the Member States themselves, on the other.

What has been described and condemned by many authoritative voices and, in particular, by organisations that work in this area - and also by our own Parliament - is that over the years the different Member States have been acting independently in the field of cooperation, often according to individual national views and interests, sometimes honourable and sometimes less so, but in any event without any significant effort to be coherent and fairly distribute roles, not even in terms of providing mutual information and even less in terms of coordination.

To sum up, there has been no effort to act rationally and efficiently so that the available resources, which are always limited, are not wasted and instead yield the best possible results.

Furthermore, until very recently, the required effort has not been made to reasonably coordinate Community policy in this field with the policies that at the same time were being carried out by the 15 Member States, although this is certainly not exclusive to the area which we are dealing with.

It was truly regrettable to see how Community actions were being implemented, sometimes without even an awareness of what each of the Member States was doing in relation to the relevant countries or sectors.

The result was, and to a large extent still is, so far, disparate actions, overlapping in many cases, and even the duplication and incompatibility of what each of us is doing.

This is absurd and is something of a disaster.

This situation was naturally unsustainable and was one more problem to resolve, but that need has become all the more blatant and urgent given that the very process of European construction, the reforms and the progress of the Union, are making it essential that we act on the international stage as one country, with one voice, and given that it is an undeniable priority for the viability of our project that we implement a common foreign and security policy.

In our opinion, anything we can do in the field of development policy is but a substantial part of this foreign and security policy.

That is what Mrs Ferrer demonstrates, and the heading of her report highlights the key concept of complementarity.

This is not the first time we have discussed this issue in Parliament, of course.

The faults which we had noted were too obvious not to have been raised in previous debates.

Nevertheless, by taking account of a situation which is particularly pressing, but also particularly favourable, we are taking an important step forward and we are doing so at a time when both the Commission and the Council seem convinced that we have to adopt specific measures in order to leave behind the previous situation and produce the coherence which will enable the resources which Europe intends for development cooperation to be more substantial, in both qualitative and quantitative terms.

Furthermore, in this way, we will achieve for Europe a much more decisive role in the challenge, which is of such concern to us, of creating a fairer, more balanced and therefore more stable world.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I am taking the same line as my predecessors, because, unfortunately, we cannot conceal the fact that the public image of European development cooperation bears no relation to the enormous amount of financial support that the EU itself and its Member States gives to the countries of the south.

Although the EU is by far the largest donor, it comes off far worse in terms of people' s perceptions than do the large multilateral organisations, such as the UN and the World Bank.

Approximately 60% of all financial aid comes out of the European pot.

Complementarity, coherence and coordination are the notorious three C' s at the centre of the debate on European development cooperation.

The European Commission' s financial housekeeping, which revealed a considerable amount of unspent funds, played no small part in re-igniting the reform debate.

Theoretical transactions do little to help our case though.

Nor can it be denied that there have been successes that should be shouted from the rooftops.

Above all, it is practices that must change, which requires the necessary amount of political will on the part of all those concerned.

Take Mozambique and the deployment of ECHO, for example.

Right at the very start of the flood disaster at the beginning of February, ECHO rushed to the aid of the most vulnerable with EUR 750 000.

Since then, a further EUR 9.65 million have been made available as emergency aid, and EUR 21 million are to be provided in addition, to deal with the consequences in the medium-term.

There was a rapid reaction from the Member States too.

The European Union and its Member States have provided a total of EUR 85 million in aid, whereas the UN contribution brought the overall international package to only EUR 115 million, including the European funds.

What we are lacking is the aforementioned three C' s.

Coherence can only be achieved if strategies and measures are brought into line.

Complementarity and coordination are important pre-requisites for creating synergy.

The juxtaposition of multilateral and bilateral development cooperation, on the other hand - which is in evidence in countries besides Mozambique - leads to completely unnecessary frictional losses, as I saw for myself when I visited the country a few weeks ago.

Mrs Ferrer' s report contains a whole host of proposals and demands that deserve our unqualified support.

I would like to highlight three points in particular: complementarity, coherence and coordination must be brought together in one uniform strategy because they are interdependent.

The political leaders and the civil society of the partner States must have their decision-making powers strengthened, as must the EU delegation posts in situ, which is already happening with the elaboration of national indicative programmes within the scope of ACP cooperation.

This will also require there to be improved cooperation between the delegations of the European Union and the diplomatic services of the Member States, which is a matter for the Council.

We need to redouble our efforts, in order, not only to further coordination between the EU and the Member States in this sphere, but also with the international bodies.

Since we provide the lion' s share of the funding for development cooperation, we are also entitled to clear recognition on the operational front and in terms of public perceptions.

There have certainly been positive moves in this direction, but they must be developed, and consolidated in a definitive frame of reference.

At the same time, we must overcome the burdensome legacy of colonial history, or the geo-strategic interests of individual Member States.

The lack of political will on the part of the Member States represents the greatest obstacle to us being able to practise the three C' s satisfactorily, because they have no real interest in efficient, harmonised development cooperation, thereby tarnishing the European image and preventing us from optimising our potential as regards development policy, which reflects badly on the Member States themselves more than anything.

Those in the European capitals ought to learn that strengthening Europe' s standing can do the same for their own image.

I believe that complementarity and EU coordination are among our most important tools for increasing the effectiveness and impact of EU development cooperation on the ground.

I therefore welcome Mrs Ferrer' s report.

Parliament and the Commission share the same considerations and agree on the approach.

We agree that we now need to see results.

We need to increase internal EU coordination, country by country and sector by sector, following the 1998 guidelines on operational coordination.

We should help partner countries in their efforts and reinforce the role of EU coordination as regards wider global coordination between donors, whether they be the World Bank, United Nations organisations or bilateral governmental or non-governmental organisations.

The Commission has already taken the first step.

We have adopted a harmonised framework for the elaboration of the country strategy papers.

We will use this framework in future programming exercises.

The country strategy papers will guide us when reviewing our assistance programmes.

They will indicate how Community assistance fits in with what other donors are doing.

These country strategy papers are the first practical tool, not only for improved donor coordination and complementarity, but also for overall coherence of development cooperation policy with other EU policies.

The country strategy papers should also steer us in the right direction for achieving an optimum division of labour between the Commission and Member States.

Collectively, we should be able to respond to most of the essential needs of partners in the developing countries.

The move towards sector-wide programmes will greatly facilitate this process. I also hope it will produce greater cost effectiveness.

However, if we are to succeed in this, our Member States must join forces and participate in this exercise.

The quantitative aspect of how much each and every Member State is mobilising and putting into this effort is also part of our collective success or collective failure.

Let me comment on some details of your report.

Firstly, I note that at several points in the resolution, the issue of complementarity is placed within a broader framework connected with a need for greater consistency between the various policies of the EU.

This is the reason we speak about the policy of the three Cs: complementarity, coherence and coordination.

On coherence - which we have often discussed - we have now established the coherence focal point in the Directorate General for Development.

It has been operational since the start of this month and we are using it and we would like others to do the same whenever a problem seems to exist concerning coherence.

I should also mention that today is a big day for coherence in our development policy and trade policy.

The Commission, having talked about quota-free or duty-free access for essentially all products from least developed countries; has decided to drop the word "essentially" .

From today the Commission has a clear policy.

It is now up to the Member States.

We are offering, for all products, quota-free, tariff-free access for the least developed countries.

This is a very good decision.

Secondly, I welcome your wish to strengthen coordination between the Community and the Member States in international forums and at international conferences.

We, in the Commission, share your concern.

It is paramount that we improve the effectiveness and visibility of the EU at international level. This has been demonstrated at several conferences: we work well together and we represent a constructive progressive force at global level.

I have been invited to participate in the development committee in the World Bank.

No Commissioner has tried that before.

Next May we are organising a conference with Unctad, in this Chamber, on the least developed countries and we are also organising a conference with WHO and UNAIDS on 28 September concerning malaria, HIV-AIDS and tuberculosis, the three major communicable diseases.

We also work well with our partners at multilateral level.

Thirdly, specifically relating to the recommendations of the motion for a resolution, I welcome your support especially on two essential issues: firstly, human resources and, secondly, the role of management committees in development cooperation.

The lack of human resources is a serious and real problem that for too long has been ignored.

It has come back to haunt us and now requires action.

We are continuing our efforts at the Commission to improve the effectiveness of our services.

We are radically changing how we do things but this is not enough.

We also need the human resources to match our programme resources and ambitions.

Your support here will be crucial when the budgetary decisions have to be taken.

As regards the Member State committees that work in parallel with the Commission in the management and implementation of the development programmes, we believe that their key role should be to discuss political priorities and overall strategy with us.

It should not be to micromanage the process or examine individual projects as is, unfortunately, still the case.

We need to find more effective ways of working together.

The support of Parliament is also vital.

It was said in the discussion here that some Member States want to dismantle what we do collectively.

I do not think this is the case.

In any case, Member States warmly welcomed the overall policy statement which is the basis for what we do.

We also have a clear commitment on the ninth EDF and the financial perspective.

Compared with any other major worldwide donors, the Commission - and what we do together in Europe - is backed financially in a much more predictable and solid way.

This also puts a heavy responsibility on our shoulders but, the basis is that we are not only the biggest but also the most predictable and stable donor to work with.

In conclusion, I should like to thank the rapporteur again for her excellent work.

This is a very useful report and I am determined to move forward on complementarity and will use the new tools available: the country strategy papers, the new and improved programming systems and a more effective management of external assistance, which also includes greater responsibility for our delegations in third countries.

I am confident that the European Parliament will provide us with the necessary support in these endeavours.

I look forward to continuing to work with you in an open and constructive manner.

The reform process is now moving.

We know what kind of battles to fight and, with your support, we are also going to win them.

Today we can be proud that we are doing all this and, hopefully, tomorrow we will also have reason to be proud of how we are doing it.

Thank you very much, Commissioner Nielson.

The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 a.m.

(The sitting was suspended at 7.55 p.m. and resumed at 9 p.m.)

Trade in goods resulting from the processing of agricultural products

The next item is the debate on the report (A5-0228/2000) by Mr Souchet, on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development, on the proposal for a Council regulation amending Regulation No 3448/93 laying down the trade arrangements applicable to certain goods resulting from the processing of agricultural products [COM(1999) 717 - C5-0095/2000 - 1999/0284(CNS)].

Mr President, the proposal for a regulation before us relates to the scheme specifically covering exchanges of non-Annex 1 products with third countries, the main provision of which is for the granting of export refunds in respect of incorporated agricultural products.

Annex 1 of the Treaty defines the list of products eligible for a COM under the CAP.

These are basic agricultural products and products that have undergone initial processing.

Non-Annex 1 products are those that have been processed a second time.

The problem which has now come fully to light and which the Community has to deal with as from this year is the fact that, because of the consolidations granted by the Community under the Marrakesh agreements, refunds are no longer sufficient in relation to needs.

The Commission cannot be said to have been overly imaginative in seeking solutions to this difficult problem, where a lot is at stake for our manufacturers and processors of agricultural products.

Other than simply withdrawing certain products from the list of those eligible for refunds and in that way causing difficult administrative problems for the sectors concerned, one solution alone presents itself, as usual: that of extending the system of active improvement which allows agricultural raw materials to be imported at the so-called world market price, as long as the processed products in which they are incorporated are re-exported.

No alternative solution to the system of refunds on agricultural products has been seriously looked into.

Other windows onto the subject, opened by certain Member States such as Germany and Austria, were immediately closed again, since any alternative proposal was declared out of hand to be incompatible with the constraints to which we have subjected ourselves under the GATT agreement.

In the circumstances, we obviously have to give primary consideration to the size of the sector concerned and to the volume of exports.

Rapidly increasing exports of non-Annex 1 processed products alone represent 25% of total exports of products from the food and agricultural sector as a whole, and 2.5 million jobs, widely distributed among the different countries of Europe, depend upon this single sector.

For these products, additional access to agricultural product refunds at least constitutes a partial, quick fix solution which, in the absence of alternative proposals, makes it possible immediately to guarantee the competitiveness of non-Annex 1 products.

The parliamentary Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development has maintained that the ways in which the additional agricultural product refunds were applied should be determined in such a way as effectively to enable companies to have recourse to these within the acceptable limits laid down by the supply balances. In this way, it would be possible to maintain a sufficient quantity of refunds for companies which cannot make use of these, either in order to avoid GMOs or because of the unavailability of raw materials on the world market or the lack of staff or appropriate infrastructures.

That said, agricultural product refunds present a range of risks and disadvantages.

First of all, a disadvantage in terms of principle: agricultural product refunds do, indeed, by their nature circumvent the Community' s expressed preference.

The European agri-foodstuffs industry ought to be encouraged to give preference to Community raw materials.

This implies that, despite the extension proposed to us, the agricultural product refunds ought definitely not to become a structural tool but ought to remain a residual scheme and a last resort solution, to be implemented only when there is a real shortage of refunds.

That is why we are proposing a series of amendments which ought to be taken into consideration overall to reinforce this residual character of the agricultural product refunds.

We believe that any extension to the agricultural product refunds should be subject to very strict supervision and follow-up.

That is why we are in favour of establishing quotas for the scheme.

That is why we are also proposing that, at the end of the first year in which the scheme has been implemented, the Commission should present the European Parliament with a precise interim report providing, in particular, an update on the situation regarding each COM concerned.

In that way, we shall have a tool of superintendence and control with which to ensure that agricultural product refunds are of limited availability, that the amounts concerned are no more than are really needed, that they do not have an adverse effect upon our own producers of raw materials and that they are not concentrated upon a limited number of COMs at the risk of destabilising these.

A second disadvantage of the system of agricultural product refunds is the particular complexity and the cumbersome procedures it imposes upon SMEs in particular.

The latter ought to be given easier access to these refunds, which remain more straightforward to administer, and, in this context, they ought to be exempted from presentation of certificates up to an adjustable ceiling of EUR 50 000 per year.

Bear in mind that the refunds, particularly for processed food products, are far from being reserved solely for large businesses. They play an essential role where SMEs are concerned.

These, then, are the component elements of a genuine monitoring tool which we think it essential to implement in order to ensure that the new agricultural product refunds are operating in accordance with the objectives which justify our agreeing to them.

In the longer term, however, there will only be a lasting solution to the issue we are to deal with today as a matter of urgency if, when the WTO agreements next come up for renewal, Community negotiators receive clear instructions to the effect that adequate account must be taken of the interests of our non-Annex 1 products and that the close links forged by our processing industries with our producers of agricultural raw materials and their countries must be maintained and consolidated.

Mr President, the Commission' s plans to slash export refunds will cost the EU' s food and drink processors an estimated EUR 145 million per year.

It is particularly galling that the decision to impose these cuts was taken without consultation with this House.

Export refunds are not a subsidy.

They compensate the food and drink industry for sourcing their raw materials within the EU at higher prices than can be obtained on world markets.

It is astonishing that the Commission chose to single out German fruit yoghurt, Scotch whisky and pharmaceutical products for these cuts, apparently for no better reason than the belief that these are wealthy industries which do not deserve assistance.

Other sectors, such as pasta, confectionery and some dairy products that also receive export refunds, have escaped relatively unscathed.

The cuts are damaging to EU industry and they will destroy the competitive advantage of our agri-foodstuffs sector and they will destroy jobs.

The Commission' s scheme to compensate food processors for losing out on export refunds, by encouraging them to seek inward processing relief on a range of commodities from outside the EU, is both muddle-headed and inept.

Not only does the scheme encourage processors to import grain and other raw materials from outside the EU - once again to the direct disadvantage of our beleaguered farmers - but it also involves a mountain of red tape and bureaucratic complexity which will virtually exclude SMEs from this scheme.

The Commission must devise a new system.

Those food and drink exporters who through adding value to their products, constitute a vitally important part of the EU agricultural economy must receive alternative compensation exactly equivalent to the value of the export refunds they have lost.

To do otherwise will place EU food processors at a massive competitive disadvantage on world markets.

Export refunds are essential to ensure the international competitiveness of non-Annex - I processed food. In addition, the food and drink processors in the EU purchase around two-thirds of all their agricultural produce within the 15 Member States.

This deliberate attack on non-Annex - I export refunds further undermines our farmers who are suffering their worst recession in decades.

It is also a direct attack on the fastest growing export sector within the EU, our processed food sector.

We are committed to 36% reduction of export refunds over six years and we are nearing the end of that period under our obligations in the GATT Uruguay Round Agreement.

However, these cuts should not be targeted in such an arbitrary manner on a small number of industries, as the Commission has chosen to do.

Access to IPR offers only a very unsatisfactory and temporary solution.

I congratulate Mr Souchet in drawing up a good report in the face of Commission intransigence on this issue.

He is fundamentally correct in describing the Commission proposal as a temporary measure.

There is no doubt that the whole system now needs to be dismantled and rebuilt in a much more sensible and less complex manner, in line with our WTO and GATT requirements.

Mr President, this proposal relates to an extremely delicate area.

We simply have to note that, basically, the system of inward processing breaks with the principle of European preference or, if you like, the system of Community preferences.

This is a very delicate area and, furthermore, the system of inward processing, in its application, is extremely complex and slow and therefore harms numerous small- and medium-sized businesses.

In this delicate area, our decisions, as politicians, should be directed towards maintaining the competitiveness of the European food industry in the world and towards strengthening the close links between the processing industry and the producers of raw materials.

The greatest responsibility in this area falls to the Commission.

We require a creative and flexible Commission, capable of judging changes in the markets, measured and, at the same time, imaginative.

We need a Commission which gives priority to the European farm model and the defence of small farmers, but the truth is that so far all the Commission has demonstrated in this area has been its opacity, its discretionary approach to legislation and very little else.

As for the European Parliament, Mr President, both the Committee on Agriculture, Fisheries and Rural Development and its chairman, Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf, have worked seriously and prudently on this difficult report.

Mr Souchet has produced a wonderful report, and I congratulate him on his work as rapporteur.

He has been correct, specifically in his proposals to limit and rationalise the use of the system of inward processing by adapting it to the situation of the markets, the regulatory framework and the budgetary framework.

All of this is correct, as well as his demands for exemptions in favour of small exporters.

Many thanks, therefore, to the rapporteur and the European Parliament, and I hope that the Commission will improve its work in this area.

Mr President, the Commission is proposing changes to trade arrangements for processed agricultural products.

The purpose is to end subsidies and restrict them by means of a certificate.

There are two fundamental courses of development behind this: on the one hand, the pressures caused by the liberalisation of world trade on reducing export aid and, on the other, the EU' s internal budgetary pressures mainly associated with external relations.

The food processing chain and, ultimately, the farmers, are going to foot this bill.

Already the market situation is putting immense pressure on the European producer.

In addition, costs are rising thanks, for example, to higher fuel prices and increasing environmental and other obligations.

Profitability in production is shaky, and this rather pointedly begs the question as to whether agricultural production in Europe makes sense any longer.

Our committee and the European Liberal Democrats believe that the EU must safeguard the profitability of the production chain.

The Commission is proposing selective deterioration.

We are, however, in a position of constraint.

It may be necessary to act in this way, but certain principles have to be adhered to in this issue.

The changes must take account of small companies active in this sector of industry.

For example, in the country I represent large export companies simply cannot exist, owing to the country' s small population.

There should be some flexibility in setting the restrictions in respect of export aid procedures.

For that reason, the wording of Amendment No 8 is justified.

It provides a degree of flexibility, especially for small companies.

I would also like to make the comment that by replacing cuts in export aid with inward processing and additional procedures the effects will be unevenly spread, in that a heavy burden will fall on the remoter EU countries in terms of transport costs.

For that reason I agree with the rapporteur that, in the long run, these procedures will not work. This is a question of temporary solutions only.

Our group supports the committee' s amendments.

Mr President, when the Commission' s proposal landed on the table we rubbed our eyes a little in disbelief.

'Active processing trade' - what on earth does that mean?

Once I had immersed myself more deeply in the subject, I was amazed to learn what this was all about.

It had been clear up until now: industry buys products produced in the EU and is then given export refunds in order to be able to compete on the international market.

Now the Commission is saying that there is no longer enough money, however, because we entered into a commitment in Marrakech and now we are going to have to rethink the situation.

Then they have a brainwave to the effect that industry will no longer buy agricultural raw materials on the EU market but on the world market instead, which the EU, for its part, will export its raw materials onto, and in dumping its goods will also be partly responsible for world market prices.

They think that industry will now be able to buy there, local products will stay where they are, and industry will then make refined products from the aforesaid local products and bring them onto the world market.

We were absolutely convinced at first that there was no chance of this working.

Then we gave the issue every attention in committee, but the view I have just described to you is that of the Commission.

Subsequently, we tried to discuss whether or not it would be possible to sell products produced within the EU at world market prices, as the chemical and pharmaceutical industries do, so that, at the very least, the products we sometimes have an abundance of - although we do not produce surpluses overall, there is an abundance of produce in certain sectors - could be reduced.

But no, they did not want to float this idea at the WTO negotiations.

An apparently elegant solution was being proposed, which undermined the WTO negotiations somewhat.

There is a passage in the explanatory statement of this regulation which states that the Community preferential arrangements must not be undermined, nor must there be disturbances to the European market.

When I buy products elsewhere, which are available here in abundance, then of course I cannot assume that there will be no disruption to the market.

It seems to be a compromise solution, and my group is unable to accept it in its present form.

I would like to offer my compliments to the rapporteur.

Mr Souchet is someone who can always be relied upon to speak up for agricultural interests. His approach may, from time to time, be a little on the traditional side for my taste, but I am full of admiration for him.

You have done your level best for rural farming in Europe, and that is the spirit in which we will vote for the proposed amendments that we put forward in committee.

We endorse your report, but we intend to reject the legislative resolution.

We had to draw the line at this point, at the very least, because, overall, we do not think it is a balanced and reasonable solution, and on the whole, we feel, and fear, that if this mechanism is implemented, prices within the EU will come under direct pressure once again.

We will lead the next discussion we have on prices and the next discussions we have about whether prices of our products within the EU are pitched too high.

But what we in fact need to discuss, is whether the sale prices on the world market call for a price discussion, because no one in the world can produce goods in an environmentally and socially responsible manner under these conditions.

Mr President, the rapporteur, Mr Souchet, makes a number of accurate comments as regards the impact of the proposed amendments to Regulation 3448/93 laying down the trade arrangements applicable to certain goods resulting from the processing of agricultural products.

If the proposed amendments are accepted and the inward processing arrangements are opened yet further, Community preference, which has already deteriorated, will no longer apply in practice and it will be more difficult to place processed Community agricultural products on international markets; small- and medium-sized units relying on Community agricultural produce and Community export refunds stand to lose and large processing units buying cheap raw materials from third countries stand to gain.

The brunt of this adverse impact will be felt in the Mediterranean countries, including Greece, because these are the countries which produce these products and most processing units in these countries are small- or medium-sized.

It would be an affront, having created such an unfortunate situation, if we were to accept the proposed amendments to the regulation, even on a provisional basis, i.e. until the WTO agreement is completed, on the pretext of safeguarding employment and the value added.

That is why, despite the fact that we agree with many of the rapporteur' s findings, we disagree with his conclusion on the opening of inward processing arrangements, even on a provisional basis, precisely because we believe that, under present circumstances, provisional measures will turn into permanent measures and will exacerbate the situation.

Mr President, according to this regulation, the Commission is stuck with a limited budget, and this is due to a complex of three reasons: firstly, the guaranteed prices for agricultural products of European origin; secondly, export refunds to companies which sell these agricultural raw materials in processed form on the world market; and thirdly, the agreements within the WTO.

Mr Souchet is right in pointing out that it is not so much the limited budget but rather the WTO rules which are playing tricks on the Commission.

In the case of shortages of raw materials on the internal European market, the food industry can import these from the world market without any import duty and under inward processing arrangements, as has been the case to date.

But the regulation changes the essence of inward processing.

A shortage of raw materials no longer justifies the use of inward processing, but rather financial motives, namely reaching the WTO ceiling.

Suppose there was a surplus of cereals on the internal market whilst the ceiling of refunds had been reached.

Inward processing would then open the door to cereal imports from the world market.

There is a very real danger that the relationship between the food industry and the farmer then changes from one of partnership to one of competition.

European farmers are not just producers of agricultural products; very often they also maintain our cultural landscape, but at a price.

We should be very much aware of that price, which is passed on to the food industry.

It requires creativity to find sound solutions for farmers and industry within the strict boundaries of the World Trade Organisation.

It is inevitable that some industries will lose their export subsidies in the process.

A number of industries process only a small proportion of their agricultural products into finished products.

It is unfair in my eyes that they should complain, especially in view of the high profit margins they submit each quarter.

Small exporters, on the other hand, deserve more protection.

We back the amendments which have their interests in mind.

Together with the rapporteur, we would call on the Commission to keep a close eye on the balance between agriculture and the food industry in Europe during the forthcoming negotiations within the framework of the WTO.

Mr President, the Commission' s proposal to reduce refunds for processed agricultural products and to make inward processing easier carries considerable risks. I shall highlight just three of them.

The first is that this proposal is not driven so much by the restrictions imposed by the WTO, but particularly by the well-known budget restrictions currently being applied in the European Union, specifically due to the need to reallocate means and resources to commitments that the Union has given in the field of external affairs, notably Kosovo.

These objectives are not under threat.

They will have to be addressed in a transparent way during the major debates on the European Union' s options.

What is not acceptable is that little more than a year ago, the Financial Perspectives up to 2007 were approved, and now, a few months later, resources that had been earmarked for agriculture are being withdrawn.

The second risk is that the increasing use of inward processing could put us in the extremely dangerous situation of no longer producing many agricultural products within the European Union, since it would be more profitable to import them in their raw state, process them and re-export them.

Only a few sections of society would benefit from this and it would spell disaster for agricultural communities.

In the long term, the European Union' s dependence on external supplies in a sector as strategically important as food production would make the Union as a whole extremely vulnerable.

It would therefore be a foolish mistake to think that the practice of inward processing could be a lasting solution.

The third risk relates to our negotiating strategy for the Millennium Round.

This week, the Commission has approved a document on the competitiveness of our exports, which reveals its fundamental position on the various types of export aid.

The Commission' s position is quite clear: the European Union will not in future accept reductions, within the WTO, only in support for export refunds - there will also have to be reductions in all types of support provided by our main competitors in the international markets, ranging from export credits to food aid and state-run businesses.

All this will have to be "put on the table" and reduced under the GATT rules.

The European Union' s stance on this issue is totally correct: all types of aid which have a similar effect must come under the WTO rules, not only the refund system used by the European Union.

It is in this context of external pressure that the European Union is applying in the framework of the GATT, that is, the WTO negotiations, that it seems to be a mistake to have presented this proposal at this time.

To conclude, I should simply like to thank Mr Souchet for the tremendous job he has done, which we greatly appreciate.

Mr President, in complimenting Mr Souchet on his work, I express my disappointment and concern with regard to the Commission proposal to reduce subsidies worth EUR 145 million per year to the food and drink industry.

This proposal has serious implications for Ireland' s dairy sector and will result in a serious loss of trade, particularly in the area of the reprocessing of dairy products.

I fully support the rapporteur in his proposals that the measure should only be introduced on a temporary basis and that aid should be introduced to cushion the effects on the sectors which are most affected.

I have given the example of Ireland' s dairy industry and would ask the Commissioner to examine the implications for this sector in particular.

I also support the provisions in Mr Souchet' s report which states that we must ensure respect for the European agriculture and food production model.

It is only right and proper that we negotiate a new regulatory framework for exports or products not covered by Annex I as part of the WTO Millennium Round.

Mr Souchet is correct when he states that the decision to cut export refunds for certain products is unacceptable because such arrangements originally contributed to the management of the internal market.

This situation in fact was validated by the World Trade Organisation.

I believe that the proposed opening of on additional facility for raw materials that have access to inward processing arrangements will not be sufficient to cover the food industry supply and export requirements.

Long-term, Europe needs to exercise greater vigilance in relation to world trade - which is now under consideration - and how decisions taken there impact on our processors and on our farmers.

There is sufficient evidence that our competitors in the world market, particularly the United States and New Zealand, are not always as committed to adhering to the rules as are the EU Member States.

With the proposed enlargement of the European Union to central and eastern Europe, we must take a strong hand in safeguarding our European objective which, of course, is to develop agriculture as a major and competitive player in world trade.

Already our competitors have demonstrated their negotiating skills in this crucial area of international policy.

Mr President, you really have to rub your eyes two or three times when you read what kind of proposal the Commission has come up with by way of a solution to these problems, which have been discussed time and again.

It is absolutely true what Mr Souchet, as rapporteur, and Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf, as chairman of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development have had to say on the subject. They have my unequivocal support.

On the other hand, however, there can be no doubt that the bottleneck in the budget and also the special WTO agreements represent a completely new challenge at the end of the day, particularly where export refunds are concerned.

Who would have thought, even as little as a year ago, that we would be facing this conundrum, and having to weigh up the interests of agricultural product processors against those of the farmers who produce the products.

If the Commission is now looking for a way to resolve this export bottleneck in products that are not covered by Annex I, then it is certainly responding to a need. Yet there is not the slightest suggestion in the Commission proposal that the problems facing the raw materials producers, i.e. the farmers, have been registered.

I am in complete agreement with Mr Souchet. Thank you very much for all the work you have put into the report.

He rightly complains that the Commission is offering no alternative courses of action.

One thing is for sure though, there must be no restriction in the availability of raw materials at competitive prices, and at the end of the day, agricultural policy cannot be devoted exclusively to the protection of the raw materials producers.

But then nor should the burden fall on one side alone in agriculture, or have to be borne by individual products.

There are agricultural products that almost pay for the export refunds themselves, at the end of the day, owing to contributions from the producers, i.e. the farmers.

Sugar is a case in point.

The farmers' contributions go into the general melting pot of the EU budget on the revenue side, and if export refunds are cut then these contributions will decline too.

As I said, sugar is a particular case in point.

I feel we must give special consideration to this issue, and give it priority where export refunds are concerned.

Mr President, I would first of all like to congratulate the rapporteur, Mr Souchet, on his report, because there was only one possible response to the Commission proposal, which was not a good proposal, and that was a powerful parliamentary response, which is what we have.

I am extremely pleased with it.

It is also providing us with the opportunity to examine the situation we currently find ourselves in, as we are being forced to adapt regulations on two counts, which means that we sometimes need to adopt working methods which are not our own.

The first point is agreements reached at WTO level and the second one could be the budget.

I would like briefly to explain both, starting with the WTO rules.

It is becoming clear - poignantly so - given the price level in the EU but also outside, that we still need refunds, and there is also an indication that the difference in power between producers and farmers worldwide and those who sell their products is still far too pronounced.

As long as this is the case, we cannot in fact do without refunds.

This will also need to be spelled out clearly during the forthcoming WTO negotiations.

The second point concerns the budget.

It does not seem right to me to use this in the argument regarding the refund regulation and processed agricultural products. Why?

Because the European Union has, for a number of years, awarded refunds to Member States because it simply was unable spend it all itself.

Surely, this cannot be the argument.

Secondly, Parliament made it abundantly clear in its report on the 2001 budget, which was adopted in the Agricultural Committee, that there is extra scope within the framework of the financial agreements of Berlin.

In these agreements, a number of proposals have been made for a number of export certificates in order to solve this problem. For example, an extra five million has been proposed for cereals in the form of spirits, an extra ten million for cereals and rice, eleven million for sugar and isoglucose and eleven million for processed dairy produce.

So the money is available and the solution should thus be in sight.

The fact remains that the agricultural policy is, in principle, there for the benefit of farmers.

This is why it has been framed with the European rural areas in mind.

The fact that this regulation is necessary also illustrates the close relationship between the processing industries in Europe and the farmers.

In this sense, an interim regulation is essential.

But I should add that, quite clearly, we should drive home the message to the processing industry that, first and foremost, we rely on products which are grown within the European Union.

In addition, I should also call on the Commission to give due consideration to small- and medium-sized businesses.

In many heavily agricultural regions, jobs are already thin on the ground, so it is precisely those companies that should be able to cope with this type of regulation and should, in that sense, be given more attention.

On behalf of the Commission and in particular my colleague Mr Liikanen, I would like to thank the rapporteur, Mr Souchet, and the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development, for the preparation of your report.

I hope that your deliberations will lead to a consensus that opens the way for a rapid implementation early in the new budgetary year.

We all agree on the need to promote the Union' s processed food industry competitive position.

Export refunds are an important instrument in sustaining the industry' s competitiveness by compensating for high prices of basic agricultural products in the Union.

However, both budget constraints and commitments under the WTO severely restrict available refunds that will no longer be sufficient to cover the industry' s export opportunities.

It is for this reason that the Commission has proposed, within a balanced package of specific measures, an additional facility of inward processing relief - IPR - that will help compensate for the industry' s loss of international competitiveness.

The Commission can agree with your proposed Amendments Nos 2, 6, 10, 13 and 15.

The Commission can broadly agree with the purpose of Amendments Nos 1, 3, 7, 8, 9, 11, 14 but does not consider them entirely appropriate for a number of reasons.

For WTO negotiations, a specific mandate from the Council is required therefore the present regulation does not seem to be the appropriate means of determining the Union' s position.

This relates to the first of the amendments.

Furthermore, some amendments could entail an administrative burden related to implementation and control that would appear disproportionate.

This concerns Amendments Nos 3, 11 and 14.

The threshold for exempting small exporters from the export refund certificate system has already been increased to EUR 50 000, which concerns Amendments Nos 7 and 8.

The remaining flexibility under the 2000 budget has already been used, which relates to Amendment No 9.

Finally, the Commission is not ready to accept Amendments Nos 4, 5, 12, 16 and part of Amendment No 1.

As a general rule, the Commission does not support discrimination among individual products concerning the possibility of access to inward processing relief.

This relates to part of Amendments Nos 1, 4, 12 and 16.

Moreover, the use of C-sugar in processed products for export is not possible under current market organisation: this concerns Amendment No 12.

Operators importing products under the IPR do not receive any refund for the export of processed goods, so the assumption in Amendment No 5 is incorrect.

Mr President, permit me to address two comments to the Commission.

Firstly, the Commissioner said: in view of the "high prices of basic agricultural products in the Union" .

Perhaps the Commission could get used to the following version: in view of the "low world market prices caused by dumping" , because otherwise we risk creating the impression that the agricultural pricing system within the EU is pitched too high.

No, it is too low on the world market because farmers cannot produce at this price.

Secondly, this is a report according to Article 37. We reserve the right - I will discuss this with the other groups - to refer this back to committee, because what you have said, your assumptions that is, will of course put paid to the efforts made by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development.

It is then highly likely that we will enter negotiations.

I am just saying this now to give you food for thought. The honourable Members here will then be able to make their feelings known in the discussions.

I just wanted to give you advance notice.

Mr President, thank you very much for giving me the opportunity to do so.

The vote will take place tomorrow, Thursday, at 11 a.m..

Enforcement of civil and commercial judgments

The next item is the debate on the report (A5-0253/2000) by Mrs Wallis, on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market, on the proposal for a Council regulation (EC) on jurisdiction and the recognition and enforcement of judgments in civil and commercial matters [COM(1999) 348 - C5-0169/1999 - 1999/0154(CNS)].

Mr President, I speak first on behalf of the committee and will speak later on behalf of my group.

In finally presenting this report to plenary on behalf of the Legal Affairs Committee, there are many people I should and will thank, but there is one whose inspiration I would especially like to mention because I hope it will set the scene for our debate tonight.

As a young lawyer in London in the early 1980s, I was privileged to work with a then elderly German lady, who was one of those remarkable German-Jewish immigrés who came to London in the early war years and entered the English legal profession.

This amazing lady not only qualified as an English solicitor, having previously qualified in Germany, but, as a true European of her own generation, she also obtained a doctorate from the Sorbonne the title of which was the mutual recognition and enforcement of judgments.

She inspired me with an interest in this area of law and as she gradually retired and handed over her practice, I became more and more familiar with the workings of the Brussels Convention as it came into force in the UK.

I hope she would approve of where we have got to today, and how the European Union is now able to allow lawyers to move and practise in other Member States by choice rather than force of circumstance and that by this regulation our committee will further assist a step forward in giving greater access to justice to our citizens across Europe.

I want to use this occasion to say something about the importance of what we are doing here.

The original EC Convention on Jurisdiction and Judgments of 1968 was an important landmark in this field of international private law, marking a departure from a previous patchwork of mainly bilateral treaties between various countries.

For the first time, by way of an intergovernmental convention, the EC gave itself a special, unique and comprehensive regime of recognition and enforcement.

We are now participating in the next important landmark in that process - seeing what was a convention become a Community act, a regulation, in one fell swoop bringing a previous area of private international law into Community law and more importantly into the internal market.

How fitting that it should be our committee, with its new competence in this legislature bridging the themes of legal affairs in the internal market, that should have had to deal with this new Brussels regulation.

The committee has been at pains throughout this process to point out and highlight the importance of the internal market dimension of this proposal which gives us a chance to ensure even more strongly than before that our businesses and citizens can have confidence that contracts and obligations they enter into across the Union will be upheld by a common framework of procedural law on jurisdiction and enforcement.

We are making progress towards a system of civil law and justice that will give ease and certainty of access across Member State boundaries, at last beginning to make a reality of the area of freedom and justice proposed at Tampere.

The issue that has, of course, taken most of the committee' s time and attention has been the fact that this proposal for a regulation has coincided with the growth of e-commerce which in itself offers enormous opportunities to business and consumers within the internal market.

The committee has, as the Commission will be well aware, grappled long and hard with the issues raised in Articles 15 and 17 of the proposed regulation.

That is to say where there is a dispute between a business and a consumer, whose court should the parties have recourse to.

These two articles, in whatever combination, have to be read together.

The Commission proposal in line with previous consumer protection legislation took the view in dealing with Article 15 that all such disputes should go to the consumer' s court whilst willing to defer to a general proposition that contracts concluded at a distance should fall under this category.

The committee has been searching for a way of protecting Europe' s growing e-commerce sector and especially small businesses from exposure to 15 different and diverse legal jurisdictions. The committee has therefore opted by a small majority in favour of the option of Article 17a which modifies the general principle in Article 15.

This modification allows parties in a B to C contract to contract in favour of the seller' s jurisdiction.

This was felt to uphold the freedom of contract of the parties but addition there is another element to which I will now turn.

I believe the committee' s most fundamental contribution to this debate will be the introduction of the reference of such B to C disputes to ADR or EDR.

This has been generally agreed to be the best way to neutralise the difficult discussion about whose jurisdiction can apply.

There can be no doubt that the Brussels Convention made enormous strides in simplifying the jurisdiction rules applicable to cross-border disputes but they are still a lawyer' s dream and a litigant' s nightmare.

They have not created real ease of access to justice.

The opening up of a simple effective system of cross-border disputes is the committee' s goal in introducing the concept of ADR and we welcome the way in which this has already been picked up and worked on by the Commission.

There was also agreement in committee that in this evolving area we remain deeply concerned as to the impact of legislation on Europe' s e-business.

Therefore, in line with the E-commerce Directive, we have asked for a two-year review.

I have covered the main aspects.

I wish to conclude with a note of thanks to my colleague on the committee, especially to our chairman who I know feels as passionately as I do about this area of law, whatever our differences, but my biggest set of thanks must go to the committee secretariat and to Mr Robert Bray for all his help and advice throughout this process.

Mr President, firstly, I would like to congratulate the rapporteur of her presentation for what is a very fair and balanced report.

On behalf of the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs, I am pleased to be able to deliver this opinion, on behalf of my colleague, Mrs Hazan, who unfortunately cannot be with us tonight.

My committee considers it important to give a positive response to this Commission proposal, which strives to make the recognition and enforcement of judgments between Member States almost automatic.

Not only does this regulation build upon the judicial cooperation between the States it marks an attempt to put the citizen at the heart of the Europe - the citizen, not just big business, money brokers and others, with perhaps profit purely as their motive.

My committee also considers that the provision of the regulation which seeks to protect the weaker parties in a contract should be approved.

This will enable consumers, workers and insurers to be safeguarded by effective European regulations that can be automatically applicable across the Member States.

Following this logic, it seems clear to us that there are no legitimate grounds to exempt e-commerce transactions from consumer protection rules.

The rapporteur has referred to this, but e-commerce is an area which is set to grow.

To differentiate between the rights of those buying on line and those shopping in the high street would go against the valuable work that the European Parliament and the EU in general has already done in championing the rights of the citizens.

E-consumers, in common with all weaker parties to a contract and indeed European citizens in general, deserve and should be given the right to a fair hearing.

Finally, my committee welcomes the introduction of alternative dispute resolution procedures and hopes that this regulation can enter into force as soon as possible.

Mr President, please allow me to begin with a few words in my capacity as Chairperson of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market.

Rarely have I felt as proud of my position as I am today in relation to this report, due to the work that has been carried out in committee over the last year.

The fact that it has taken a year does not mean that Parliament has not been interested. On the contrary, there has been intense and fruitful debate between the members of the Committee, as well as people from the academic world and all the interested parties.

I warmly congratulate Mrs Wallis on having made this work possible, as rapporteur, and of course I thank the secretariat of the Committee on Legal Affairs for the work they have done and, in particular, as Mrs Wallis has also mentioned, the work of Mr Bray.

We have had disagreements, Mr President, but I am sure that whatever the result achieved in this House tomorrow, the work of the Committee on Legal Affairs will have moved this issue forward significantly.

I shall now continue, Mr President, on behalf of the PPE.

As you well know, and as the rapporteur has reminded us, the main question being debated deals with judgments by the competent court on contracts concluded with consumers on the Internet.

I would like to say once again how proud I am at the balanced and detailed nature of this report. It proposes pragmatic solutions, which are likely to increase consumer protection and at the same time allow businesses, in particular small- and medium-sized ones, which make up the social fabric of Europe, to offer their services and products to consumers resident within the internal market.

The internal market must be a genuine domestic market, both for businesses and for consumers.

As for the consumer, it is proposed that the scope of the special system be extended to those who sign contracts at a distance within the internal market with no distinction whatsoever between directed and undirected activities and, as the rapporteur has highlighted, it incorporates the extrajudicial resolution of disputes into the regulation.

With regard to the promotion of cross-border electronic commerce, it is proposed to allow businesses, under certain very specific and very restricted circumstances, to insert jurisdiction clauses which the consumer could accept.

Mr President, I am convinced that Parliament' s opinion will have a real impact on the Justice and Home Affairs Council.

In fact, as Mrs Wallis has said, Parliament has done what neither the Commission nor the Council has dared to do, which is to hold a realistic debate on the basic question, on the protection of consumers in the 21st century, not the protection of consumers in the 19th century, nor the 20th century, with all the interested parties and taking account of all the interests involved.

When we examine the history of this issue, we realise that the Commission, in making its proposal, has limited itself to a draft review of the Brussels Convention, carried out by a committee of experts before the entry into force of the Treaty of Amsterdam, i.e. when this was an intergovernmental matter, very close to international public law.

Furthermore, Mr President, that committee worked alone, with no transparency, with no interministerial consultations and without consulting the interested parties.

It is clear that the Justice and Home Affairs Council expected that, given the weak institutional powers of this Parliament in this field, even after Amsterdam, the final adoption of the regulation by the Council would be a mere formality.

The clear unwillingness of the Justice and Home Affairs Council to open a debate on this question indicates that in recent times Parliament has been subject to every type of pressure.

After more than one year of discussion in the Committee on Legal Affairs, I can say simply that the arguments levelled against its report lack foundation and are more the result of intimidation and demagoguery than of basic reasoning.

Let us look at this briefly.

Some people are trying to politicise the debate, hoping that that will create a left-right division, trying to take the consumer hostage, saying that the report would prejudice their protection.

This argument is both demagogic and unjustified and is ultimately based an antiquated form of protection, which is ineffective and grounded in a nationalist view that runs counter to European construction.

The solutions that have been adopted offer much more protection than those proposed by the Commission or - and here I disagree with Mrs Wallis - those presented to Parliament, which in reality limit the protection solely to consumers targeted by an Internet site, by a business.

Pseudo-legal arguments have also been put forward, such as the supposed incompatibility with the directive on abusive clauses or with the jurisprudence of the Court of Justice.

Well, there is no incompatibility with that or with anything else and allow me to quote the report, issued by the SANCO Directorate-General on 20 September 1999, which says, and I quote in French because it is the only version that exists: "The jurisdiction clauses are therefore possible and legal, within the meaning of this proposal, provided that certain conditions are guaranteed" .

It continues: "It is therefore necessary for the consumer to be clearly informed before signing the contract" .

It is precisely for this reason, Mr President, that the Committee on Legal Affairs requires strict conditions of transparency.

It is therefore not true that this report goes against an intended Community objective.

Lastly, and perhaps this is the most cynical of the arguments, people say: "Well, this creates difficulties for small- and medium-sized businesses, but they should be insured" .

That is like saying: "There should not be firemen in towns or cities.

If a house burns down, the owners should be insured" .

We must create good legislation, which is balanced for everyone.

To end, I disagree with Mrs Wallis' solution, despite the fact that we have shared this adventure, because I believe that at the end of the day her solution does not offer more protection to the consumer, since it only protects the consumer which a company has targeted.

A lawyer could spend years and years pondering which jurisdiction should apply in the case of active or passive sites or directed or undirected activities.

In conclusion, Mr President, it seems to me that in this field of judicial cooperation Parliament must send a clear signal to the Council and the Commission that it will not accept being sidelined or manipulated by dogmatic arguments that represent purely nationalist interests.

Instead, by dint of its thorough work, Parliament has here a great opportunity to demonstrate that pragmatic and reasonable solutions can be found to rebalance this proposal whatever the result tomorrow in this House.

Mr President, we all know that the development of the Internet as a shopping channel can bring great benefits: new opportunities for small businesses, for Internet start-ups and opening up the single market to our consumers right across 15 Member States.

It can lead to lower prices for them.

It can lead to a range of choice and we all support that, but we also know from surveys by national consumer councils, particularly in my Member State, that consumers do not yet have sufficient trust and confidence in the new technology to shop on-line.

I am pleased to see that businesses recognise that consumer confidence is critical to the growth of this small-business e-commerce network.

They recognise it is a precondition for persuading the consumer to shop on-line and therefore our key objective has to be to encourage that trust and confidence which in turn will benefit business by broadening their customer and consumer market base.

It is regrettable that in committee this debate has declined in some ways to business versus industry.

Both business and industry can gain from a common sense approach to this.

We can only recognise the full potential of business-to-consumer e-commerce if sufficient trust and confidence is there.

The way to persuade those consumers to take the plunge is to ensure that their rights are intact and this has to include, in my group' s view, the right to take action in their own national court.

There is a view that consumers are only engaging in buying CDs, books, low-value items, but of course we know that e-commerce is taking off in such way that soon they will be buying financial services, they will be buying cars.

In my constituency they want to buy cheaper cars from France and the Netherlands.

These are serious amounts of money and, as we encourage more consumers to go on-line, we really must give them the right to sue in their own courts so that we do not expect them - particularly poorer consumers - to go to courts abroad.

In reality we know that regulating the e-commerce world in the interests of both business and consumers requires a more innovative approach.

It needs a fundamental legal framework with innovative, non-legislative solutions and that is why I support Mrs Wallis' proposals: looking at the potential of ADR systems, looking at trustmarks, supporting small businesses in voluntary codes of good conduct, and finding mutually satisfactory ways to solve disputes.

Internet service providers have a role to play in this.

America Online, for example, runs its own merchant business programme where it guarantees to support the consumer in getting legal redress from any of the businesses that use them as a provider.

The reality is that none of these systems, of course, are in place in Europe, nor are they even really developed.

Even in the US, where only 8% of websites have trustmarks, there are still considerable problems gaining legal redress.

ADRs, therefore, cannot be a replacement for legal remedy.

The consumer cannot be bound to lose his right to go to court by contracts, as inserted in the report that is before us from the Legal Affairs Committee.

More work needs to be done in the area.

We need to create trust but, until these new systems are in place, there is no reason why consumers should not enjoy the same rights on-line as they do offline.

I cannot deprive my constituents of their right to sue in their own courts.

They are entitled to their own system of justice and we have to continue to support that.

We do not support jurisdiction clauses because my group also believes that these are in contravention of the unfair contract term legislation, by causing significant imbalance in the parties' rights and obligations under contract to the detriment of the consumer.

This we believe would create more legal uncertainty, more court cases, more money perhaps for lawyers, but that cannot be in the interests of business or consumers.

I am very pleased that in my country the CBI has backed Mrs Wallis' approach.

It is a sensible position in helping us to work with business and consumers that we can ensure that court action is only the last resort and we can find better ways to resolve disputes.

It is a matter of some regret to me that members of the Legal Affairs Committee seem to have forgotten that it is our committee which bears the responsibility for the legal protection of the consumer.

It cannot, therefore, be right that we respond to the challenges of the new world of e-commerce by seeking to limit or constrain those rights.

This will send a bad signal to consumers.

It will not support e-business development and it will mean that we will not develop the e-commerce business-to-consumer sector.

I appeal, therefore, for some common sense in this debate.

I know that no legislation is perfect.

We are all struggling in the e-commerce world to get legislation that is right, to get the right balance between self-regulation and a regulatory framework which gives minimum guarantees.

That is why I believe also that this two-year review clause is sensible.

It will allow us to look at legislation, how it is impacting on SMEs and now it is impacting on consumers.

The idea of setting up a case book and collecting evidence is an excellent idea.

We now have to work to find practical and effective ways to resolve disputes.

This cannot be at the expense of consumers.

The opinion on this report revolves around Articles 15 and 17.

I now speak on behalf of my group, in respect of the amendments tabled by them and other political groups.

The shared aim of all of us is to try to find a balanced way of protecting consumers and shielding SMEs from differing Member State jurisdictions.

This problem has been exaggerated totally out of proportion.

From the evidence available, such cross border B to C disputes are few and far between and the hope is that most of them will now be weeded out by ADR systems.

But, where they go beyond that, it is the consumer who is most disadvantaged.

The bigger businesses will be able to afford legal assistance.

The astute and sensible SME can insure for a modest premium.

That leaves the residue of unsuspecting businesses that may get involved in a transaction outside their Member State.

In these circumstances it is not unreasonable to build on the previous content of Article 15, use the concept of "directed at" , acknowledge that this is a concept also found in American jurisprudence and utilised by WIPO.

It is not simple but it has been used and there is no simple solution here.

This, in combination with a modification to Article 17, which allows freedom of contract to choose ADR but respects existing consumer rights in the form of the unfair contract terms directive, presents a much more workable, legally certain package that will promote confidence.

It is a mark of the balance that we have achieved in these amendments that they have won the support of the CBI in my own country and more than partial support from consumer organisations. They certainly prefer this package to the committee one.

What I did not refer to when I spoke previously was Parliament' s role in this legislative process.

We know from what has been said on this subject by Commissioner Byrne that he will not accept the type of formulation proposed by the committee at Article 17a. I believe that Commissioner Vitorino shares his view.

From the Council' s perspective, the UK Government expressed a similar view.

It seems unlikely that a French Presidency, which is highlighting consumer affairs, will take a different view.

We could say that, because we are only consultees, we can say what we like.

We are merely signalling a political direction but it is important that we should signal a legally certain and workable solution, not one that will create as many problems as it seeks to solve.

Parliament should behave responsibly as a grown-up legislator, not as a petulant child.

We have the opportunity to build on the already substantial achievements in the committee' s final report.

I hope that we will go further.

I would like to thank the rapporteur, Mrs Wallis, for her persistence.

It has been a long and hard road.

The European Commission has made a proposal which would ensure that consumers would have the right to take action in their own national courts and legal disputes arising from cross-border e-commerce transactions.

Amendments from the Legal Affairs Committee before Parliament would take that right and make it subject to unreasonable conditions and I cannot support those amendments.

The amendments shift the balance in the report towards traders and away from consumers.

Consumers can agree - prior to the conclusion of the contract - that they cannot bring proceedings against the other party in the courts of the Member States where they are domiciled.

The main problem with this approach is that it assumes that consumers first read the small print in such contracts and, even if they do, that they fully understand the implications of agreeing to forego the right to sue in their own courts and the differences in relation to costs incurred, legal systems, the choice of language used and so on.

It is unlikely that the average consumer understands or is aware and we cannot agree to their full legal rights being abrogated in this way.

I agree with Mrs Wallis that Commissioner Byrne was right to say that he would not accept this, and I hope that Commissioner Vitorino feels the same way, because this would be a disastrous outcome.

The committee did, however, agree to take a coherent approach to the law relating to the internet.

Under the proposal, key information contained in the court files in the Member States would be copied, using a standard form, to a centralised database for on-line access by interested parties.

Such a system will also promote the convergence and coordination of the different national legal systems and enable parties to check on the status of trading partners and suppliers, especially in an age of on-line trading.

This European causebook is very much to be welcomed and I hope that we will be able to support this report.

I want to compliment Mrs Wallis on the preparation and the presentation of her report.

I broadly welcome this report and I want to focus in particular on Amendment No 20, Recital 26 (new), which states that the Commission will consider proposals for the establishment of a Centralised Electronic European Union Causebook and Judgment Registry Database.

This has been justified very clearly in the report.

It is pro-citizen and it is pro-consumer and I would strongly urge the Commissioner to consider this proposal favourably, particularly in view of the fact that it is so pro-consumer and pro-citizen.

I would strongly urge the Commission to consider it favourably as we now live in a global network with a global economy, global companies.

But we have yet to establish an infrastructure to enable the Brussels Convention, as amended and extended, to benefit our EU consumer citizens and to attract inward investment.

It is necessary to establish the causebook which has been inspired by a proposal from an Irish lawyer, Twinkle Egan who has worked diligently on this initiative for some years.

At the expense of repeating myself, this will ensure that it is to the citizens' advantage.

This system has the advantage of having already been vetted by many reputable institutions including the International Bar Association.

The system has the attraction of being capable, of extension, to synchronising the international legal system of the global world in which we now live and trade.

The system would enable citizens of the Community and others to have prompt and easy access to authoritative and up-to-date information in relation to the existence and progress of trans-border litigation in which they may have a legitimate interest.

This system would also provide efficiency in obtaining and enforcing judgments within the EU.

Mr President, Commissioner, unlike many other MEPs, I am not in the habit of routinely thanking the rapporteur.

I only do so when there is a reason.

Today, we do have reason for thanking Diana Wallis for displaying what has most emphatically been the patience of a saint and the stamina of an athlete in drawing up this report.

I want to emphasise that the majority of the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party supports her and the amendments she has tabled on the Group' s behalf.

I also want to point out that the debate has been frustrating to some degree.

If the same energy had been put into developing confidence-building systems instead of into lobbying which has not always been very professional, I believe that a lot would already have happened to create the confidence and confidence-building systems which are required if consumers are to have the courage to begin trading.

One great merit of this piece of work is the importance which the rapporteur and Parliament attach to consumer-friendly dispute-resolution mechanisms and the pressure they have brought to bear in order to obtain these.

This is important, and I do not believe that the same weight would have been given to this issue if this work had not been done.

As has been repeated a great many times, the biggest dispute, as we all know, has been about which court is to have competence in matters relating to electronic commerce.

This is an issue which will set a precedent, and that is why we have seen such vigorous lobbying.

It is a question with which we shall be confronted many times in connection, for example, with tax issues and cyber crime.

We must resolve the issue of which is to be the competent court.

I believe that there is a lot to indicate that, in the future, we must have clearer rules specifically in connection with places of domicile.

We cannot proceed as often on the basis of where events have taken place.

This also emerged yesterday from our seminar on cyber crime.

What is to be taken as the domicile address?

That is why it is important that we should establish today that it is the consumer' s domicile address which matters in the end.

Finally, I should like to ask those who are going to support the majority of the committee in the vote how they can look consumers in their own countries in the eye when the latter become aware that the view of the majority of the committee will, in practice, lead to their being denied access to their own courts.

I should like finally to strike a biblical note.

I once met an old man who said, 'I am in no doubt at all that, when I speak to my God, I can speak in my own language. I also hope, however, that the same will apply in the courts I may be called before' .

I would like to join my colleagues in thanking Mrs Wallis for her tremendous effort and work on this very difficult brief and I also want to support the call by my colleague, Pat the Cope Gallagher, and my other Irish colleague, Nuala Ahern, with regard to the establishment of a centralised European Union Electronic Database on case-law, put forward by Twinkle Egan, a barrister from Ireland.

However, when we look at the difficulties which have arisen with regard to this report, when we look at the disparate views - the so-called purists on behalf of the consumers or the other so-called purists on behalf of business and e-commerce - we sometimes forget that a lot of small- and medium-sized enterprises are consumers themselves, who will be trading with larger companies or larger suppliers and who deserve the same protection that I, "as an individual" or anybody else, as an individual consumer, would have.

Therefore, what is most of all required within the new framework is certainty with regard to the protection available and the responsibilities of the people who are trading on-line.

I look to other legislation to see what analogies or what benefits can be drawn from it.

Under the various insurance directives, for instance, non-national insurance companies are required to have an agent in each Member State to deal with insurance claims that may occur in that Member State.

Why not put in place a similar requirement on on-line trading companies?

Likewise, under the consumer credit directive, the provider of the service is required to inform the consumer of certain rights, certain entitlements, certain get-out clauses as well.

It is not difficult to transpose that kind of ideology into a direct consumer-service-provider relationship also.

That is why, more than anything else today, we need to put this regulation in place.

We do not need to defer it any longer.

We do not need to put any more mud into the water.

We need to enable Europe, which is lagging behind in e-commerce and Internet business worldwide, to put in place new arrangements with regard to creation of on-line business and the protection of consumer rights and also to ensure that Europe takes its rightful place at the top of the world trading system of Internet and on-line businesses.

That is why it is important that we should support the general opinion, agreed by the Legal Affairs Committee and as proposed by Mrs Wallis, concerning those areas over which there has been some conflict, I take note of what Commissioner Byrne said recently in his speech about the other opportunities.

No consumer, "as an individual" or as a company, can be denied the ultimate right to take legal action but that does not mean that this should be the first course of action.

There should be an agreed dispute-resolution mechanism available at local level, which can reduce the cost of settling consumer disputes because, as has been pointed out by many speakers this evening, there is the question of added costs with regard to resolution of disputes.

Finally, I would once again like to thank the rapporteur and the Commission representatives for their work and remind all Members that there is another way under the Brussels I Convention and we can put other mechanisms in place.

Let us agree on this report and then make changes in other areas as they come before us.

As Mrs Wallis knows only too well I have not agreed with a number of things that she has said during the time she has been rapporteur for this important report but I would like to put on record my appreciation for the very considerable work and effort she has put into what she has done for this Parliament.

As spokesman for the British Conservatives and the Legal Affairs Committee, I want to begin by endorsing the remarks made by Mrs Palacio, chairman of that committee.

The process of which this debate is a part is, as has been explained already, a component of the so-called Amsterdamisation of the Brussels Convention.

It is an unusual process but one in which Parliament has to give the message from its consultation that the Brussels Convention must not merely be transformed into a regulation it has to be brought up-to-date to meet the needs of the contemporary world.

The Convention itself is old: it antedates my own country' s joining the European Economic Community.

It goes back to an era before not only the Internet but even before the commercially available personal computer.

It is therefore tragic that the Commission and the Council have been so timid in getting to grips with the reality of the modern world for we are in a world which is moving away from that of national jurisdictions into the world of networks.

In the world of networks traditional jurisdiction-based disputes-resolution procedures are of no real help to consumers and traders when things go wrong.

It is for this reason that the jurisdictional aspects and arguments must be squeezed out of disputes.

ADRs which are a form of bona fide privatised law, agreed upon by the parties and legislators, must be the first and the main means of resolving disputes.

They cannot merely be the pre-trial steps before a disappointed consumer takes refuge in his own legal system for, if they become that, myriads of SMEs will boycott the Net for business, thereby reducing their own profitability and their contribution to society and the national exchequers.

It will seriously reduce Europe' s citizens' choices, thereby reducing their quality of life and standard of living.

I hear my opponents say: there is Lord Inglewood representing the forces of reaction, flying in the face of the Community' s honourable tradition of consumer protection and arguing at variance with the detailed terms of existing European Community consumer protection legislation.

Taking the latter point first, I argue in the way I do because existing legislation no longer meets the consumers' needs.

After all, a later statute succeeds its predecessors and, if the form of protection the consumer is given needs overhauling, earlier legislators cannot and do not stop the draftsmen and their successor legislators.

When it is time for change then it is the time for change and that time is now.

We have got to move on with it and nowhere is this more clearly seen than in the debate we have had about the so-called directed website.

Such a thing is a contradiction in terms since the Net is a shop window at every terminal link to the network and, to argue in some contrived way, that a site can be directed at some and not others is linguistically facile, commercially nonsensical and technologically illiterate.

We have an opportunity tomorrow to vote for the 21st century, its consumers, traders and citizens by voting for the committee' s report or we can look at the future and then turn our back on it and find superficial comfort in the last century by voting for the amendments.

We, in my delegation and in this group, shall be voting for the 21st century' s solutions to 21st problems and supporting the committee' s report.

Mr President, I respect your tenureship of the chair and I yield to no one in that, but I wonder how you can justify the fact that you indicate a time and then in the case of several speakers absolutely ignore it.

I do not cast any judgement over the previous speakers or the substance of their remarks, but, if people have been allocated a period of three minutes, to give them 50% more is insulting to those people who have spoken earlier and have kept rigidly to their time.

I wonder whether you could justify why you have decided to ignore the clock?

I have not ignored the clock and I am very concerned that some Members may be abusing my tolerance.

In general, Members have respected the time limits for their interventions and, in any event, they have expressed their points of view.

I accept responsibility for this anomaly, which is going to be positive since we are going to gain time - if we do not waste it with points of order - and it is not going to set a precedent.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, could I first underline the fact that Mrs Wallis has spared no effort in submitting this report for discussion.

The report, as it was approved within the committee, is in my view a fine example of a document which has struck a fine balance between the interests of all parties, both small- and medium-sized businesses and consumers.

It would be regrettable if this balance were to be disturbed by tomorrow' s vote, besides which, it is highly unlikely in my view that the Council would be able to agree on the tabled amendments.

The terminology, as it is currently before us, is clear.

We talk about 'contracts concluded at a distance' , terminology which, even to a lay person, is far more transparent than 'directed activities' , as is currently used in the amendment.

Let me illustrate this with an example.

If a French winegrower recommends his crémant in French, a French consumer may well enjoy protection under the Brussels convention, because the winegrower' s 'activities' are 'purposely directed in a substantial way' , but the English, Belgian or Italian consumer will not enjoy this protection because the activities were not purposely directed in a substantial way to those consumers.

This creates considerable legal uncertainty and will lead to various procedures having to be thrashed out before the courts where each case will need to be examined individually to establish whether the activities were purposely directed or not.

Secondly, it is crucial in my opinion that the report offers parties themselves the opportunity of building a competence clause into their contracts.

Contractual freedom is a fundamental principle.

If we deny a party contractual freedom and, with it, the constitutional right to go to court, I can foresee various procedures needing to be instituted on account of denial of justice.

In my view, the Brussels convention is of major strategic importance for the development of e-commerce within the internal market and it will also have a major impact on the success or failure of small- and medium-sized businesses.

I therefore hope that this report, as approved in the committee, will be adopted in its unamended form in the plenary tomorrow.

Mr President, as I have said in this Chamber on previous occasions, I have the privilege of working in a very interesting Legal Affairs Committee and being one of the few non-lawyers on the committee.

Diana Wallis as a distinguished international lawyer has been the ideal person to work on this very complex file.

I would like to thank her for the way she has done it and the way she has so freely shared her knowledge with us.

I have certainly learned a great deal from it.

I want to pick up on what is a central point for me: we are, as my colleague Lord Inglewood said, trying to reflect a new world in which we want small businesses to take advantage of the most powerful, international marketing tool that they have ever been offered.

There are many business that we want to use the network, the Internet, to sell to consumers all over Europe.

Many of those small business will have no experience of exporting, they will not have a network of lawyers, they will be uncertain themselves about how they are going to deal with consumer complaints.

The way that the committee has finally structured its approach strikes exactly the right balance.

Let us be clear, that what we have proposed in these alternative jurisdiction clauses is not something for the larger businesses.

Large businesses, even medium-sized businesses, will have offices all over Europe, they will have lawyers, they will be able to deal with consumers in that respect.

The basis of consumers being able to go to the court of their domicile to receive justice in the event of disputes still remains intact.

Listening to some of the speeches you have heard this evening, you would think that option was under threat.

We have had Mrs Ahern - I am sorry she is not here - saying it will be a disastrous outcome if the committee' s report is voted through.

What we have done is offer small companies the alternative of doing something else.

They can offer consumers alternative jurisdiction but only under very specific conditions.

A double lock is built in there, because they must agree to incorporate an alternative dispute-resolution mechanism before they can use the alternative clause and the terms must also be made very clear to the consumer concerned before he accepts them.

Let us think about this on-line world, ladies and gentlemen, and those of you who have shopped on-line will know that you are offered the conditions and you must positively accept them.

You press the button, you move your mouse, you make a conscious decision.

How many of you, when you last had your gas or electricity bill, turned it over to look at the small print - the conditions?

How many of you realised that you were accepting them?

In the on-line world, we must think differently.

We are thinking in the old world here - some of our colleagues are thinking in the old world.

What we need to do tomorrow is to accept the committee' s report and move forward.

That is our role as a grown-up legislator: to think about new ideas, encourage change and not necessarily, as Lord Inglewood said, go along with an accepted wisdom that has been with us for many years.

Mr President, Commissioner Vitorino, it is important for the e-commerce market that we can conduct pan-European trade in an electronic environment.

No barriers to the market should be set up, either legislative or technological.

A Europe without borders is to the benefit of consumers.

If the amendments made by the committee to the report now being discussed were to be rejected tomorrow, the future of ecommerce in Europe would be in jeopardy.

Ladies and gentlemen, as nice as it would be for the employment situation for our legal profession, it would be an enormous burden for small- and medium-sized enterprises in Europe to take account of the legislation that exists in all EU countries and the signatories to the Locarno Agreement when they are engaged in e-commerce.

Presumably this would also mean that any respectable companies that want to be responsible and look after their consumers' interests, will not become involved in ecommerce at all.

As a result, there will be less on offer to the consumer as a whole, as Lord Inglewood earlier mentioned.

On the other hand, irresponsible rascals would remain in the market and they would look after the consumer only until the clink of money is heard in the seller' s bank account, and no longer.

Ladies and gentlemen, according to a proposal by a consumer organisation, marketing could be directed at just one country or just certain markets, which is not technically possible in the world of the Internet.

The electronic world knows no national frontiers.

Besides, this would discriminate against consumers, as the consumer must have the right to order products from anywhere to go anywhere.

This kind of interpretation would probably also run counter to the principle of the free movement of goods and services as referred to in Article 49 of the Treaty of Rome.

A company engaged in e-commerce cannot normally even know what country the consumer is in.

It would therefore be impossible to require a company to find out beforehand about the consumer protection legislation that exists in the customer' s country, as that country could be anywhere.

Instead it would be reasonable to create alternative procedures for resolving disputes.

The e-commerce players should, however, have the right to choose between normal court procedures or an alternative way to resolve the dispute.

I would also ask the Council and the Commission to still take time to reflect whether it would be worth considering this charge-back mechanism, which Mrs de Palacio mentioned again in her amendment to the report.

It could increase bureaucracy from the point of view of the consumer.

In this the committee' s position is not absolute but it would seem that the majority in this Chamber support it and that tomorrow it will be upheld as Parliament' s position, which is a good thing.

About 18 months ago the Council of the European Union nodded through a draft of the new Brussels regulation which essentially rubber-stamped old principles supposedly in order to apply them to modern conditions, but without thought, without real discussion and without consultation, I hope, whatever the result of the vote tomorrow, that both the Commission and Council will take note of the very extensive discussions and debate which we have had in this Parliament, which have taken account of the concerns both of business and consumers.

I disagree with Mrs Wallis' suggestion that, because of some criticism from David Byrne of the result reached in the Legal Affairs Committee, we should give way now.

I would say it is our democratic duty to stand up for what we believe is the right solution for consumers and for e-commerce in the European Union regardless of whether that gives distress to Mr Byrne or not.

I would give my wholehearted support to the conclusion reached in the Legal Affairs Committee.

It is a common-sense balance between, on the one hand, protecting consumers and, on the other hand, ensuring that those same consumers have access to the low prices and wide choices that are available with the truly competitive market.

We have to decide, in a new era where physical location has become almost meaningless, where a dispute is eventually litigated, where a dispute is eventually solved.

To allow consumers and businesses the freedom to make that choice themselves is the most pragmatic and the most common-sense solution and this gives the maximum certainty both to business and to consumers.

It does not strip consumers of their pre-existing rights.

It gives them choices and it reflects their enhanced status in a new Internet world, which gives them more power and more choices than ever before.

If small businesses are driven out of the market because of the proposals from the Commission or if we adopt Mrs Wallis' amendments tomorrow then it will be consumers who suffer because it will leave them at the mercy of the large global players and it will deprive them of the low prices that they deserve under the new Internet economy.

Even more importantly, it will also threaten the new economy and the e-economy in the European Union.

We are sadly far behind the United States and, if tomorrow we support the amendments proposed by Mrs Wallis, we will stay far behind the United States.

With the Commission' s proposals, we certainly have the worst of both worlds.

We have uncertainty and legal risk for business without genuine consumer protection, because in many cases the right to sue in your own home court may be illusory if you cannot enforce the judgment without going overseas and incurring the same inconvenience as if you had to go overseas in any event to litigate this issue.

The Legal Affairs Committee has come up with a pragmatic solution.

It is a common sense balance to a difficult issue and I would appeal to the House to support the resolution as put forward by the Legal Affairs Committee.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the Commission wishes to begin by expressing its pleasure at the fact that this proposal has received not only the careful attention that the European Parliament gives to all of our proposals, but also because this represents work of the highest quality, which shows the great commitment of its rapporteur, Mrs Wallis, whom I should like to congratulate in particular, and of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market, chaired by Mrs Palacio.

The "Amsterdamisation" of the Brussels I Convention is, as you know, one of the priorities of the French Presidency.

From the Commission' s point of view, the issue is to adopt a legal instrument which will enable us to define clear and transparent rules which everyone can accept. These rules are necessary if we are to be able to harmoniously apply the principle of mutual recognition of legal judgments, which will, of course, involve a debate on determining the principles and rules that apply to the competence of the Member States' courts when they rule on trans-border disputes.

The scope of this regulation is therefore very broad.

First of all, it contains a principle which I believe is universally accepted today: that of the jurisdiction of the courts in the Member State in which the defendant is domiciled.

To achieve greater flexibility and to adapt more efficiently to the specific needs of the parties in a given dispute, the proposal for a regulation lays down alternative rules for jurisdiction, essentially the jurisdiction of the courts in the Member State of the place where the contract was concluded or of the place where the damage was done in the event that an offence has been committed.

The regulation also lays down rules for the protection of the weaker party to consumer contracts, that is to say the consumer, but I shall return to this subject in greater detail later. It also lays down rules for the protection of workers and insurance policyholders, who are deemed to be the weaker parties to such contracts.

As long as certain conditions are met, these parties have the right to bring a case before a court in the Member State in which they reside.

This is the broad legal framework.

I understand - and I feel that it is important to make this clear to the House - that the proposed regulation is a horizontal instrument, which can be applied, in a general way, to both civil and commercial matters. It covers both contractual and non-contractual matters.

It is therefore worth bearing in mind that in the field of contracts, we are dealing with legal rules on general contracts between companies, between companies and consumers, and even contracts between private individuals.

Various types of special contract, such as employment or insurance contracts, are therefore dealt with separately.

Having said this, my concern is to emphasise the fact that although we recognise that the debate has naturally become polarised around one aspect of the regulation' s implementation, namely that concerning the new rules on e-commerce, this regulation covers more than just this one area.

There is an enormous and immediate advantage in moving towards adopting a regulation on this matter on the basis of civil judicial cooperation.

Let us move on now to the issue that has aroused the most passion in the debate, which concerns consumer contracts concluded electronically, in other words, the amendments to Articles 15, 16 and 17.

First of all, I wish to say, on behalf of the Commission, that our proposal, which defines rules for judicial competence, is not seeking to come down on the side of judicial procedures at the expense of an alternative dispute-resolution system. This is not a dogmatic proposal seeking to enshrine the legal approach and to reject the choice of extrajudicial approaches to dispute resolution.

Quite the contrary. The Commission shares the concern that honourable Members have expressed about the fact that perhaps in an increasingly general way, but particularly where e-commerce is concerned, the extra-judicial resolution of disputes is, without a shadow of a doubt, a much better solution in most cases than resorting to judicial procedures.

This is not only because in most cases, in this type of contract, the sums involved today are, as we know, relatively small. Also and above all, it is because the speed with which these contracts are concluded by electronic means is in stark contrast to the excessive formality and slowness with which courts tend to act when resolving these disputes.

The Commission does not, therefore, recognise itself in the portrait that you might wish to paint of us, that is one of a nineteenth century dinosaur, or an even older one, if you prefer. We do not see ourselves in this light because, as you know, anthropologically speaking, dinosaurs no longer existed in the nineteenth century.

We are not dinosaurs, fiercely resisting the adoption of alternative methods for resolving disputes and obsessively pursuing the notion that the courts are always the solution to all ills.

This is not the Commission' s position. I even think that the extremely intensive work that we have been carrying out, which I will shortly discuss in greater detail, to promote alternative means for resolving disputes at European level is tangible proof that instead of merely making grandiose statements, we are working on the ground to implement mechanisms for alternative forms of dispute resolution.

Furthermore, we are convinced that it is possible to make use of new communication technologies, such as the Internet, the new network concept and flows to facilitate extrajudicial dispute resolution.

That is why I would say that the commitment to responding to the challenges that have been set for us here is not so much a question of a making a dogmatic choice of legal solutions. It is rather a question of our ability to give credibility to alternative mechanisms for dispute resolution and to give consumers and business people confidence in these mechanisms.

Probably the greatest tribute that we could pay to this debate would be to say in a few years' time that we wasted a great deal of time on a highly legalistic debate that in practice was shown to have no real importance at all.

In other words, the best way of honouring this debate would be to see if we can create a system for dispute resolution that renders the debate on access to the judicial process almost obsolete.

Why is it that we cannot avoid discussing the issue of the judicial approach?

It is because the Commission does, in fact, share the idea that extrajudicial resolution must become the rule but that, in order to provide an incentive for people to seek recourse to this extrajudicial approach, there must be clear principles for the alternative, that is the judicial route.

There must therefore be rules on the jurisdiction of the courts in those cases - which the Commission hopes will be rare - where an alternative form of resolution is not possible or does not produce a satisfactory result.

Accordingly, with regard to consumer contracts the Commission found the discussion in the Committee on Legal Affairs extremely useful and takes the view that the second part of Amendment No 23 contains a principle which is considerably clearer and more reliable than that contained in our original proposal.

The phrase 'directs such activities to' is an ambiguous one, which could cause problems by being open to interpretation and could drag us into a never-ending discussion on what are positive, active or passive web sites. We therefore feel that it would be helpful to replace this phrase with "contracts concluded at a distance" .

We are prepared to incorporate this phrase into the amended proposal.

This action would, however, have two consequences for Article 15.

First of all, its wording needs to be adapted so that it does not limit the scope of Article 15 to contracts concluded in the consumer' s home, which is an impossible condition to establish for contracts concluded electronically.

We are therefore not inclined to retain the first part of Amendment No 23.

Secondly, it is important to point out that, because of the amendment I have just mentioned, "presential" contracts are also covered by Article 15. By "presential" contracts, I mean those that are concluded face to face.

I am thinking here of situations in which the vendor, even if he or she has been contacted by the consumer, via the Internet for example, has gone to the consumer' s home in order to conclude the contract there. I also have in mind contracts where the consumer has been given an incentive, at the initiative of the other party, the co-contractor, even to leave the state in which he or she is domiciled in order to conclude the contract, as happens, for example, in contractual situations involving holidays organised by the suppliers themselves.

If these stipulations are guaranteed, we feel that the phrase "contract concluded at a distance" would be much more appropriate to the situations I have been describing.

On the other hand, we have problems with Amendment No 24, which concerns Article 16.

Our view is that this amendment would mean applying the general rule of the jurisdiction of the Member State in which the defendant is domiciled and using the courts to override all of the common provisions of European Union and Member State consumer law as they stand today.

As I see it, such an amendment would, in fact, render useless any provision in the field of consumer contracts, notably Article 15 itself. Apart from this, unless I am mistaken, this would leave consumers in a worse situation than that of an operator who is bound by a business-to-business contract, and who would be able to choose between having the case heard in a court in the defendant' s state of domicile and a court in the place where the contract was concluded.

The same thing applies to the amendment seeking to open up the system laid down in the Brussels Convention on jurisdiction clauses in consumer contracts.

I am referring here to Article 17.

The Commission feels that Amendment No 26 is unacceptable since the clauses that are proposed would, in our opinion, be systematically used by the supplier, unless, of course, they were based on free and individual negotiation on the part of the consumer.

The new Article 17(a) that has been proposed seeks to replace the guarantees provided by the courts by an extrajudicial and binding system of dispute resolution.

The issue of the binding nature of these decisions is extremely important.

My view is that this proposal would create a compulsory arbitration system for resolving these consumer disputes.

As I see it, however, arbitration generally follows more complex procedural rules than those applied by the courts.

I feel that the solution put forward in this proposal would present legal problems with regard to the law applicable and to the implementation arbitration awards.

This concern on the part of the Commission would also apply to Amendment No 39, to which various Members have put their name.

We understand the intention of this amendment, which establishes the freedom of the parties to agree upon a 'get-out' clause for an extrajudicial mechanism for dispute resolution, and lays down that this mechanism, which may be binding on both parties and which has the Commission's approval, enables the supplier to refuse to enter into the transaction if the consumer does not accept the clause. Presumably, whether juris tantum or juris et de jure applies, this would always be in accordance with Directive 93/13/EEC on abusive clauses.

I believe that this amendment would raise similar difficulties in law.

I shall not go into further detail about the idea contained in this amendment that an abusive clause would never be involved, but the truth is that by relying on the binding nature of the decision of the ADR (Alternative Dispute Resolution) body on both parties and therefore on the consumer, we would be opting as a general rule to compulsorily replace the courts with extrajudicial dispute resolution mechanisms.

Such a solution would, in fact, raise constitutional issues in some Member States, in which it is not possible to prohibit access to the courts, even if only as a last resort, and would open the way for an interpretation of what is a question of law and what is a question of fact in this type of contract which, in my opinion, would vitiate the efficiency and speed of the system.

The Commission' s view is that this regulation should not depend on the adoption of a package of legislative and non-legislative measures on e-commerce between companies and consumers.

We feel sure that actions we have already launched and which are now up and running will enable alternative dispute resolution mechanisms to be put in place shortly and will enable us to provide a rapid response to the challenges of settling disputes arising from e-commerce.

I would remind you of the revision of the Commission' s 1998 recommendation on the principles applying to alternative dispute resolution bodies, which in fact form the basis of what is known as the EEJ-Net - the European Extrajudicial Network - which has already been launched.

Similarly, under the e-Europe initiative, which was adopted by the Feira European Council, the Commission is currently actively working on formulating proposals for codes of conduct, trust marks and extrajudicial procedures for the extrajudicial resolution of disputes arising from e-commerce. The Commission has also been given the task of preparing a Green Paper solely devoted to alternative methods of dispute resolution, as was decided by the Justice and Home Affairs Council of May of this year.

All of this is currently being done and is part of our short-term work programme. In another area, that of minor disputes heard by the so-called "small claims" courts, we have already initiated work in line with the Tampere mandate, to simplify and speed up the processing of trans-border disputes involving small or uncontested sums.

We are therefore convinced that these initiatives, which are already under way, and on which there will have to be a full debate with civil society, with interested parties, with associations representing industry, business and consumers and, of course, with the European Parliament, will enable us to put in place, in the short term, a legal reference framework which will establish alternative dispute resolution mechanisms.

We therefore think that, in order to allow this process some time in which to develop, it would be appropriate if the entry into force of this regulation were postponed for a few months.

We propose that this should wait until six months after its publication, not only so as to enable operators to become fully conversant with the regulation, but also so as to enable the work that is currently under way on alternative means for dispute resolution to be concluded.

Lastly, the Commission wishes to state that it is able to accept Amendments Nos 3, 27 and 30 on the introduction of provisions on trusts, with the reservation that some small changes are made to the terminology used.

We can also accept Amendment No 22, on group insurance contracts, Amendments Nos 28, 29, 33 and 34, which allow notaries to be included in the authorities that are able to take part in the exequatur procedure.

We also accept Amendments Nos 18 - in part - and 29, but we have difficulty in accepting Article 55, which seeks, for the purposes of compulsory implementation, to give extrajudicial dispute resolution the same status as authentic acts that have been recognised by a body which has public authority.

Mr President, forgive me for being more of a bore than I usually am, but the valid arguments and especially the passion of the criticisms that have been made deserved a frank answer from the Commission.

The Commission is humble enough to say that it has learnt from this legislative process and that you can be quite sure that this work will not end here.

Thank you very much, Mr Vitorino, for your extensive intervention.

The vote will take place tomorrow, Thursday, at 11 a.m.

(The sitting was closed at 11.15 p.m.)

Mr President, I should publicly like to reject and condemn the botched procedure, although I do not know if it has been adopted by the Conference of Presidents, the Presidencies of the Council and the Commission or the Presidency of Parliament, for dealing with an issue as important and far-reaching as terrorism in Spain.

This may be in line with the Rules of Procedure, but it is neither ethically nor democratically acceptable for such a crucial issue to be dealt with using a procedure that does not provide for a political debate on a specific proposal for a resolution to which all of the interested parliamentary groups can present amendments.

As I see it, the procedure adopted asserts that a written declaration presented by five Spanish Members of the European Parliament - who are fully within their rights to do so - can become the official position of Parliament. If this were the case, however, it would amount to a position adopted selfishly, by the back door and almost by stealth, so as to prevent other groups and Members from having the chance to present amendments or changes with the aim of achieving a broad consensus on the text.

Mr President, representatives of the Council and the Commission, might I be so bold as to say that what has happened today is a huge political mistake, and that something as important as Parliament' s position on terrorism will not have the broad support of everyone, since there will be some who, whilst unequivocally rejecting and condemning terrorism...

(The President cut the speaker off)

I am very sorry Mr Ortuondo, we are now taking note of the fact that you do not approve of what has been decided.

However, this is a decision taken by the competent bodies of this Parliament.

We have taken note of your opinion.

Let us turn to what we should be talking about, namely the Minutes, as Mr Ortuondo did not comment on the Minutes. Who wants to comment on yesterday' s Minutes?

Mr President, I would like to draw attention to a deplorable state of affairs at the European School I in Brussels.

Thousands of children and young people - most of whom are the offspring of our officials - have not had any lessons since the end of June.

They have, as yet, been unable to start the first term of the new school year.

It was originally scheduled for 7 September.

Several days previous to that, it was postponed until today, and now the parents have been informed once again that the term cannot begin because some major building work has yet to be completed.

The renovation work has been going on for years at this school, and the asbestos problems are a familiar tale too.

Yet no alternative arrangements were made for the children.

I urge the President of our Parliament, in conjunction with the Commission, to ensure that this disgraceful state of affairs is not resolved at the children' s expense.

I cannot believe what is going on!

School attendance is compulsory and yet the children are unable to fulfil this requirement.

Mrs Schleicher, it would be particularly tragic if children were to suffer because it is impossible to receive an education.

I am taking note of this and will pass it on, at your request, to the Bureau and other competent Parliament bodies.

We will see what we can do.

The next item is the Council and Commission statements on terrorism in Spain.

This debate is opened on behalf of the Council and Commission.

I have been informed that Minister Paul, representing the Council, is still on his way and hopes to arrive here very shortly.

He is on his way here on the train from Paris and, as the sitting started early, is unable to attend at present.

But I assume that Commissioner Vitorino is ready to make his statement now, and we will wait and see whether the Minister will be arriving shortly.

If this is the case, I should like to give the floor to Commissioner Vitorino, who will be speaking on behalf of the Commission.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the Commission has been disturbed to see renewed acts of violence in the Basque Country. The Commission agrees with the repeated and forceful statements that have been made condemning these loathesome acts of terrorism committed in the territory of the Member States of the European Union - in all Member States, but particularly in Spain.

Terrorism represents one of the greatest challenges our societies face and is unacceptable, because of the indiscriminate violence that characterises it, and which particularly affects the civilian population.

Terrorist attacks shock and sadden the entire European public and fully deserve to be rejected because Europe's citizens continue to express their unrelenting desire to share a peaceful future.

The Commission believes that the solidarity shown by the other Member States can and must support the Spanish authorities' fight against terrorism.

The Commission therefore welcomes the step forward represented by the enshrinement in the Treaty of Amsterdam of the principle of solidarity in the fight against terrorism.

Article 29 of the Treaty on European Union specifically mentions terrorism as one of the forms of crime to be prevented and fought at European level and one of the areas in which the European Union can bring added value to this fight.

The European dimension of the fight against terrorism is not, however, a recent concept.

Some key acts of cooperation between the judicial systems and police services of at least two states, particularly on both sides of the French-Spanish border, have recently produced some good results in this fight against terrorism.

For its part, the Commission is cooperating with the Member States and with Europol with the same aim.

Similarly, in the framework of action by the Council of Europe and the United Nations, there are various appropriate international conventions against terrorism that have not yet been signed, but which are currently being negotiated.

Nevertheless, these new attacks unfortunately show that these efforts are still not enough to eliminate terrorism.

We must go further in terms of European cooperation.

A few words on behalf of the Commission would be appropriate here, heartfelt words of respect for and in tribute to the victims of terrorist attacks, who have often been representatives of the people, whose legitimacy comes from the ballot box in democratic elections. I also wish to pay tribute to those who have fallen victim to terrorism because they are carrying out their professional duties out of a sense of duty as servants of the state and of the people.

But I also wish to pay tribute to those arbitrary victims of terrorism, the anonymous members of the public who refuse to live under the blackmail of fear. The finest tribute that I can pay is exactly this, to prove that we in the European institutions are able to contribute to this collective effort on the part of Europe' s citizens.

The Treaty of Amsterdam, as I have already stated, enables the European Union to make this contribution.

Immediately following its entry into force, therefore, the Heads of State and Government meeting at the Tampere European Council included terrorism in their overall approach to combating all forms of crime.

Clear political commitments were given, such as the commitment to set up joint investigation teams, which, in my view, represent the most effective instrument for fighting terrorism at its very roots.

Europol, whose mandate expressly covers terrorism, must also give its support to this joint action and participate in these joint investigation teams.

The greater operational capacity Europol has, the more effective its support will be.

Although it is true that in many cases bilateral cooperation between police forces is an essential instrument for combating terrorism, it is no less true that the need to establish the link between some terrorist acts and other forms of organised crime, in its methods, in its networks of activity and even in its sources of financing, requires a multilateral, not just a bilateral vision of the phenomenon of terrorism.

Furthermore, Mr President, instruments for judicial cooperation, specifically those designed to prevent criminals from benefiting from and taking advantage of the differences in legislation across Europe, will also enable us to reduce, or even, one day, to eliminate all the obstacles that are raised when an application is made to extradite terrorists from one European Union country to another to stand trial.

The path we must take is quite clear, as it was decided in Tampere that formal extradition proceedings between Member States for those who have actually been sentenced must in future be abolished. The principle of mutual recognition of judgments should also apply to final judgments, but also to judgments prior to the trial stage itself.

A first objective would therefore be to guarantee that capture orders for the purpose of a trial are implemented, bearing in mind the gravity of the crimes we are talking about, in the event that several warrants are served on the same person.

Our institutional partners now have the responsibility of ensuring that these guidelines, which have already been accepted at political level, are translated more rapidly into laws and into action.

Various essential actions for stepping up the fight against terrorism are already included in the scoreboard for the creation of an area of freedom, security and justice. I feel certain that these actions, particularly the commitment given by the Heads of State and Government to the effect that terrorism is one of the forms of crime on which the European institutions will have to adopt common definitions, charges and sanctions, will rapidly be given substance in order to send out a clear message that terrorist acts will not be protected by the legislation of any Member State.

I should therefore like to reiterate the Commission' s commitment to promoting more effective European action against terrorism, using all the means made available to it under the treaties, whether these terrorist acts take place in Spain or in any other Member State, as I have just been informed has happened tonight in the United Kingdom.

In democratic societies such as ours, terrorism cannot take shelter behind any supposedly political justification.

Terrorism, it must be said, is a dead end and the fact that it has fortunately disappeared from other European countries gives us cause for hope that sooner or later it will also be eliminated in Spain.

It is up to governments to demonstrate to the public in their countries the absurdity of terrorism and to attack it root and branch by means of a multifaceted intervention strategy.

I am sure that democratic societies, of which we are proud to belong, will win this battle, as long as we do not abdicate our democratic values and demonstrate that democracy is a powerful system for fighting terrorism and therefore make both preventive policies and the repression of terrorist acts more effective.

This is clearly what Spain is doing and is also what the Commission is committed to doing in the fields in which it has competence.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, Europe is an area of freedom which we all wish to strengthen.

Hence, all terrorist attacks are not just attacks on democracy and the rule of law but they also prevent Europe' s citizens from enjoying the freedom that we all desire.

Our commitment and our collective efforts must therefore be directed towards enabling everyone to fully enjoy this freedom.

Freedom must not be surrendered to blackmail or to fear, because only in freedom can human dignity be experienced.

Mr President, do you not think that it would be a better idea - and I say this, of course, as a point of order, not as an intervention - if we waited a few more minutes for the Minister to arrive?

It would be difficult, you understand, for me to respond to the representative of the Council if he did not have the opportunity to speak first.

I therefore suggest that the sitting be suspended for less than 10 minutes, until nine o' clock, which is the time the Minister is due to arrive at Parliament.

Mr Galeote, I hear what you are saying.

By way of apology on behalf of Mr Paul, I would like to point out that his train from Paris is due at 8.20 a.m.

We expect him here any minute.

I would prefer it if we embarked on today' s proceedings rather than adjourn, in view of today' s punishing schedule and the fact that the House decided yesterday to vote at 11 a.m.

I would actually like to ask you to make a start.

We have heard the Commissioner' s statement.

We decided yesterday to start at 8.30 a.m., and it would therefore be odd if we were to suspend proceedings at this stage.

Mr President, I am convinced that the vast majority of Basque people, given the opportunity, would thank the French Presidency of the Council and the European Parliament for echoing their deep desire for peace and democratic coexistence.

Ladies and gentlemen, since the first democratic elections took place in Spain in 1977, the Basque Country has emerged as the European region with the highest degree of self-government.

Since then, the Basque people have had the opportunity, on six occasions, to elect the representatives for their autonomous parliament and violent and radical nationalism has never won the democratic support of the Basque people at the polls.

However, since our Constitution was approved, enshrining the democratic rights of the people of Spain, ETA has killed 804 people in my country and left over 2000 widows and orphans all over Spain, mainly in the Basque Country.

Their victims were men and women from all walks of life, including, of course, those who dedicated part of their lives to fighting the dictatorship.

As part of the struggle to banish fear, these days in the Basque Country and in the rest of Spain there is a popular, civic and peaceful backlash against the tyranny of murderous terrorism.

In my view, ladies and gentlemen, this debate must take up and broaden this popular call and encourage the people of Europe to work together to create a great pact for freedom.

We must be able to make the people of our countries of origin realise that the fundamental principles on which our common coexistence rests are threatened whenever anyone, in any part of Europe, is killed because of their beliefs.

Only the united stand taken by democrats can ensure that the perpetrators of violence are marginalised as well as those who, owing to the permissiveness generated in our democracies, protect, induce, justify or tolerate terrorist acts of any kind.

I hope my message is clear.

We all doubtless agree that dialogue is a decisive factor in the democratic process.

There is only one exception to this golden rule and that exception is also an essential component of democratic systems.

In a democracy, ladies and gentlemen, the voice of those who are intent on destroying it and who use criminal methods to achieve their ends must be silenced by the law, by the Rule of Law.

Democracy must never bow to those who at the same time, and this is something I stress, at the same time, insist on holding it to ransom, gun in hand.

I am convinced of the personal and political commitment of Commissioner Vitorino and the College of Commissioners to this undertaking, something that they have demonstrated on several occasions.

I should therefore like to ask the Commissioner to use his exclusive powers of legislative initiative to propose new measures to enable us to make progress as regards European cooperation which, as you yourself pointed out, is still insufficient.

One of the most effective measures in the fight against terrorism is in fact the European arrest warrant, which would mean that terrorists served their sentences in the country where they committed their most heinous crime.

I would like to end, Mr President, by sparing a thought for those Europeans most affected by fear, in other words, the victims of terrorism and their families.

Today, thanks to this debate, they are a little less alone.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the Member States of the European Union are unanimous in condemning terrorism, whatever the motives of the groups of criminals carrying out terrorist attacks, and so the Council of the European Union is just as firm in its condemnation of all the forms of terrorism carried out on European territory.

I should like to point out that at the Summit of the Heads of State and Government which was held on 19 and 20 June this year in Santa Maria da Feira, in Portugal, the Council expressed its outrage at the tragic events related to terrorism in Europe and vigorously reaffirmed its commitment to continuing to fight terrorism at European level and to stepping up and intensifying cooperation between Member States in this area.

Since France currently holds the Council Presidency, at this point I would particularly like to express our solidarity in the face of the terrorism in Spain, which is the most deadly in Europe at the present time.

Clearly, the European Union cannot possibly tolerate Spanish terrorists using the construction of Europe as an alibi in order to justify their claims.

In no instance can violent nationalism be compatible with the ideals of the European Union.

Combating all forms of terrorism is therefore a priority for the European Union in order to achieve the area of freedom, security and justice set as a goal by the Heads of State and Government at the Tampere Summit in October 1999.

Of course, alongside the multilateral cooperation implemented by the European Union bodies, there is also particularly effective bilateral cooperation, and we have recently seen the results of French and Spanish operational cooperation.

It is the role and the responsibility of the European Union in combating terrorism in general, and therefore also terrorism in Spain, which I wished to discuss this morning in my capacity as co-chairman, together with Elisabeth Guigou, the French Minister of Justice, of the Justice and Home Affairs Council.

If you will allow me briefly to outline the story so far, the cooperation between the Member States of the European Union on internal security originated in 1976, at the time of the Trevi groups.

These informal groups, which met every six months, were, from the outset, a reflection of the determination to have police cooperation in a number of areas, including on terrorism, which was of particular concern to the members of the Trevi I group.

Cooperation in police matters, an idea developed at the Trevi Conference, led to the establishment of a network of liaison officers.

The implementation of this network, undoubtedly the most effective cooperative network, was the result of the action programme adopted in Dublin in June 1990 by the Ministers of Justice and Home Affairs of the twelve Member States at that time.

It involves exchanges of information between experts posted in specialised departments in the various Member States. These liaison officers are responsible for exchanging information, but also for supporting the relevant departments in an advisory role.

I think it is safe to say by now that this network of liaison officers has very clearly demonstrated its effectiveness by facilitating the smooth running of police inquiries in real time.

In the context of cooperation on justice and home affairs, a specific counter-terrorism working group was also established, subsequently, by the Maastricht Treaty.

This Experts Group on terrorism was confirmed by the Treaty of Amsterdam, clearly demonstrating the need for a body within which the representatives of the fifteen Member States have the opportunity to meet to exchange views and cooperate.

The work of this group was what led the Council to adopt two important decisions which I would like to remind you of.

In 1996, the Council adopted a Joint Action establishing a European Directory of specialised counter-terrorist competences, skills and expertise, and stipulating that it be maintained.

Moreover, at the end of 1999, the Council adopted a recommendation on cooperation in combating the financing of terrorist groups.

I should also at this point mention the role played by the European Police Office, Europol, in combating terrorism.

From the outset, the Convention of 26 July 1995 establishing the European Police Office stipulated that this police cooperation body would be competent to deal with 'crimes committed or likely to be committed in the course of terrorist activities against life, limb, personal freedom or property'.

The initial wording of the Convention stipulated that Europol' s mandate would be extended to terrorism within two years at the latest of the Convention' s entry into force, which was on 1 October 1998.

As you know, there is a Europol department dedicated to combating terrorism.

This was a request from Spain and so, naturally, a leading official from Spain was given the job of managing that department.

In view of the criminal activity undertaken at that time by some terrorist groups, the Justice and Home Affairs Council, which met on 28 and 29 May 1998, took the decision to authorise Europol to bring forward its counter-terrorism activities and have them begin on 1 January 1999.

Finally, I cannot, of course, fail to mention the current priorities of the French Presidency of the European Union in the area we are discussing this morning.

In particular, the French Presidency wishes to improve and intensify the cooperation between Member States, but also to extend this cooperation yet further to include the candidate countries.

This is both legal and police cooperation, which will no doubt one day lead to the harmonisation or unification of criminal charging systems.

The Spanish Government, for example, would like a European arrest warrant to be established.

Among the priorities of the French Presidency I should particularly like to mention the initiative to establish a programme of information and measures to be undertaken in order to prepare for the accession of the candidate countries to the European Union.

This approach is intended to enable us to increase our knowledge of their counter-terrorism organisations and to increase awareness in countries which do not a priori have any specific experience in this field.

In order to draw up an accurate picture of the terrorism situation within the European Union, and this is the second priority of our presidency, we wished to continue the practice of providing an opportunity at each meeting of the working group of exchanging information on recent developments in terrorism in each of the States.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, it is this system, with a combination of bilateral and multilateral cooperation, which very recently, in fact just a few days ago, made it possible to achieve some remarkable successes in the fight against terrorism in Spain.

Mr President, while we have been here discussing these issues, José Luis Ruiz, a town councillor of the governing Partido Popular party in a town in Catalonia, has been murdered by ETA.

Some are trying to confuse us and seem intent on creating confusion between the people of good will in Parliament.

But there is a clearly defined line that separates us.

On one side stand those that die for democracy, and on the other, stand those that kill in their attempts to deprive us of our freedom.

Thank you, Mr Galeote, for your contribution.

The fact that this is the way things are done is extremely tragic and difficult to take in.

Mr President, I was probably the first to hear about the terrorist attack this morning at 7.40, so I have known about it for a while now.

The attack happened in Catalonia about three or four kilometres from my house and it appears that the situation is worsening since, even though ETA have already killed more than 800 people, they have committed yet another atrocity, even as we speak.

No political objective justifies the use of violence.

We can but express our wholehearted condemnation of terrorism and particularly at a time when the terrorists seem so intent on destroying us.

We must therefore, once again, strongly reiterate our firm and cooperative position as the Commissioner said, in support of a strong democracy, given that terrorism constitutes a direct threat to our core values.

We should like to express our solidarity with those who have been affected and also, in particular, our hope for peace.

In the wake of the latest atrocity, the debate is especially difficult for this Member, and this is something I commented on to four of the five people that signed the declaration against terrorism in Spain.

I pointed out to two of them that the signing of the declaration may prove difficult for some due to the content of one of the paragraphs, the second paragraph in fact.

This paragraph rejects dialogue with any group that tolerates terrorism or that is involved in it.

The reason I spoke to the authors of the text is that I think they need to find a formula on which everyone agrees.

One might wonder why the second paragraph of the text as it stands is proving so difficult to sign.

The reason is because it calls into question the culture of peace and the culture of dialogue.

What is more, if we renounce dialogue the Northern Ireland peace process would not be possible, the Middle East peace process would not be possible and, the Member of the European Parliament, Mr John Hume, would not have been awarded the Nobel Peace Prize and I think it is important his work receives recognition.

If ETA does not give up its weapons, we shall not give up ours.

If ETA refuses to renounce violence, we shall refuse to renounce the law and dialogue, which are our weapons.

This is why I strongly urge those that presented the declaration - as I have done so in private and do so now publicly - to do all they can to enable us to sign it, because any position that is adopted on terrorism requires universal backing.

On the other hand, if this declaration is supposed to stem from the 1997 declaration adopted by Parliament, which spoke of dialogue in positive terms, it would seem strange not to have recourse to it, and in particular, to the eighth paragraph in which Parliament considers dialogue in positive terms.

Mr President, we should all be in a position to sign the declaration.

Nothing justifies the use of terrorism and nothing justifies the failure of democratic forces to adopt a united front in the face of it.

Mr President, I have requested the floor on a point of order regarding the intervention we have just heard from our distinguished fellow Member, Mr Esteve.

On 14 December 1995, Parliament adopted a resolution in which it reiterated its rejection of any type of dialogue with anyone who collaborates with, protects, incites or carries out terrorist acts of any kind, and on 15 October 1998, Parliament adopted a resolution in which it reiterated its refusal to enter into dialogue with anyone that collaborates with, permits, encourages, supports or carries out criminal acts.

These are both Parliament resolutions, Mr Esteve, and according to you we should encourage the signing of the declaration.

It is difficult to encourage someone who is genuinely at peace with their conscience.

Mr President, in addition to expressing my agreement with the content of Mr Esteve' s speech, I should firstly like, on behalf of our group and also on behalf of my party, Eusko Alkartasuna - one of the governing parties of the Basque Country along with our colleagues from the Basque Nationalist Party - to express our clear and wholehearted rejection of terrorism and especially today, in the wake of the criminal outrage that has been committed in Catalonia.

We regret that unequivocal repudiations and constructive proposals do not, however, go hand in hand, as proved by the declaration that has already been discussed and which has been presented by several groups to the exclusion of others and without open debate.

We naturally respect the freedom of individuals and political groups to make statements, but forcing us to reject dialogue, and for a large number of reasons, is something we cannot accept.

In the first place, this is because we, like Mo Mowlam, firmly believe that dialogue is the best way to resolve violent conflicts in whatever part of the world, and, in the second place, because we cannot be inconsistent with declarations made by Parliament on previous occasions, a few of which I shall mention here.

A few days ago in Strasbourg, President Nicole Fontaine herself made reference to all of the democrats of Europe, men and women alike, and especially the Basque Country in Spain, which, in her view, continues to believe in political dialogue, despite the climate of terror that exists.

Where would Lionel Jospin, François Bayrou or our fellow Member of the European Parliament and winner of the Nobel Peace Prize, John Hume, as well as all those in favour of the Irish peace process be if they accepted proposals that condemned dialogue?

Where would Commissioner Reding stand as a result?

I shall not quote from the text, but the Commissioner' s report on terrorism presented to Parliament in 1997 is there for consultation.

When we talk about a serious European conflict we cannot consider it lightly and simply content ourselves with rhetorical and repeated statements, without attacking the root causes underlying all of these problems and without trying, together, to find a solution.

Parliament needs to be in a position to promote initiatives that will put an end to this cruel violence afflicting the Basque Country, and which will help find new paths of dialogue, especially between the Basque democratic forces.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, although all groups, including ours, must be self-critical, it is now time we set to work and, above all, attempted to combat such a serious problem as terrorism from solid foundations, the maximum consensus possible and, of course, in the knowledge that dialogue has been, is and will always be the most valued method for achieving peace and reconciliation.

We could have presented an alternative text here, but this would have been a serious mistake because in our view, resolving a matter as serious and important as this requires us to do everything that we can, except to put forward proposals that divide Parliament.

Allow me, if you will, to make a small personal confession.

Thirty years ago at the height of the Franco dictatorship in 1970, I was in prison for championing freedoms and at that time I was against ETA.

Like any human of integrity and intelligence, I am prepared to learn, but let me tell you this; I do not accept lessons in how to stand firm against terrorism.

I shall end, Mr President, by recalling the words of Jorge Luís Borges when he wrote "Around 500 years before the Christian era, the greatest thing to happen in the history of the world occurred in Greece - the discovery of dialogue.

Faith, certainty, dogmas, anathemas, prayers, prohibitions, orders, taboos, tyrannies, wars and glories overwhelmed the order of things.

Out of this, some Greeks acquired - we shall never know how - the singular habit of conversing."

Without those Greeks, Western culture would be inconceivable.

If only today we were able to hold on to that great value of global culture that is dialogue, without prejudice to the greatest strength of our democratic convictions and the outright rejection of terrorism, and do so despite the latest painful, sad and abhorrent murder, even during the most difficult times and in the face of our most stubborn and murderous enemies.

Mr President, on a point of order, Northern Ireland has been referred to a number of times in this debate and the notion of unconditional dialogue with terror has been suggested as the basis of the Irish peace process.

The Irish peace process was based on the unconditional cease-fire of the Provisional IRA.

Mr President, I understand that there are several debates taking place concurrently and that it is probably easier to speak when one is independent of any particular political group, but everything appears to be moving in favour of political dialogue and the clarification of what we are discussing here, as well as the objectives of the written declaration that has been presented.

Today is pointless already, after all that we have heard about the significance of ETA terrorism, its devastating effects on the population, its outright assault on the democratic values enshrined in the Spanish Constitution of 1978 and in the Statute of Guernica, that cost the countless efforts and sacrifices of the Basque and Spanish people as a whole to achieve.

We have heard from those who fought against the Franco dictatorship, who are present today and are to be commended, but there are others, now dead, who no longer have a voice and can no longer participate in political dialogue.

This is why the issue must be clarified here today, and why I must respond to the various interpretations of what constitutes political dialogue.

Quite clearly, over and above natural political differences political dialogue must exist, a political dialogue between people and organisations that respect and defend the values of democracy and freedom.

Political dialogue cannot be achieved when, with one hand, or at a given moment, people call for dialogue and with the other, they turn a pistol or a bomb on those with whom they are supposedly in talks.

(Applause)No one can be invited to join in this dialogue.

Political dialogue should take place between democratic parties, whether they be nationalist or not, with Convergència Democràtica de Catalunya, with Convergència i Unió, with the PNV, with Eusko Alkartasuna, with Izquíerda Unida, with the PSOE, with the governing Partido Popular, and within the institutions, transparently and clearly, on behalf of the people and answering to all Spanish citizens.

We cannot, however enter into the kind of dialogue that the proponents of violence are calling for, as that kind of dialogue is not permissible in a democratic and open society.

We are aware that problems and any political, economic and social contradictions can be resolved through dialogue and through decisions taken by democratic institutions. However, we must not use dialogue as a universal rhetorical remedy that is also open to those who perpetrate and advocate violence and to those who bemoan the deaths as though they were traffic accidents when they are in fact cruel murders committed against children and defenceless people, as in the name of democracy, this is unacceptable.

I think these people should remain silent and I hope they hear my message and adopt a more moral approach to the problem, as opposed to violence.

(Applause)Dialogue cannot serve to cover up violence and terror, nor can it mean surrender in the face of crime. Political dialogue is only possible when the bombs cease to go off, the guns are silent and democratic values have been accepted.

We wholeheartedly reject the call for dialogue and the meekness that both lead to dictatorships and concentration camps.

We are, however, in favour of responsible and democratic dialogue in order to achieve peaceful coexistence and to strengthen democracy, which is so essential to us.

Mr President, more than 15 000 people have been arrested, more than 5 000 tortured.

Hundreds of people have been killed.

Journalists and deputies have been killed by state terrorists, local councillors have been killed by state terrorists, men and women, my colleagues have been killed by state terrorists in the Spanish Kingdom.

Can the European Parliament collaborate with state terrorism?

Today, more than ever, the great majority of the Basque people remain committed to non-violence.

It is particularly fitting, at this moment, to remind ourselves that the Lizarra Agreement, that two years ago opened the way to a peaceful and democratic Basque society, was consistently rejected by the Government of Madrid after an unconditional ceasefire.

The moving remarks from the victims of ETA and the Spanish repression prove better than anything else the tragedy of permitting this excellent opportunity to be wasted.

We stand ready to help in any way the peace process.

We will never do anything that could hinder the settlement once and for all of the ongoing conflict through the recognition of the Basque identity.

Here you see the Spanish idea of freedom of speech and democracy.

They are not tolerant, they have spoken for more than three-quarters of an hour, they cannot stand just one minute by me, that is their democracy.

The day when the European Union will stand for a political solution, I will assure you that for 100% of the Basque inhabitants, including PP and Socialists, will be the happiest day in our lives.

Mr President, on behalf of the British Conservatives, I should like to offer our strong support to the Spanish authorities in their fight against terrorism.

The United Kingdom has suffered from terrorism for over 30 years.

Indeed, there was another incident in London last night, and I offer our condolences to the latest victim of terrorism in Spain.

In order to defeat terrorists, it is essential that government should be unambiguous in the message that it sends out and that public opinion should be kept resolute.

Terrorists should be given no hope of achieving their objectives by force, no comfort that they will avoid punishment for their awful crimes and no hiding-place.

In particular, no European Union Member State should provide sanctuary for terrorists so they can mount attacks on another state.

I am afraid the UK experience has in fact been largely negative on all these counts.

We support the Spanish Government and security forces in their tough stance against ETA terrorism and express solidarity with the Spanish people and in particular, those that have suffered directly as victims of terrorism.

Mr President, let us send out a very clear and unequivocal message from this Parliament today that violence has no role of any description in solving the problems of a divided people.

All that violence does is deepen the divisions and make the problem much more difficult to resolve.

Organisations which use violence, should be told very clearly that their claim to be acting to achieve human and civil rights for people is completely false, because their method undermines the most fundamental human right of all, the right to life.

The message we should send out is that there should be an absolute and complete end to violence.

Following an absolute and complete end to violence, there can be dialogue and this dialogue should involve democratically elected representatives of all sections of the people.

The objective of that dialogue would be an agreement that would enjoy the loyalty of all sections of the people.

This is a straightforward and logical way of dealing with terrorism and those who genuinely want to solve the problem should have no difficulty in following that path.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I of course support the unreserved condemnation and outrage that everyone within this Chamber feels at the news that the blindest and most cowardly form of terrorism has struck once again in Spain, at 7.40 this morning, making a victim of José Ruiz, a municipal councillor in Sant Adrià de Besós, in Catalonia.

On behalf of the European Council, I have pointed out the structure of bilateral and multilateral cooperation enabling our police and legal systems to relentlessly score points against terrorism.

This cooperation achieved a notable success a few days ago with some of the main leaders of ETA being arrested in France.

However, ladies and gentlemen, this success must not induce in us any sense of collective self-satisfaction.

This is a just war which democracy is waging against violence and which we must continue to fight every inch of the way.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, on behalf of the Commission, I would just like to add my own deepest sympathy with regard to the victim of the attack which occurred in Catalonia this morning, and also to stress my concern at the events in London.

In particular, I want to state that, outside this debate on the legal instruments - police cooperation, legal cooperation, the questions of how to make the extradition system more effective and how to ensure a European mandate for investigation, which we are looking into - there is an added value which Europe is providing in the fight for freedom and democracy.

I believe that the main message is a clear message of solidarity, solidarity with the people of Spain as a whole, and with the Basque people.

On a personal note, like the Spaniards, I have lived in a country which spent more than 40 years under dictatorship at a time when all the other countries of Europe were democratic.

I believe that the most important added value which your institution can give the fight for freedom and democracy in Europe is to send out this message of solidarity to the victims.

We must never lose faith in the fact that freedom and democracy are values for all time.

Mr President, I should just like to say two things: firstly, we all need to draw on the things that have been said; and secondly, that we realise when we are playing into the hands of those of whom we are so critical, by making noise while others are talking.

Mr President, we all in fact need to know who is playing into the hands of whom, given that in this democratic Parliament words are what count above all.

We democrats cannot prevent the terrorists from murdering us, but we can and must stop them from insulting us, and both democrats and freedom fighters have been insulted here.

Mr President, over and above the dialogue with the perpetrators of violence, over and above the rejection of all terrorism, a rejection with which we wholeheartedly agree, I believe that there is something fundamental lacking in Spain, and that is dialogue between the Basque Government and the Spanish Government, dialogue between the Partido Popular (PP), the Socialists (PSOE), the Basque Nationalist Party (PNV) and Eusko Alkartasuna, the latter two of which are both governing parties in the Basque Country.

Our decision not to sign this declaration is not the result of the fact that there is no dialogue with the terrorists, a position we understand, it is rather because there is no dialogue between the democrats which, over and above the cruelty of the killing, is the fundamental problem.

Parliament needs to facilitate dialogue between the democrats.

The President of my country, Galicia, once said that Europe no longer constituted an international affair and Mr Mayor Oreja said that he did not want international mediators.

I stand by these two statements made by the Partido Popular party and make the point that Europe is no longer an international affair in our view and Parliament must mediate politically, not between the terrorists and the government, but between the Basque Government and the Spanish Government, between the PP and the PSOE and the PVN-EA, as this is what is presently lacking in Spain, over and above the terrorist violence.

Ladies and gentlemen, this is an extremely sensitive issue.

If we return to the procedure, I should like to give the floor to Mr Gorostiaga first.

I wanted to end the debate a moment ago, but given the nature of the topic, I am being indulgent, yet I also have to be neutral.

I would request the next speakers, if they want to raise a procedural point, to keep it extremely brief, and I would ask the honourable Members to remain as calm as possible.

I shall now give Mr Gorostiaga the floor on a procedural motion.

Mr President, that honours you greatly.

You are really democratic because you accept free speech.

It is not the problem really; these people do not accept that there is another possibility: namely that the Basque Country has the right to its own identity in Europe.

That is what is impossible for the Spanish democrats to accept.

Mr President, I am now in a position to provide Parliament with more details.

The local councillor of the governing Partido Popular party, José Luis Ruiz Casado, was firstly shot in the back of the head and, on falling to the ground, was finished off by his killers.

As I said before, Mr Nogueira, a person may choose which side of the fence to sit on, but he later cannot seek futile excuses to justify his decision.

Mr Gorostiaga, in the name of this freedom of expression that you cite, can you look me in the eyes and assure me that neither myself nor my family are under threat from ETA for using this freedom of expression here in Parliament?

Can you honestly assure me of that, Mr Gorostiaga?

I should like to thank the Council and Commission for their input.

The next item is the joint debate on the oral questions:

(B5-0534/00) by Mrs Ludford, on behalf of the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs, to the Council on the European Union' s stance, on the World Conference of 2001 against racism;

(B5-0536/00) by Mrs Schroedter, on behalf of the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance, to the Commission, on racism in East Germany;

(B5-0537/00) by Mrs Kaufmann and Mr Wurtz, on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left/Nordic Green Left, to the Commission, on right-wing extremist violence in Germany.

Mr President, there must be a common and effective EU contribution to the success of the UN World Conference Against Racism next year and its European preparatory conference next month.

The EU has a human rights duty and competence to make all different, all equal, a reality.

It can and must forcefully tackle race discrimination and xenophobia making the EU a world leader in the celebration of multicultural and ethnic diversity.

Let us do it with wholehearted political conviction, not just as a diplomatic exercise.

This question and motion outlines ways in which racism must be documented and prevented and sanctions implemented.

Getting effective sanctions means firstly exploiting EU powers for anti-discrimination laws and agreeing the Article 13 Race Directive in record time sent the right signal of determination.

Effectiveness also means stepping up intergovernmental police and judicial cooperation under Article 29 of the EU Treaty and ways to do that are explored here.

We want to hear that the Member States will sign Protocol No 12 of the European Convention on Human Rights which makes discrimination a direct infringement of the convention on the occasion of the convention' s fiftieth anniversary in November.

Other Members and Groups with many helpful amendments which I will accept, but there are some I cannot accept.

Firstly, I regret that the opportunity has been taken to identify specific countries and parties as especially bad e.g. Amendments Nos 1, 3, 5 and 6.

The trouble with singling out some countries but not others is that you do not make a comprehensive assessment.

I therefore appeal to the sponsors of these amendments to consider withdrawing them.

In particular I would appeal to Mr Ford to withdraw his Amendment No 1 even if I have sympathy with it since it would be a pity if a motion on these very important European and world conferences were derailed over Austria.

Mr President, scarcely a day goes by without a news report of right-wing extremist acts in central Germany.

Citizens' initiatives, various religious denominations and other social groupings have been warning against right-wing extremism for years.

It is there in the East and in the West, even though the acts are perpetrated by a minority.

In the East, right-wing groups no longer regard themselves as a minority, but believe they hold centre stage in society, and they have cult status among young people.

Silence breeds consent right across the social divide, which means there are certain zones in EU cities where the right wing holds sway and not the state.

There may well be various reasons as to why this is so, e.g. people were brought up in a totalitarian state, many people in the East suffer from a lack of self-esteem, there is high unemployment, and young people feel they have no future prospects, but we must not dwell on these explanations and instead, take action at long last.

A Europe founded on the inviolability of human dignity and which guarantees freedom of movement, must take a zero tolerance line with right-wing violence.

So it is time to break our silence over the right-wing violence that has become an everyday occurrence in parts of the European Union, even if we stand accused of running down our own countries.

We need a tolerant government and the pro-active financial support of local groups and players, and of those who have the courage to stand up for their beliefs.

Europe must be seen to fly the flag on this issue.

It must provide these groups with outside support, so as to encourage them to continue to stand up for their own convictions against the right wing.

Mr President, in response to an inquiry from the PDS Group in the Bundestag, the German Government revealed that in 1999, a total of 2031 right-wing extremist and anti-Semitic criminal offences were committed in Germany.

The well-known German newspaper 'Der Tagesspiegel' records that there have been 93 murders with a right-wing extremist background over the past ten years.

Being of DDR origin, the developments in eastern Germany are of course particularly hard for me to bear.

There are undoubtedly underlying reasons, stemming from the way society was in the DDR; in particular the after-effects of authoritarian structures and the weakness of civil society in eastern Germany.

But there are just as many reasons that have to do with the developments that have taken place over the last ten years, for example the dissociation of economic and social development in eastern Germany from that in the former Bundesländer, the lack of respect for East Germans' curriculum vitaes and their experience, and the lack of rigour in the debate on right-wing extremism past and present.

Long-established right-wing extremist parties and organisations are transferring their infrastructure, organisational set-ups and funds from the old Bundesländer to the new Bundesländer on a massive scale.

The social polarisation of society, state withdrawal from social and educational establishments and the increasingly fierce competition within the labour market, provide a fertile breeding ground for racism and xenophobia.

The feeling of helplessness that grips so many people in the face of socially and culturally destructive global competition, and the suppression of politics and democracy in favour of profit-making business interests.

A policy of rhetoric, underpinned by nationalism, which uses immigration as a point of departure for election campaigns, will smooth the way for racism and xenophobia.

The European Union' s restrictive immigration and asylum policy, the lack of transparency, and citizens' involvement, are contributory factors.

The first thing we need though, is for there to be rigorous stigmatisation of racist and right-wing extremist views, secondly, the EU and its Member States must make their immigration and asylum policies more acceptance and integration-orientated, thirdly, we need an active employment and social policy, particularly for young people, and fourthly, we need a classical education policy that instils tolerance and considers cultural and ethnic diversity to be enriching.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I should like to answer Baroness Ludford' s question point by point.

The Council and the Presidency attach great importance to the European Conference against racism "All Different, All Equal" which will be held in Strasbourg between 11 and 13 October 2000, in preparation for the 2001 UN World Conference Against Racism.

In this context, the Presidency is sparing no effort to achieve the utmost cooperation and coordination between the Member States of the European Union in the preparations for the conference in Strasbourg.

There is already very active coordination of efforts between Member States, in addition to the many preparatory meetings which have taken place.

At this stage, the Council does not, at this European Conference in Strasbourg, intend to present a position common to the fifteen Member States, according to the terms of Article 34(2).

I think it is important, however, that the coordination between the European Union Member States should continue in order to avoid a situation where they are expressing divergent views on the various issues raised.

The Council does intend, and I must stress this, to present a common position at the World Conference which is due to be held next year in South Africa, and work on finalising this common position has already been set in motion.

In order to coordinate their positions ready for the European Conference, the Member Sates will, of course, take account of the very useful recommendations given in the document provided by the Commission departments on 17 April.

As to the resources to be implemented in order to ensure maximum synergy between the work carried out in this area by, on the one hand, the United Nations High Commissioner's Office for Human Rights and, on the other, the Council of Europe' s European Commission against Racism and Intolerance, but also the European Monitoring Centre for Racism and Xenophobia, I would like to remind Baroness Ludford that, on 21 December 1998, the Council adopted a decision relating to the conclusion of an agreement for the purpose of establishing close cooperation between the Council of Europe and the European Monitoring Centre, and that the cooperation between these two institutions has actually been very fruitful.

Moreover, research is underway into how to establish closer links between the High Commissioner' s Office and the European Monitoring Centre for Racism and Xenophobia.

I should, further, like to point out that on 21 June 2000, the Council directive was adopted, implementing the principle of equal treatment of persons irrespective of racial or ethnic origin.

Because of the duplication that now exists between this directive and the proposal for a directive on the creation of a general framework promoting equal treatment in employment and work - the directive on discrimination - racial discrimination was withdrawn from its scope, but let me remind you that the scope of this proposal for a directive is a great deal more limited than that of the directive previously adopted, which covers not only the sectors of employment and work but also social protection, welfare benefits and education, as well as access to goods and services and the provision of goods and services.

Next, work on the Community Action Programme to combat discrimination is well underway within the Council and I can safely state today that, if the European Parliament issues its opinion during its first part-session in October, the Council will be in a position to adopt a political agreement on this text on 17 October, so that the text could be adopted before the end of the French Presidency, enabling the programme to be launched, as anticipated, on 1 January 2001.

Finally, on the subject of the 1996 Joint Action concerning action to combat racism and xenophobia, in May 1998 the Council examined a report on Member States' compliance with the obligations upon them under the Joint Action and decided that the implementation of this Joint Action should be re-examined in 2000.

Let me point out that the Presidency is currently making arrangements for this review which will assist the Council in assessing the overall effectiveness of the Joint Action and in ascertaining which features need strengthening.

I hope, Baroness, that I have given as full an answer as possible.

Mr President, there were two monsters in Ancient Greek mythology which killed and swallowed people, Scylla and Charybdis.

The two monsters in Europe today are terrorism and racism.

And these, unfortunately, are the subject of our debate today.

Odysseus overcame both monsters, but he needed ingenuity, persistence and courage.

Today, the political, democratic leadership of Europe has to play the role of Odysseus.

Sixty years ago, we lived through one of the worst wars in the history of mankind.

The idea behind the European Union was to create institutions which would guarantee peace and significant steps were taken in the years which followed.

Unfortunately, the clouds of racism are still hovering over Europe.

There are numerous dimensions to the fight against racism at European level.

One such dimension is the EU' s basic policy of deepening its policies, i.e. strengthening social cohesion in Europe and ironing out differences, and another is its enlargement policy, i.e. strengthening countries which have problems.

As far as anti-racist policies in particular are concerned, I should like to refer to quite specific policies and measures.

In 1996, the Council approved a joint action on judicial cooperation between Member States on questions of racism.

We are about to enter the second stage of this joint action.

The Treaty of Amsterdam is a really important weapon in Europe' s institutional arsenal.

Articles 29 and 13 allow us to adopt quite specific policies.

Article 29 allows us to combat racism and xenophobia by cooperating in the area of justice and security, in order to create a single area of freedom and justice.

In Tampere, the policy for measures in this sector was evaluated and decided and we are now moving more towards measures relating to this sort of crime via the Internet.

Secondly, two directives have been proposed on the basis of Article 13; the directive on racial discrimination was voted through by the European Parliament and the Council in record time, a mere six months, and is now part of European legislation.

The purpose of the second directive is to combat all forms of discrimination in the workplace and this will be debated during the French Presidency.

Of course, laws alone are never enough, which is why the Commission has proposed an anti-discrimination programme which allows governments, non-governmental organisations and local authorities to work together on innovative policies and to exchange best practices in the fight against racism.

The European monitoring centre in Vienna is an important institution, the purpose of which is to provide objective, reliable, comparable data on racism, xenophobia and anti-Semitism and to act as a basic design tool at both European and national level.

The monitoring centre has already drawn up studies on the extent of racism and on manifestations of racism, xenophobia and anti-Semitism in various Member States, in order to analyse their causes, repercussions and results and has examined examples of good practices which are working in certain Member States.

The monitoring centre is setting up a coordinated network of non-governmental organisations and organisations which can work together at European level in order to address questions of xenophobia.

Similarly, it can make recommendations to the Community and the Member States in connection with policies which should be pursued and it has already been working with the German Government.

Finally, the Strasbourg conference is a very important event.

The Commission is also involved from the point of view of theoretical and political proposals.

We have already submitted two documents incorporating all the experience and proposals on how to combat racism at Community level, together with our experience in matters of education, training, research and policy for young people in order to address these matters.

There is financial support for the conference as regards non-governmental organisations because we believe that they can play an important role, over and above the role of governments and, of course, we are negotiating for support for the involvement of non-governmental organisations in the regional conferences to be held in Chile, Senegal and Iran.

Honourable Members, we must never forget that the European Union was constructed in order to prevent a recurrence of the racist atrocities which we lived through 60 years ago.

Policy is based, at European level, on an institutional arsenal which we strengthened with the Treaty of Amsterdam but in which there is still room for further effort, by creating structures to study and analyse this phenomenon and support governments, by supporting a European network between various agencies so that they can increase public awareness and, of course, by exchanging and supporting national policies on education, the mass media, policies for young people and information at national level.

However, we must say, and this is important, that all these policies, this entire philosophy is based on one principle: zero tolerance in Europe towards racism and zero tolerance of the reason for any operation based on racism.

Mr President, racism is indeed a scourge affecting our society.

It is even one of the most appalling human failings, and no one has a monopoly on it.

Often, it is the product of fear, ignorance, foolishness and selfishness, but also of institutional cowardice.

If a society wishes to call itself truly civilised, it has a duty to track down, prohibit, punish and eradicate racism by means of education and prosecution.

Europe wishes to be a civilised society, and has the opportunity every day to show that it is.

Parliament is required to give an opinion on the European Union' s position at the World Conference Against Racism.

Our position must be clear, intelligible and specific.

Our position must be clear, without going into unnecessary details.

Personally, I am all in favour of brief texts.

It must be up-to-date, i.e. it must take account of the new means of communications which can also be used as media for the expression of racist views.

Our position must be intelligible. That is to say, it must be structured around the major key ideas establishing a method: the identification of racism, particularly with the aid of our partners, the NGOs or our own monitoring centres, the punishment of racism, with the idea of zero tolerance and, of course, the prevention of racism.

Our position must be specific. That is to say, beyond the universal value of the fight against racism, there must be a specifically European message, for, let us be clear about this, Europe has often been the home of racism.

We can, moreover, even see the revival of racism in some European Union countries.

In such instances we have a duty to remember and a duty to be vigilant.

Our message must be an ambitious one.

We must be a role model.

As the Commissioner pointed out, we do not lack the resources to combat discrimination or racism in general.

We are currently drawing up a Charter of Fundamental Rights, the first article of which prioritises human dignity.

That, I believe, is the reason why the PPE has become involved in framing this text.

We want to ensure that it is rid of all the pointlessly contentious dross to do with the current situation and free of any additions which do not contribute to the formulation of the text.

In this, as the Commission, the Council of Ministers and Parliament, we have a shared responsibility and we want to be very scrupulous about this common approach, as Europe' s credibility, at this World Conference Against Racism, will depend, above all, on our assessment of the situation and on how credible we are on our own territory.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I think that this debate serves as a timely continuation of the debate we held in Parliament first thing this morning on the issue of terrorism in Spain.

Today we learned of the death, very near to where I live, of another person who worked of his own free will in the world of politics: a local councillor.

I say that this debate is a timely continuation of this morning' s debate because, as John Hume has so often reminded us in Parliament, all conflicts are linked to the notion of difference, all conflicts focus on what we do not accept in others.

John Hume has also reminded us on many occasions in Parliament that the European Union is and must continue to be an example of conflict resolution.

One could say that the European Union today is the practical expression of the exact opposite to the notions of terrorism and racism.

This is why I believe that Europe has to go to the World Conference Against Racism having adopted a strong and common position, a position that has been tried and tested on other occasions, the first of which was the application in the European Union of the United Nations Convention of 1965.

However, Mr President, I think there is another, more important issue that we must tackle without delay.

We cannot allow the radicals in Spain - in El Ejido - in Italy, Germany or Austria to take the initiative in this field.

We must talk to the people of Europe and we must - as has been achieved in the directive against discrimination - make progress on all of the other objectives of the Tampere European Council.

Lastly, I should like to congratulate Baroness Ludford on her report and let her know that we intend to seriously examine its proposals.

We have to accept that these days Europe is a more pluralistic place than it used to be and we must let the world know that we are pleased that this is the case.

Mr President, 'They died because they looked different, thought differently and lived a different kind of life.' So read the title of an article in a daily newspaper on right-wing extremist violence in Germany.

I do not intend to recount how many times Jewish cemeteries have suffered arson attacks and desecration, or describe to you the various racist attacks that have taken place.

Racism in Germany and in Europe constitutes one of the greatest challenges our society has to overcome.

Not only does racism put the minorities living amongst us at risk, it also jeopardises the values our societies were founded on after dreadful experiences.

The European Union is the product of this development.

We can only welcome the fact that the United Nations have seized the initiative and will hold a World Conference Against Racism next year.

We must make use of this opportunity and make a clear European contribution to this conference.

I very much regret that my colleagues from Germany are not present in the Chamber at the moment to join me in sending out the message that racism does not stand a chance, either in Germany or Europe.

Mr President, from the racial persecution in El Ejido, in Spain, to the murder of Mozambicans in East Germany, everywhere incidents of racist violence are inflaming passions in the heart of Europe.

We often condemn the perpetrators of such violence.

I think it is high time that we pointed the finger at the people who provide the ideological weapons to arm them, the soundbites.

As we know, the parties of the extreme right build themselves up by exploiting social problems, job insecurity and unemployment.

This is what we must fight, and we must also, where necessary, combat the spineless consensus between traditional political parties, on the left wing as well as the right, which helps gain them more sympathisers.

As you ought to know, the extreme right gets into power only by exploiting and stressing our weaknesses, the areas we neglect.

All those who repeat their words and their ideas are therefore giving them credibility, and all those who think they can moderate them by involving them in public affairs are making them commonplace.

It is not possible to understand the strategy of the parties of the extreme right by looking only at their hatred of foreigners. Instead one must look at their overall social programme, their homophobic utterances, and their anti-cultural attitude.

It then becomes clear that their strategy is one of homophobic statements, attacks on culture and on workers' rights, opposing the right to strike, opposing the self-determination of workers.

We should also avoid the situation of women being banished from the world of work due to the establishment of a 'wage' for mothers, as we have seen recently.

The only possible response is a hardline attitude.

We have only succeeded in combating the Front National effectively in France because we never had any government alliance.

In Europe, we must make massive investments in education, prevention and combating job insecurity, and we must reaffirm the fact that non-European residents have the same rights as European residents.

I shall conclude by thanking Commissioner Diamantopoulou for making the comparison between terrorism and racism, because I consider that it is an attack on the physical dignity of persons, and as such is intolerable.

The Europe of tolerance and opposition to hatred versus the Europe of violence and indifference: this is what is at stake at the conference.

Mr President, this is a valuable report, but it remains to be seen whether it will actually be followed up by those responsible.

It is valuable, although there are some omissions: for example, there is no mention of one form of institutional racism, the denial of the right of self-determination of peoples.

Sadly, the European Union has much to learn in this area: it has conferred the status of candidate country on Turkey, which denies this right, in the same way, moreover, that China denies this right to Tibet, and yet the whole world is in favour of improving relations with China for economic reasons.

In relation to this report, I would like to focus particularly on Amendment No 6 - which I hope will be rejected - which cites the political movement to which I belong as a racist party.

Now, there are very strict laws against racism in Italy.

The judiciary is by no means lenient towards my political movement: our secretary has been convicted on several occasions and prosecuted a number of times, but never for racism. The party leaders, and I myself, are under investigation on grounds of separatism, which is punishable by imprisonment, but no member of my movement has been either convicted or brought to trial for racism or acts of violence.

I therefore do not understand why we are being accused of racism.

I belong to the Lega Nord, not to Mr Haider' s movement, and I therefore fail to understand why the two should be confused.

I reiterate: in Italy, my movement is not currently arraigned on charges of racism and has never been convicted of racism in the past, and I therefore fiercely reject this accusation.

The statements of those jokers who persist, year in, year out, in asserting to the contrary, are pure fabrication.

Mr President, last Friday, the German Lower House discussed adopting a more hard-line approach in order to fight right-wing extremism at home.

This was an opportune debate at the appropriate level.

The spokesperson of the Greens, and as such a fellow member of the party of Mrs Schroedter, who submitted the oral questions, argued on that occasion that there are no easy solutions for combating right-wing extremism.

However, to him, the many initiatives against right-wing extremism from the citizens in the new federal states offer a ray of hope.

This Green representative sounds all in all less gloomy and less alarming than his colleague within our own EP ranks.

In saying that, I have no intention of playing down the genuine concerns of Mrs Schroedter with regard to society' s current aversion to foreigners, if not downright xenophobia in the east of Germany.

Considerably more East Germans than West Germans seem to think that too many foreigners are residing within their own territory and even feel exploited by this group.

A remarkable state of affairs, given the sobering fact that hardly any foreigners live in East Germany.

They make up between 1 and 2.5% of the population over there, according to a recent German press source.

It seems logical that this paradox is very much playing on the minds of the Germans.

It is exactly this crucial factor at home that I miss in Mrs Schroedter' s written introduction to her questions.

By way of background to racist violence in the new federal states, she quotes the "dramatically high percentage" of racist attitudes among the population, including the fact that racism is being elevated to "a kind of youth culture" .

This reasoning immediately brings to mind an obvious follow-up question: why do racism and right-wing extremism thrive within the territory of the former German Socialist state of workers and farmers, the GDR, of all places?

Our fellow MEP, André Brie provides a clear and plausible answer to this.

The writer of the Frankfurter Allgemeine' s leader quoted him approvingly yesterday as saying: 'One of a number of causes of right-wing violence is definitely to be found in the GDR.'

The German commentator, Lutz Rathenov, is bringing this viewpoint even more into focus: 'The GDR used to treat foreigners in a way which right-wing extremists would dream about these days.' This attitude is, to this day, leaving its mark in the east of the united Germany.

According to Rathenov, right-wing extremism cannot be eradicated as a localised and clearly identifiable evil.

Instead, a social norm has emerged for which the Federal Republic is ill prepared and for which it is partly to blame. Which West German negotiating partners of the GDR were concerned about the fate of the Vietnamese immigrant workers in East Germany at the time?

In the words of Rathenov, did it bother him as a Christian Socialist negotiator, that, in the event of their becoming pregnant, these Vietnamese women were forced to have abortions?

Overcoming the GDR complex within the Federal Republic, namely the feeling many East Germans have of being second-class citizens, will take time.

As an antidote to East German right-radicals, neo-nazis and skinheads, insider Lutz Rathenov is making an interesting proposal: 'There are places where young people should be sent abroad en masse for a couple of years.'

On a voluntary basis, I think Europe would be prepared to finance this proposal.

Mr President, unfortunately, a number of delegates here in this House are using this extremely important debate about racism to place themselves on an imaginary list of good and evil.

Whilst those of a left-wing persuasion define their position at a comfortable distance from Stalinism, Communism and left-wing extremism as if it were the most natural thing in the world, they are evidently incapable of recognising the difference between the right, right-wing extremism and fascism.

However, those who, as a matter of course, only ever lay responsibility for crimes against humanity at the door of their political opponents, are committing the fatal error of simply using those very crimes to absolve themselves of all blame.

No one in this House becomes an anti-fascist by denouncing their political opponents as fascists.

One cannot escape one' s own history and one' s own responsibility that easily.

Finally, a word to Mr Ford, who unleashed the customary tirade of hatred against Austria in his proposed amendment.

Perhaps next time he could get his political facts straight, because that is not how the European Council responded.

Austria still belongs to the European Council, and no one spoke to us on that occasion.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, what is this debate actually about?

Quite simply, it is about the difficult task of finding a position which the European Union, i.e. the European Parliament, can agree on as regards a strategy for dealing with racism, and then representing this position at the world conference.

The Commissioner has made constructive proposals on a sensitive issue, as has the author of the motion for a resolution, Mrs Ludford, and we will support them in this.

But this debate should never be misused for other purposes.

I am sorry to say that certain delegates have repeatedly done exactly that; for example there is one who only makes reference to one region in the fight against racism, thereby giving an exaggerated impression of the problems which exist on a European and worldwide scale.

Mr Ford defamed my country, Austria, in his statement.

He told me he had not read the Wise Men' s report, but that did not stop him from writing in his statement, with reference to the report of the Three Wise Men, that the problems of racism and xenophobia would endure.

Had he read the report, he would have found that that is patently untrue.

There are no problems there of the kind he describes.

On the contrary, the report registers a very positive response to the government, because it is pursuing successful counter-strategies, some of which go beyond the standards set by other EU countries.

I have here motions for resolutions that call, in general terms, for budgetary lines to be increased, without saying to what end, and without specifying which activities are to be the beneficiaries of this funding.

Some of the demands are excessive, such as those calling for the level of immigration to be increased, and for illegal entrants to the Union to be placed on an equal legal footing.

These are all things that work people into a state of panic, given the sensitivity of the issue.

What we really need is a plan for tackling the root causes, immigration policy strategies that take account of integration capacity, and of an individual Member State' s absorption capacity, also strategies leading to a common asylum policy which help refugees whilst tackling abuse, and measures promoting integration.

We ought not to be so superficial and submissive in our dealings with this issue.

The matter is far too serious for that.

As I see it, there is a great deal to be done, and those who want to work constructively on this issue are invited to take the proposals put forward by Commissioner Diamantopoulou and Mrs Ludford as their true example, and to disregard, or give a wide berth to unsuitable debates in plenary session, with a view to making progress in this area.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, Mr Sichrovsky has just given us some food for thought.

It is true that being on the left does not make you proof against a fascist mindset.

Therefore it is absolutely true that the left must reflect on their past too, as must the right.

But the object of the exercise today is for the democrats to give thought to the tasks they face here and now.

The task facing the democratic parties at present, be they in East Germany, in your country, in Italy or in Spain - El Ejido to name but one - is how to actually mobilise the silent majority of people who stand idly by and watch as defenceless, helpless people are driven through the streets and murdered.

How do we mobilise this majority?

The question we must ask ourselves is this, 'Why are five thousand people in my homeland - which is North Rhine Westphalia in Germany - prepared to take to the streets in protest against a decree on fighting dogs, but only 300 turn out to protest against right-wing extremism?'

That is the question we must ask ourselves.

I will tell you something, Mr Sichrovsky, you represent the Freedom Party.

People who criticise your party are not disparaging Austria as a whole.

I respect the Austrian people but I despise the racists in your party - let there be no mistake about that - of whom you are one.

The same applies to you, Mr Pirker, in every sense.

Therefore, to recap: the point of these oral questions, and the statements made by Mrs Ludford, Mrs Schroedter and Mrs Kaufmann, is not to single out any old region in Europe and say 'that is where things are at their worst' .

We German delegates, coming as we do from a land notorious for its perpetrators of fascism, always find it hard to bear that something like this is going on in our country, of all places.

But anyone who believes that fascism is a German phenomenon inevitably plays down the fact that the problem is endemic to Europe.

Therefore I say again: this is a European battle.

Mr President, as a Radical and a European Federalist, an anti-fascist and an anti-communist, I put to you this question: which is worse in terms of racism: the programmes of extremist right-wing parties or the practical policies of European governments, which are prohibitionist and repressive on matters of immigration, drugs, new forms of employment and everything else?

Parliament has no trouble appeasing its conscience on this matter, making solemn declarations and financing useless initiatives and monitoring centres.

But racism should be fought by basing our societies on rights and freedoms, whereas Europe is growing into an anti-democratic, prohibitionist society which is repressive in all areas, with the result that it has become fearful to the point that it even wants to ban opinions and parties.

This is the road to ruin.

In the United States of America, where, in 2050, whites will be in a minority, there is an American Nazi party and there is a candidate for the American presidential elections from the Nazi party, but no one thinks of banning it, no one is afraid, because the weapons of democracy and freedom are being used to combat racism.

This is how racism must be fought, and this is how we must fight it in Europe.

Mr President, Mr Schulz called me a racist.

Thank you, Mr President, for giving me the opportunity to respond.

He described himself as a representative of a country notorious for its perpetrators of fascism.

I would never use such an expression, even though many members of my family were murdered during the Holocaust.

I would ask Mr Schulz, as a representative of the country notorious for its perpetrators of fascism - his own words - to cite just one, just one, racist comment that I have made in the course of my career in politics.

If he is unable to come up with one, then would he please apologise, not for criticising, but for vilifying my character.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I think we can safely say, from what we have heard this morning, that extremism and racism are two of the most important issues we have to deal with at present.

The past few months in particular have seen a whole spate of racially motivated criminal acts in Germany.

The events that took place in Dessau, Munich, Ludwigshafen, Düsseldorf are of such concern to us primarily because violent acts were committed against defenceless people with great indifference and coldbloodedness.

The fact that the crimes were committed in all these different places, however, shows that racism and right-wing extremism are not problems specific to East Germany, but are to be found throughout Germany, indeed throughout Europe.

It does not help matters though, Mrs Schroedter and also Mr Schulz, to want to concentrate on tackling this problem in the new German Länder, singling these regions out for attention.

It is true that the propaganda peddled by these groups, which have long been active in the old Länder, has, I regret to say, fallen on fertile ground in the new Länder in recent years, and that we undoubtedly need to take appropriate action.

But hysteria makes for a poor counsellor.

What we need is to show a united front in the fight against violence, but also to have faith and confidence in the ability of state and society to rid us of this monster.

It is in no one' s interests to assert that over 10% of people in the new Bundesländer are of a racist disposition, or to disparage them as such.

16 million citizens cannot, and will not, allow themselves to be labelled as such all because of the activities of an extremist minority.

Our citizens have done nothing to deserve this, and nor, more to the point, have our young people, the vast majority of whom are tolerant and open-minded.

I would expressly like to draw attention to the various actions undertaken by the inhabitants of the new Bundesländer over the past few weeks and months, which have demonstrated repeatedly that they feel a great deal of solidarity with the victims of these crimes, and that we will not tolerate xenophobic machinations and acts of violence in our country.

Mr President, there has been some interest in my commitment to Austria.

I have to say to Mr Pirker that I have been interested in what has been happening in Austria for some time.

I was there in 1986 protesting about Mr Haider' s discrimination against the Slovene speaking minority in Corinthia.

While I accept, of course, that individual members of the Freedom Party may well be impeccable and upstanding individuals, there is a phrase that those that lie down with dogs get fleas.

So it may be unfortunate that some people who have chosen particular political parties get labelled in that way but it is their own ultimate responsibility.

Can I congratulate Baroness Ludford on her report.

She has put a great deal of work into it.

I have to say, however, and it is not her fault, that there are sins of omission as far as I am concerned.

Commissioner Diamantopoulou made the point very clearly that there are two monsters facing us here in Europe, terrorism and racism.

We have to recognise that those monsters exist and I am not sure that we do in this particular resolution.

There is still a view that there is not really any racism in Europe.

If there is any racism, it is fairly small and, if it does exist, it is the fault of the victims.

We have had in East Germany the assassination of a Mozambique man, attacks on migrant workers in Spain, an attack on a Jewish professor in Italy, and the continued rise of racism within football that was presented to us yesterday by those people who are campaigning around the " Show racism the red card" slogan.

We have had the recent condemnation of a terrorist bomber in the United Kingdom, David Copeland, who killed gay people and non-gay people in a gay bar and, of course, we have had the effective sacking of Professor Pelinka from the Observatory by the Austrian Government.

If Europe wishes to play a central role in the World Conference Against Racism it has to start seeing itself as others see it rather than as we would like to be.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I come from Leipzig, from East Germany that is.

I have seen often enough how right-wing extremists have harassed - or attempted to harass - foreigners, or even those who hold different beliefs.

But I have also seen the other side, and how courageous men and women have defended themselves.

It is wrong to picture East Germany as being predominantly right-wing extremist in its leanings.

The vast majority of people are open-minded and tolerant, and an ever-increasing number of them are prepared to nail their colours to the mast.

I believe it is also wrong to maintain that the young people are right-wing extremists.

The issue is more complex than that, for although, Mrs Schroedter, it may be precisely these young people that grab the headlines, they do live with their parents and exist within a social sphere.

In other words, if we want to solve this problem then we must do more to educate them politically and to communicate values to them, and more still to encourage them to stand up for their beliefs.

Over the past few weeks, the German Government has made an additional DM 70 million available for just such projects.

I feel that is a very important sign.

Likewise, for me personally, the fact that consideration is being given to banning the NPD (National Democratic Party of Germany) sends out a very important social signal.

We Germans will not submit to being terrorised by a minority.

It is our democracy that is being put to the test here.

Speaking as a European, I beseech you not to write East Germany off as a region.

I myself, together with many other people throughout Germany, condemn right-wing extremism and xenophobia, and we need the support of the rest of Europe in our fight against it.

Mr President, allow me to start, in this highly topical debate, by supporting what Mr Sylla said yesterday before the order of business, i.e. that we must begin by combating manifestations of racism here in this House and that we must stamp out the racist language to which the far right wing of Parliament frequently resorts.

However, whether some of us like it or not, Europe is already a multiracial and multicultural continent and no racist is going to stop people intermingling and intermarrying.

Unfortunately, the ideologies to which millions of human lives were sacrificed are again taking centre stage.

In fact, today, they are even worse, because apart from the basic racist ideology, they include religion and culture and propagandise racial, linguistic and religious purity together with genuine cultural identity.

The sad thing is that the proponents of racial violence are young people up to the age of 20, most of whom have not completed their education or who do not have a profession.

The package of measures which Commissioner Diamantopoulou has already presented is, in my view, an integrated proposal and may provide a convincing response to the racism and xenophobia which we are witnessing today in the European Union.

That the state and political leaders have a responsibility goes without saying.

However, the media still have an important role to play by promoting the variety and richness of contemporary multiracial and multicultural society and, instead of dramatising and distinguishing crime by immigrants from crime in general, could present the positive contribution made by immigrants.

We also need to take immediate action to include the consequences of and the fight against racism in school curricula and in teacher training courses.

We also need to mobilise political circles in the way suggested by the Commissioner and other honourable Members.

Mr President, I asked to speak out of turn because I feel that I have to set the record straight.

Europe is based on principles of freedom, justice and respect for human rights and it is not entitled to discounts either internally or with its negotiating partners, still less for commercial or economic reasons.

I should therefore like to make it clear that, as far as Turkey' s candidature is concerned, the criteria have been laid down quite clearly.

Negotiations on Turkey' s candidature will only commence once we feel that it meets the Copenhagen criteria.

Mr President, honourable Members, this debate is about fighting crime - organised crime to be precise - which is now responsible for at least one in four of all crimes, and which makes huge profits from drug crimes, trafficking in human beings, insurance and credit card fraud, and from other activities.

These ill-gotten gains are laundered and go into circulation in the legal economy.

In so doing, they undermine our national economies, and in view of corruption, also erode our social systems and states.

We therefore need to muster all our resources and bring all our strategies into play, so that we are appropriately equipped in our fight against organised crime.

So we need these measures, and this proposed plan of action has special significance, because it sends out a signal to the people of Europe that Europe is not just an economic and currency union, but in the interests of its people and the Member States, it must also be built up into a union of security.

An action plan of this kind will undoubtedly help to achieve this objective.

But we must take the necessary European rules of the game into account when putting plans of this kind into practice.

That is what happened with this action plan, and so I submitted a parliamentary question back in the spring, at the time of the Portuguese Presidency, which has applied itself very diligently to this issue, but has failed to play by the rules.

Indeed the Presidency promised that Parliament would deal with the action plan, the opinion would be awaited and then incorporated into the action plan, and only then would the action plan be put into practice.

The erstwhile Portuguese Presidency failed to keep its promise and this led to the question being asked that we are dealing with today.

The criticism is justified, for more reason than one.

Firstly, because the failure to involve Parliament has taken us a step backwards, not just to the days before the Treaty of Amsterdam, but long before the Treaty of Maastricht, because according to Chapter 6, Parliament must be involved in every case.

But even the Treaty of Amsterdam demands openness and transparency and so, as a body representing the interests of the citizens, Parliament should have played a full part in the proceedings, as per the undertaking it received here from the Presidency at the beginning. Another broken promise.

The question I would like to ask the French Presidency is how it intends to handle this, i.e. whether it will involve Parliament in the framing of long-term strategies, as provided for by the Treaty, await our opinion and then develop strategies that are in keeping with Parliament' s proposals.

However, the action plan content has also been subject to criticism, which has to do with the fact that recommendations have been drafted and numbered from 1 to 5 in order of priority.

Yet these lists of priorities have not been drawn up solely on the basis of urgency and absolute necessity, but very often, I regret to say, on the basis of feasibility, and I will give you an example.

The freezing, or confiscation, of the ill-gotten gains of organised crime was only given a priority rating of 3, even though we all know that money is the driving force behind organised crime, and so the freezing, or confiscation, of these assets should have been given a priority rating of 1.

There are other examples I could mention.

I therefore call upon the French Council Presidency to rethink this list of priorities and to reorganise it in terms of real priorities, rather than ranking the objectives according to how difficult they will be to accomplish.

We also feel that we need to develop preventive measures, and we have submitted concrete proposals to this end.

They range from reviewing legislation in terms of the impact it has on preventing organised crime, to preventive measures aimed at deploying technical instruments too, with a view to nipping organised crime in the bud.

For example, these include higher security standards for credit cards or electronic immobilisers for cars.

So what we are talking about is a whole host of concrete proposals, and as a Parliament we are aiming firstly, to be fully involved in the process, and, secondly, for our proposals to be incorporated into the action plans, i.e. the long-term strategies.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the Council of course shares the view that it is important to ensure a wide exchange of views and information and maintain consultation between the institutions of the European Union.

The Presidency has also committed itself to involving Parliament to a greater extent in the work undertaken in the field of justice and home affairs, in particular by means of regular participation in the meetings of your parliamentary Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs.

The Council is bound, nonetheless, to comply with the terms of the Treaty.

The legal framework does not, in fact, allow it to consult Parliament on strategy papers currently being studied within the offices of the Council.

On the other hand, as you know, on 21 December 1999, the Council sent Parliament the strategy document on organised crime drawn up under the Finnish Presidency, expressly specifying that it wished to keep Parliament informed right from the start of discussions on this document.

What is more, at the meetings of the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs, the Portuguese Presidency informed Parliament of the work being carried out and of the reasons why the Council deemed it urgent to continue with the procedure for the adoption of the strategy document.

In particular, the Presidency explained that the previous action programme, for 1997, had already expired and that the European Council had requested that it be followed up.

Ladies and gentlemen, the Council is not unaware that, in response to the strategy document, Parliament is currently working on a new document on organised crime.

We are pleased to see the work carried out by Parliament.

As in the case, moreover, of Parliament' s response to the 1997 action programme on organised crime, the Council fully intends to study your reports carefully during the implementation of its own strategy and to take the views expressed by Parliament into account.

In this respect, the Council suggests that Parliament give its opinion on the level of priority to be given to the various recommendations made in its document.

In accordance with the commitments made during the Portuguese Presidency, the Council will keep Parliament informed on a regular basis of the debates currently taking place in the field of justice and home affairs. It was indeed the Portuguese Presidency which demonstrated a clear intention, through its initiatives, to pay special attention within the European Union to the prevention of organised crime.

In this respect, the Council confirms that it will strictly apply the Treaty when consulting the European Parliament on any action resulting from an initiative of the Member States or the Commission.

Mr President, I should like to thank the French Presidency for its clear and unequivocal words and - I think I speak on behalf of the whole Parliament here - I welcome its concern on the matter, something that the Presidency-in-Office once again demonstrated today during the debate on terrorism.

Mr President, there is in fact one thing that the people of Europe are unable to comprehend, and that is why criminals in Europe enjoy all the advantages of the freedom of movement, whereas those who legitimately fight crime are hindered by the issue of borders.

This issue is also of concern to Parliament, as the representative of our citizens, which is why, ever since the start of this debate, Parliament has been acutely aware of the need to make progress in this area.

Mr President, the Treaty of Amsterdam marked the beginning of the so-called 'communitisation' of many policies, but not those relating to criminal matters in both procedural and substantive terms.

The reasons behind this are not always immediately obvious to the people of Europe: they are rooted in our legal cultures and in the differences between our legal cultures.

However, Mr President, over and above these deep-rooted differences lie the most deeply-rooted common principles which ultimately boil down to something as simple as the need for trust between Member States.

The construction of Europe is based on the mutual trust that exists between Member States and the mutual recognition of similar levels of protection regarding fundamental rights, legislation and basic principles.

This is why - and here I recall the ever enlightening and splendid words of Commissioner Vitorino who called for common definitions to be established in the field of organised crime and similar rules to be laid down regarding the sentences imposed and the time served - this is an issue that must be studied in the long term, as the idea of "vérité en deçà des Pyrénées, erreur au delà" [all that is truth this side of the Pyrenees, all that is falsehood beyond], cannot hold true.

We cannot afford such luxuries in this area.

In the meantime, Mr President, we are making progress in the area of trust and mutual recognition and the Council has submitted a proposal that is supported by the various Member States.

As we are in the process of reaching this last stage of development, we must firmly ensure that an order or resolution pronounced by a judge in a Member State is automatically recognised and implemented by another Member State.

In other words, an arrest warrant for a terrorist should take effect immediately without the need to go through the highly complex extradition process - which is still complicated between European States - so that the terrorist or criminal can be taken immediately to the State that wants them and where they have committed their crimes.

This, Mr President, is what we urge you to do and what we hope will soon become a reality.

Mr President, I should like to thank the French Presidency for its very clear statement.

Our priority in criminal matters is combating crime, particularly money laundering.

France' s request for a joint Council of Ministers for Justice, Home Affairs, Economic Affairs and Finance devoted to combating money laundering, was therefore extremely interesting.

Let me also draw your attention, at this point, to the Convention on Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters to combat organised crime, tabled by the French Presidency in order to remove the obstructions affecting the work of judges.

Studies indeed show that impressive amounts of criminal proceeds are amassed by organised crime and reinvested in the world economy.

In this way, criminal organisations infiltrate the economic fabric of states and can, if they so wish, destabilise our economies by taking control of commercial companies.

Legal and police cooperation is absolutely vital in the fight against organised crime, particularly the trafficking of human beings, the sexual exploitation of children, and money laundering.

The Member States must define common penalties and adopt a consistent overall policy.

We cannot, however, discuss penalties without discussing crime prevention, and clearly we must implement programmes for educational and information purposes, directed, in particular, at the citizens of our own States but also at the populations of third countries.

Criminal organisations can find themselves in a position of strength thanks to the financial operations they carry out in order to launder criminal proceeds.

The fight against organised crime is an important undertaking, where we must not fail.

The victims expect a great deal of us and this is a challenge we must accept.

The Europe we want to build is a Europe of rights.

One of these rights is the right to security for all.

Mr President, the Liberal Group believes - with all due respect to yourself, Minister - that the Council of Ministers is looking foolish once again.

Perhaps not according to the letter of the Treaty but certainly according to its spirit, Parliament must be involved in any proposed policy measure.

This is simply the spirit of the Treaty of Amsterdam and our rapporteur, Mr Pirker, was absolutely right to point this out.

I can perhaps interpret the Minister' s response as a promise that this kind of procedure, whereby the Council of Ministers decides upon a policy document without involving this Parliament beforehand, will not occur in future.

I understand why it is happening.

The presidency' s term is only six months and every presidency is keen to flex its political muscles.

However, this Parliament cannot accept this as an excuse for being kept in the dark.

I would now like to turn to European crime prevention.

The Liberal Group believes that, in addition to all kinds of practical measures which are included in the document, it is, in particular, high time that criminal prosecution was improved by means of European cooperation.

This does not appear to be happening.

I would like to take this opportunity to argue once again in favour of setting up a European public prosecution office.

Although this is required as a matter of urgency, it has not been provided for in this plan, nor has it been mentioned at Tampere or on the scoreboard.

In fact, the scoreboard, in the field of crime prevention, refers far too often to documents which Commissioner Vitorino is to issue, studies which are being carried out, guidance documents and such like.

Documents are not what we need to fight crime.

Instead we need to tackle crime head-on.

Mr President, it will take time to harmonise the penal systems.

Therefore, all the Member States must immediately harmonise the concept of international organised crime and introduce penalties against it.

Organised crime is more than terrorism, trafficking of dangerous drugs, abduction, arms trafficking, money laundering etc: now, more than ever, it includes the trafficking of human beings, who are sold and exploited like slaves, and the sexual exploitation of children.

In our quest to develop legislation which is common to all the Member States, and lays down penalties for international organised crime, there is a particularly urgent need to find a way of regulating the Internet, in order to prevent an information tool, created to bring men and cultures closer together, becoming increasingly used by organised crime as a means of communication and expansion.

In the face of the thousands of Internet sites with turnovers of millions of euros, which sell children and exploit them sexually, Parliament, the Commission and Council must think carefully.

For genuine freedom to exist, it must be regulated, for otherwise it becomes an abuse of power, and, in this sense, the organised crime of the underworld is much more powerful than governments or our speeches, which flow forth in abundance in defence of the weaker members of society but which have hitherto proved completely incapable of containing evil.

This is why we reiterate the need for the Member States to acknowledge the reality of international organised crime and to harmonise their penal codes in this specific field immediately.

This matter must also be included on the Nice agenda, for it is a subject which closely affects the citizen and is also urgent, both because the situation in the Member States has reached dramatic proportions - witness even this morning' s events and the extent of the bloodshed on European territory in recent weeks - and because, with enlargement on the horizon, there is an urgent need for a solution to be found to the problem of organised crime.

Mr President, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, first of all I should like to thank Mr Pirker for this excellent initiative and to express my support for the positions that he has already adopted. I should also like to congratulate the French Presidency on their statement to us.

I think that most of us recognise the need for greater coordination and closer cooperation between Member States on the issue of fighting the world of crime.

This action is a common responsibility, given its international dimension, as such criminal organisations generally operate across national borders because of the high degree of mobility they have and even take advantage of restrictions on jurisdiction, loopholes in the law, and of the differences between national administrative and criminal justice systems, exploiting the anomalies of the various systems.

Organised crime in the European Union has seen significant developments over the last decade, requiring action essentially in the areas of computer crime, crime involving trafficking in human beings, drugs and arms, terrorism, child pornography and money-laundering as well as corruption and fraud.

It is crucial for the European Union to adopt a harmonised definition of organised crime that covers all of these areas.

The fight against this type of crime therefore requires urgent action.

This is a fight which must engage us all and which must be able, specifically, to count on the participation of the European Parliament in defining the strategies to adopt and the priorities to set.

I would ask the honourable Members to sit down, because the debate has not yet finished; alternatively, if you wish to talk, please go outside, as it is actually quite difficult to hear what the speakers are saying.

The respect we owe them requires certain minimum conditions to be met so that they can speak and be heard.

Mr President, it is a matter of deep concern that, yet again, the European Parliament has not been consulted on the Council' s intended action plans for the prevention of and fight against organised crime.

The European citizens, who, every day, live through the drama of all forms of petty and serious crime - from international drug trafficking to the sexual exploitation of children, from the trafficking and exploitation of human beings to illegal immigration - who live in towns which are unsafe or even dangerous, would like to be able to express their opinions and to lay claim, democratically, through their representatives at the European Parliament, to their rights and priorities of security and the fight against crime.

Most importantly, Parliament should be able to give a voice to the defenceless, and I am referring to the many children who are victims of violence or sexual abuse and the many adolescents who are ensnared by drugs.

Clearly, the fight against the sexual exploitation of children and that against drugs - to quote but two examples - are genuinely extremely difficult tasks, but they are priority issues, and it is certainly not acceptable, as the Council advocates, for priority to be dictated by feasibility rather than urgency,

I have received one motion for a resolution pursuant to Rule 42(5) of the Rules of Procedure.

The vote will take place today at 11 a.m.

Mr President, I would ask you to turn your attention briefly to a letter which we received from Mr Balfe, on behalf of the College of Quaestors, in which, referring to the car-free day tomorrow in Brussels, he has requested the Brussels authorities make an exception for the area around the European Parliament. He would like to ensure that a limited number of cars are able to drive from here to Zaventem and to the railway stations, for example.

It is extremely easy to travel by rail from here to Zaventem, which is what we did last time with the Swedish delegation, or to travel to the station.

I would ask you to raise this matter and find out whether others are agreed on this proposal.

We, for our part, certainly are not.

I am sure the Quaestors have noted the point you have made.

Mr President, first of all I should like to say that I am astounded at the vote on Amendment No 16 because, as far as I was aware, it had been withdrawn, but, more especially, I should like to request that my report be referred back to committee pursuant to Rule 69(2).

Indeed, at the end of last night' s debate, the executive committee' s position seemed rather confused on many very specific points of our amendments.

We are therefore anxious to see the committee improve its proposal taking more amendments into account, yet we do not, however, wish to hold up proceedings, as we would like to see a vote during the next part-session in Strasbourg.

I am therefore requesting, Mr President, that my request for referral to committee be put to the vote.

Mr President, I would like to support the rapporteur' s motion.

We have given our utmost attention to this report in committee and feel that our proposed amendments substantially improve this regulation.

So far, the Commission has not seen fit to adopt these improvements.

I hope we will be able to reach an accommodation in the compromise negotiations, which we will then vote on in October, because no group wants a blockade.

We want this regulation but we want it with our improvements.

It is the old story: Article 37 provides the basis, we have no power of codecision and so we make sure that we influence the proceedings.

I hope the honourable Members will recognise this and give us their backing.

Mr President, on a point of order.

During the debate late last night there were at least ten speakers who all raised points very critical of the Commission.

I felt very sorry for Commissioner Nielson who had to respond as duty Commissioner and who read out about half a page prepared by Commissioner Liikanen.

Clearly this is very complex subject and Mr Nielson did not appear to really know what the Commission position was.

That is why we are now in this situation of sending this back to committee.

This a very unsatisfactory way of doing business.

It was like a dialogue of the deaf last night.

It is not a satisfactory way of proceeding for Members to be here late at night, making very critical points and receiving a non-response of this nature.

Report (A5-0253/2000) by Mrs Wallis on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market on a proposal for a Council regulation (EC) on jurisdiction and the recognition and enforcement of judgments in civil and commercial matters (COM(1999) 348 - C5-0169/1999 - 1999/0154(CNS))

Report (A5-0220/2000) by Mr Glase on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs on the Commission Communication on undeclared work (COM(1998) 219 - C4-0566/1998 - 1998/2082(COS))

Report (A5-0217/2000) by Mr J. Evans on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs on the competition rules relating to horizontal cooperation agreements (C5-0304/2000 - 2000/2154(COS))

Report (A5-0227/2000) by Mrs Ferrer on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation on communication from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament on complementarity between Community and Member State policies on development cooperation (COM(1999) 218 - C5-0179/1999 - 1999/2156(COS))

Motion for a resolution (B5-0766/2000) by Baroness Ludford on behalf of the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs on the European Union' s position at the 2001 World Conference Against Racism

Mr President, I propose that the words 'which have not done so' should be inserted after the words 'the Member States' , in that Italy, for example, already has stringent legislation against racism in place, and I am sure that absolutely nobody in my country would consider that it needs to be changed.

I do not feel that the request should be addressed to all the States in general: it should be addressed to those whose legislation falls short.

(Parliament accepted the oral amendment) On Amendment No 15

Mr President, to continue along the line of reasoning followed during the work on this draft resolution in committee, I would like to table an oral amendment. It is for Parliament to decide: either we insert the words 'and left-wing' between the words 'right-wing' and 'extremism' , or we remove the word 'right-wing' altogether, and simply refer to 'extremism' .

(More than twelve Members objected to the oral amendment; the President therefore declared it inadmissible)

Mr President, I requested the floor before just to say that Mrs Ludford has done a very good job as rapporteur for this report, which has been discussed in the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs in more than one meeting.

I would ask, nevertheless, that we please stick to what has already been discussed and to the list of votes.

Mr President, this protest from the left is unacceptable.

We have just seen that the left is in favour of left-wing extremism, for it voted against an oral amendment against left-wing terrorism and left-wing extremism.

Italy has the Red Brigades and Spain has ETA.

Now we can see that, in Europe, the left supports left-wing racism and is in favour of left-wing anti-Semitism!

These are all very interesting political games but the procedure is that we hold the debate and vote afterwards.

We do not hold a debate during the vote.

You are right to call these political games.

If the people objecting now really cared about racism, they would have come to the committee meetings and put down amendments.

Mr President, I would like to make the same proposal for Amendment No 16 as for Amendment No 15: to mention both sides of extremism or not to mention either.

Moreover, as I would not class myself as one of those who do not participate in committee work, I would like to remind the House that it was we who tabled the amendments and point out that we maintained a very balanced line in committee.

You could have made that oral amendment but we have already voted on that amendment.

I have asked for the floor on a point of order, Mr President, because I have been trying to request to be allowed to speak for half an hour now and, as usual, you only look at one side of Parliament and not the other at the expense of democracy.

My point of order is this: you said that we have voted, but what was written down was an oral amendment tabled by Mr Fiori.

If you or your officials do not follow the correct order you are an extremist - right-wing or left-wing, it does not matter - in any case nothing but an extremist!

And there is no democracy here!

That is a very interesting point of view.

Mr President, this is a plea for everyone to calm down a little on the subject of this debate on racism.

I know it is a subject that arouses great passion, but we are not talking about extremism here. This is a debate about racism.

Nowadays, the perpetuators of racist crimes and actions belong to the extreme right wing.

It would be another matter if the debate were about extremism.

So, for five minutes, let us calm down.

We know what we are here to discuss, so let us keep our tempers and let us get on with the debate.

Mr President, as representative of the Pensioners' Party in the Group of the European People' s Party and European Democrats, I voted for this report.

It is a report which is intended to assist developing countries in preserving the environment.

This is a fine aim which also concerns the less well-off and elderly people who live in developing countries.

The entire world has been focusing on consideration for the elderly in the past few days, with the Jubilee of the Elderly celebrated by Pope John Paul II, which greatly encouraged the little Pensioners' Party as it was an example of genuine interest and commitment shown towards the elderly throughout the whole world, including, in particular, those in developing countries.

While I wholeheartedly support Mr Wijkman' s report, particularly the budget allocation obtained through conciliation, I am concerned to see, firstly, that the significance of sustainable development has not been understood, and also that the environment need not necessarily be taken into account in all development projects for underprivileged countries.

For how is it possible to plan development time limits or strategies without seeing them in the context of environmental protection?

How can we even dissociate development from the environment?

Moreover, the conditions valid for the development strategies of Third World countries should also apply to the growth strategies of developed countries.

The advocates of untrammelled liberalism will surely not fail to see these environmental safeguards as further restrictions upon, or obstacles to, the difficult economic emergence of these underprivileged countries.

What, though, would be the point of an economic take-off which would destroy the environment of a country, sacrificing its ecological potential?

The cure would be worse than the disease.

The deceptive salve of a purely economic recovery would soon wear off, overtaken by the gangrene of spasms in the environmental arena, and thus the health arena, and ultimately, the social arena.

After sacrificing their ecological potential in attempts to achieve an economic take-off, once the first flush of the positive benefits had faded, such countries would find themselves even poorer than before, with even more limited development prospects.

The contradiction in terms, however, is patently obvious. Every day we can see examples illustrating the lesson that purely economic development could not possibly be sustainable.

It would be a flash in the pan, destined to burn itself out.

The very concept of development implies an extended period of time, the long term, and this concept of time implies the concept of the natural environment, the preservation of the human environment.

If, today, it is respected by this kind of civilisation and way of thinking, then, tomorrow, it will safeguard that of future generations.

Mr President, I voted for Mr Fernández Martín' s report because it is always a good thing when the European Union intervenes to assist the less-well off peoples of developing countries, although I would be happier if there were to be changes in European Union policy regarding aid in certain sectors to developing countries.

For example, a pensioner friend of mine, a joiner by trade, asked me why, "instead of giving all this money to those countries to preserve their tropical forests" , we did not "make people buy fewer bedrooms and less furniture made from wood the production of which entails cutting down tropical forests?" I agree with him.

In this way we might achieve more and spend less.

The Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance, on whose behalf I am speaking, completely supports the report by Mr Fernández Martín on the conservation and sustainable management of tropical forests and other forests in developing countries.

The Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance is pleased to see the increase in the budget allocated to protecting tropical forests.

In view of the alarming, relentless way they are being devastated, this sudden interest on the part of the European Union looks like a good start, but it is still quite a modest one considering the actual restoration requirements.

Until now, indeed, the only attention paid to tropical forests has been a mere selfish reflex on the part of Westerners anxious to safeguard the forests that are the lungs of our planet, in a last ditch attempt of our industrialised societies to bind the wounds, without considering the indigenous peoples living in and off these forest areas, who are condemned to be sacrificed to the profits of the industrial groups exploiting their resources.

We have the appalling example of the gold mines in French Guiana, which are laying waste to vast swathes of forest, causing the death of the flora, fauna and the indigenous peoples, which are all suffering from the mercury contaminating their soil, their sap or their bloodstream. This is a phenomenon that is continuing on a daily basis.

The argument of concentrating entirely on economics as a last, desperate springboard for the development of Third World countries, which are unable to afford the luxury of environmental safeguards, is mere pettifoggery.

There is no sustainable development except in the context of the responsible use of the environment.

Similarly, we must point out the fallacy of the assertion of commercial interests that their forestry clearance activities contribute to combating the greenhouse effect.

While claiming the same noble motive of environmental conservation, all that such theories are seeking to safeguard are the interests of a few major industrial groups.

In the Hague, the European Union must refuse to be drawn into this trap, which would make it possible for tropical forests to be treated like coal mines and shamelessly exploited and for States to be released from their obligations in terms of combating the greenhouse effect.

Mr President, as representative of the Pensioners' Party, I was very happy to vote for the Skinner report, which lays down safety measures to prevent occupational accidents.

My friend and fellow party member, Mr Bushill-Matthews, called for the report to be rejected.

In response, I would say to him, in his absence, that if the Member States had managed to curtail fatal and serious injuries then I would have agreed with him.

However, the number of fatal occupational accidents has increased in recent years and an ever increasing number of people are being widowed or orphaned due to occupational accidents, particularly in the construction industry, where this directive is intended to reduce the number of accidents.

I therefore feel that it is right and proper for the European Union to intervene in cases where the Member States are not managing to achieve sufficient success in important areas such as the reduction of occupational accidents.

UK Conservatives voted today against the Skinner Report, for the reasons given in my speech to the House the day before.

However, despite what I said in that speech, my comments were deliberately misrepresented by subsequent speakers from the UK Labour party, presumably for the same domestic party political reasons which dictate so much of their comments to the House.

Stephen Hughes accused me of regarding Safety issues as a trivial matter: I have never said this nor thought this.

Peter Skinner said that I had apparently complained to the British press that people were being told they needed to be trained to go up ladders, but the only reference to training was alleged to be an amendment from me.

My amendment followed on from existing wording about training, and merely added that workers should be made aware of their own responsibilities for safety together with those of their fellow workers.

The Socialists asked for a split vote, which retained the training reference but removed my helpful amendment.

It is important that untruths are rapidly rebutted.

This explanation of vote is necessary in order to correct the record.

We have abstained from voting on Mr Skinner' s report concerning minimum safety and health requirements for workers' use of work equipment at work.

This is an area in which the EU ought not to have so much influence.

We are basically well disposed towards the European Union.

As Swedish Liberals, we view European integration as an opportunity for finding solutions to cross-border problems concerning the environment, trade, movement across borders, human rights and conflict management.

On these issues, the European Union gives Europe' s democracies a chance to show the world that cooperation leads to peace and increased prosperity.

We also believe in the principle of subsidiarity, according to which decisions are to be made as close as possible to the people they affect.

That is why we are actively pushing the issue of a constitution for the European Union, through which the distribution of responsibilities would be clear to everyone.

It must be made perfectly clear to all citizens that the EU should stick to the issues it knows best, namely cross-border issues.

All other questions ought to be dealt with at local, regional or national levels.

We are convinced that it is not at EU level that legislation on, for example, how ladders are to be used in jobs above ground- or floor-level is best enacted.

How scaffolding is to be erected and jobs carried out must be decided in the light of national conditions.

For us, it is important that the EU should instead concentrate on a small number of areas in which it can really be of use.

This is not one such area.

In a common market and a cooperative European enterprise based upon common values that put people' s best interests first, it is only fair and right to require certain minimum standards for workers' safety and health.

As Christian Democrats, we therefore support the principles behind Mr Skinner' s report, but we cannot accept the detailed regulation at EU level which is the result.

Directives ought essentially to be aimed at establishing goals, not at regulating the details and describing the path to the goal.

Requiring at European level that employers should take necessary measures to guarantee workers' safety is only reasonable.

However, it is unreasonable to regulate in detail at EU level how such safety is to be achieved.

It is high time we took the subsidiarity principle seriously and allowed detailed regulations to be adopted at the lowest effective level.

Allow the Member States themselves to decide the best way of framing the rules so that the directive' s required objectives are met.

In certain countries, this can be done by means of national laws. In others, agreements concluded between the two sides of industry can be envisaged.

Against this background, we have chosen, as Swedish Christian Democrats, to vote against the report.

This proposal typifies the belief of this assembly that, for every ill in society, the solution is a new law and - when that fails - to create another.

The success or otherwise of a law depends on the nature of its enforcement, and the skill/experience of enforcement officers, which cannot be addressed by this directive.

This was recognised in 1972, when the Robens Committee Inquiry on health and safety in the UK, addressing the dynamic of excessive resort to law-making and its effect on enforcement, observed: ". . . the sheer mass of this law, far from advancing the cause of safety and health, may well have reached the point where it becomes counter-productive."

The response by the government of the day was the Health & Safety at Work Act 1974, a highly effective legislative model reducing the law to a few simple principles and duties, spearheaded by a new enforcement agency.

Although these developments were hailed as a major contribution to health and safety at work, the Commission has consistently undermined this Act.

Ever since it began legislating in this area, it has confused the issue, making enforcement progressively more difficult.

It should desist now, and this assembly should reject this directive.

Mr President, I voted for the Hernández Mollar report because pensioners and elderly people are extremely concerned by what might happen to them with modernisation and the development of electronic and computer science.

The elderly are used to writing by hand - in beautiful script - wherever possible, and they are used to traditional filing systems and are afraid that the storing of all their personal data in public pensions institutions will one day lead to some electronic initiative being taken against them, resulting in the reduced protection of their specific civil rights.

They therefore call upon the European Union to step up their interventions to protect personal data on citizens which the authorities manage to obtain one way or another.

- (DE) Data protection is a typical example of one area where it makes real sense to create central control points.

The existing juxtaposition of countless Community data protection regulations, which are called any number of different things to boot, is neither conducive to effective legal protection, nor does it make for a transparent legal situation.

The continued existence of national control points is beyond doubt.

Legal protection must be provided as close to the citizens as possible.

Not only will the amalgamation of Community control points have a positive effect in terms of transparency and legal clarity, it will also help keep costs down.

At long last, a constructive, truly expedient measure at Community level.

Mr President, as representative of the Pensioners' Party in the Group of the European People' s Party and European Democrats, I also voted for the Pirker report, particularly because of Amendment No 13 - which has been adopted - tabled by the rapporteur, which provides for permanent erasure from the central database of the names and electronic fingerprints of those who, having arrived in our States without refugee status as yet, are then recognised as persons who should be permitted to enter the country and are accorded refugee status.

This is an example of consideration for the dignity of human beings and their rights, and pensioners, who suffer a great many injustices, know just how important that is.

I shall begin my speech by reminding you that the Eurodac system for comparing the fingerprints of asylum seekers and certain other categories of alien was created in order to facilitate the application of the Dublin Convention, a text which makes it possible to determine the State responsible for examining the asylum applications received in one of the European Union Member States.

This Convention was signed on 15 June 1990.

The report under discussion deals with this Eurodac system and the way it operates. The Council is proposing to alter this in a direction which is not at all acceptable to Parliament.

Specifically, the Council has proposed to take the task of setting up the Eurodac system for the collection and comparison of asylum seekers' fingerprints (the Eurodac database is used to determine the country that was the asylum seeker' s entry point and whose task it therefore is to examine the asylum request) away from the Commission and entrust it to the Council itself in order to regain jurisdiction over it.

The Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs of course rejected this Council proposal.

The rapporteur, quite rightly, pointed out that under the EC Treaty, the Council may, in principle, confer implementing powers on the European Commission, but only in "specific cases" can the Council reserve the right to exercise these powers itself and, clearly, this is not applicable in the case in point.

Furthermore, Parliament would lose the right to be informed and would have to rely completely on the goodwill of the Council, and this is, of course, completely inadmissible!

The proposed revised wording for Articles 22 and 23 of the Eurodac regulation, which is what has currently been referred to Parliament, was therefore rejected by the committee which proposed, instead, an amendment endowing the Commission with the unconditional right to exercise implementing powers.

I, of course, unreservedly support this position.

Once again, the European Parliament finds itself dealing with Eurodac, i.e. the system intended to prevent multiple asylum applications.

It will always be essential for a system of this kind to be subject to democratic control.

Accordingly, it is incomprehensible as to why the Council should want to alter the procedure in such a way that will deprive Parliament of all its information rights.

That being the case, we support Mr Pirker' s report.

However, I would point out that this courtesy does not extend to the committee' s proposal to raise the age limit.

The Danish Social Democratic delegation wishes to express its full support for setting up Eurodac for the purpose of comparing the fingerprints of asylum seekers and certain other foreigners.

Eurodac will be an effective tool for ensuring that the Dublin Convention operates effectively.

In compliance with the Danish opt out in the legal sphere, we have abstained from voting in the final vote in view of the chosen legal base for the regulation.

We were very pleased to note that, at the Council meeting (legal affairs and the internal market) on 29 October 1999, the Danish Government stated that it wanted to participate fully in Eurodac cooperation on an intergovernmental basis.

On 19 November 1999, the European Parliament adopted its position on the proposal for a Eurodac regulation.

In the document that was approved by Parliament we called for several amendments, among others, that the minimum age for taking fingerprints be set at 18. We also expressed our concern regarding the extension of Eurodac' s scope to third-country nationals and illegal immigrants, whose situation, in our view, has nothing to do with the application of the Dublin Convention.

The Socialist Group voted accordingly in that particular Parliament vote and hopes that the Commission and the Council will accept our proposals.

The reason why Parliament is once again debating the matter today is because the Council has amended the original proposal regarding the conferring of competences for implementing Eurodac, so that such competences, as provided for in the Treaties, will no longer be conferred on the Commission but retained by the Council.

Mr Pirker, the rapporteur, opted to comment only on the part of the report that had been amended.

The Socialist Group accepted this proposal, which is why we, together with the Liberal Group, abstained from voting today on all of the amendments that do not refer to this new consultation.

We welcome the outcome of the vote regarding the conferring of competences which, as we and the vast majority of Parliament understand it, should be given to the Commission.

We should like to reiterate the fact that we hope that the Council and the Commission will take the two positions adopted by the European Parliament into account when it comes to making the final decision on the Eurodac regulation.

Modernising the Brussels Convention is legally in order.

However, we believe that, in the future too, it should have the legal status of an intergovernmental tool.

Where consumer rights are concerned, we believe that consumers should be entitled to bring claims in their place of domicile in the event of disputes relating to electronic commerce.

It is absolutely essential to the growth and functioning of e-commerce within the European Union, to strike a reasonable balance between the legitimate concerns of the consumer and those companies that want to use the Internet for e-commerce purposes.

The compromise reached in the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market does exactly that in our view.

Providing the consumer with comprehensive information on the company' s terms of business particularly with regard to the legal aspects, safeguards the consumer against cheating, on the one hand, and protects the companies against unreasonable risks, on the other.

E-commerce offers the Member States of the European Union hitherto undreamed-of possibilities in terms of creating jobs for the professionally qualified.

This reform will undoubtedly help to achieve this goal in a way that is not to be underestimated.

Out of respect for the Danish opt out in the legal sphere, the Danish Social Democrats in the European Parliament have abstained from voting in the final vote on the proposal.

Mr President, 'illegal work' could also be referred to as 'underground work' .

When I told my pensioner friends that this matter was under debate, they urged me to do all in my power to ensure that they are not left underground for too long - they have trouble breathing - and to bring them up into the open air.

'Why underground?' , you may ask, Mr President.

Some pensioners are forced to work 'underground' - i.e. illegally - because, in certain States, it is not possible to receive both a salary and a pension.

If we want to combat illegal working practices we must also permit pensioners - who live on low, paltry, starvation-ration pensions - to receive a regular salary in addition to a pension, or else they will be forced to remain underground, where they could well end up suffocating.

Mr President, the report claims to combat undeclared work, but the sole concern of the rapporteur is the conditions of competition between employers, not the situation of the workers forced to work in the black economy.

The things that force workers increasingly to accept just any old job are this economy of yours, unemployment, and poverty.

These workers are the first victims, the principal victims, of undeclared work, in personal and social terms, as they are grossly exploited, subjected to terrible working conditions and terrible wage conditions, and deprived of any legal sickness and accident insurance.

So it is scandalous to attempt to blame them for their own misfortune, even in part.

In the report' s explanatory statement, the author even has the temerity to wonder if some of the reasons for the black economy are not the excessively low retirement age, the excessively short working day or "inflexible employment legislation" , by way of suggesting that if legal working conditions were reduced to the level of those in the black economy, then bosses would have less reason not to declare workers.

If Parliament truly wished to combat undeclared work, it would have to begin by proposing that any employer guilty of employing a non-declared worker should be forced to employ that person under an open-ended contract.

We did not, of course, vote in favour of this report for, while pretending to protect victims, it in fact absolves the slave drivers, including a number of major firms which are completely unaffected by economic penalties.

Everyone is united in condemning non-declared work, or the black economy, as it is commonly called.

At the same time, however, many people resort to using this cheap workforce.

The figures speak for themselves, as the 'black economy' is equivalent to between 7 and 16 percent of the figure of the GDP of the European Union.

Quite obviously this is intolerable in our Member States which are facing persistently high unemployment rates which are still high despite a clear downturn in recent years.

I further endorse the rapporteur' s insistence that combating the black economy is to a great extent a direct contribution towards combating unemployment.

I am well aware that finding solutions is not an easy matter.

It is clear, nonetheless, that the Member States would be well advised to coordinate their efforts in order to establish a proactive strategy to combat this scourge.

The first requirement is for a list of the most affected sectors and the main categories concerned to be drawn up within each Member State.

This survey must be followed up in a practical way by implementing measures appropriate to each situation. These measures are to be included in action programmes.

These programmes must then be incorporated in national action plans related to the Employment Guidelines in order to establish mutual transparency and assess the effectiveness of the actions undertaken.

There is, moreover, a clear link between the level of taxes and deductions, and the extent as well as the growth of the black economy.

Member States must therefore devote some effort to reducing the taxes and deductions that weigh down on employment.

The reduction in VAT rates for services that are highly labour intensive, a sector where undeclared work is particularly prevalent, a step that Member States are entitled to take under the Council Decision of 28 February 2000, will most certainly have beneficial effects on the fight against the black economy.

Like the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs, I would like to see the Member States that do not yet use this option review their decisions.

That is why I voted in favour of this report, which represents a further step in achieving a social Europe.

The spread of non-declared work is not down to workers opting to supplement their incomes but to the determination of firms to milk only the most profitable sectors.

The other sectors, where profits are considered to be less extensive or less quick, are contracted out.

Such sub-contracting effectively promotes the outsourcing of work.

Bringing "greater flexibility to the labour market" (point 11 of the motion for a resolution), making "efforts to reduce tax and contribution levels" (point 11), and promoting "flexible working hours" (point 26) will not be sufficient to reduce the extent of undeclared work.

It is not the workers who should be held responsible but rather the capitalist economic logic which must be fought for it continually endeavours to reduce labour costs, particularly by eliminating employers' social security contributions.

Mrs Glase' s report does not live up to the expectations aroused by the explanatory statement, which, for once in this place, I found to be exceptionally perceptive.

Indeed, we agree with the rapporteur that one of the causes of the black economy is the insane level of taxation on work, the bureaucratic formalities and red tape required of firms, the removal of checks at the internal borders of the European Union, and Lord knows what else.

We do, however, deplore the fact that not once does this report mention the obvious link between the massive illegal immigration afflicting this continent and the explosion of undeclared work.

Nor does it mention the very great extent to which the Europe run by Brussels is responsible for establishing and exacerbating the causes of the black economy.

We therefore abstained on this report.

Undeclared gainful employment is just a euphemism for illicit work.

It is a problem all Member States face to a greater or lesser extent, and it exists for all sorts of reasons.

And there are mountains of regulations for tackling illicit work.

Of course these are only effective if they are implemented in conjunction with supervisory and punitive measures.

But introducing new European regulations is no way to go about tackling the problem of illicit work.

A new phase of Brussels-inspired regulating mania would be neither use nor ornament in the fight against illicit work in the Member States of the European Union.

Illicit work must be tackled at the roots.

Why, for example, are people prepared to do illicit work when it does not entitle them to social protection?

Why are employers prepared to take on illicit workers when they cannot offset the wage costs against tax?

Our rapporteur, Mrs Glase, rightly states in her report that the fight against illicit work is a task which cuts across a whole range of policy areas, such as finance, the economy, social issues, the labour market, and justice.

Illegal immigrants are engaged in illicit work, but industrial law regulations are not the way to go about tackling this problem.

Illegal immigration must be prevented, and many Member States are too lax on this front.

It is pointed out in the report that a particularly high number of illicit workers are women, principally in the service industry.

Particularly where domestic servants are concerned, employees are only too willing to pursue, and employers are only too willing to countenance, undeclared gainful employment; in the employer' s case because it cuts down on the administrative burden, and in the employee' s, because they can avoid paying tax and social contributions.

The collective taxation of spouses is a fundamental reason as to why - in my country at any rate - domestic servants simply do not want to be registered.

In addition, the amount of paperwork involved is a stumbling block to the lawful employment of domestic servants , particularly for elderly private individuals.

We certainly did not solve the problem in Luxembourg, but under the terms of the employment plan, we have released employers of domestic servants from the administrative burden, and I believe that the payment of a net wage to personnel of this kind represents a substantial improvement.

Naturally I voted in favour of the report, but I also wanted to point out that positive, tax-related and other measures are a more effective way of tackling illicit work than new, European prohibitive measures, particularly where women are concerned.

I would like to start by assuring you that we support Mrs Glase' s work.

It is, in effect, a clarion call for the Member States to combat a scourge which is, moreover, proliferating but increasingly being ignored, and which not only harms the economy and checks social policy but also hampers employment policy.

However, three points are worth noting.

Firstly, given precisely the different ways in which the Member States interpret the concept of undeclared work, the explanatory statement attached to the report would appear to shed more light on the subject than the text itself.

The second point is the - by now constant - call for the two sides of industry to be flexible and responsible.

'Emersion' contracts aside, in addition to the initiatives adopted by the Member States to combat undeclared work which are to be included in the national employment plans, as the rapporteur requested, it would be interesting to find out how many allegedly joint flexibility initiatives have indeed induced both sides of industry to be responsible and how many have, in practice, been successfully implemented to date.

The third point concerns a type of working relationship which the rapporteur does not mention even in the explanatory statement, but which nevertheless, in Italy at least, is likely to become as common, if not more common than undeclared work.

I refer to that type of relationship which appears on the surface to be completely legal and have impeccable recruitment procedures, but which, in reality, is characterised by abusive terms and conditions and protection and penalty clauses which are the product of what are termed 'pirate' work contracts concluded by colluding trade union associations.

In this regard, we feel that the study into the situation for the different categories of work, requested by the rapporteur, must take this last factor into account as well, and that quality parameters should then be defined so that work relationships can be genuinely above-board.

(EL) The plague of undeclared work is spreading through all the Member States of the Union at an alarming rate, especially in the less developed regions.

This grim form of exploitation is afflicting ever larger social groups as the result of poverty, which is spreading like wildfire, and also as the result of the increasingly indifferent laws of the market and the unaccountability of big business, which provokes and exacerbates it.

The anti-labour economic and social policy pursued by the European Union is a determining factor in the rise in undeclared work, which is growing much faster than the mainstream economy.

The hidden economy is becoming more and more important in the Member States, allowing companies which evade tax and national insurance payments to rake in huge profits.

The constant harping on at summits and in other Union institutions about the need to reduce the famous "non-wage labour costs" is encouraging companies to implement this reactionary approach on their own initiative, by generalising undeclared work and extending it to a surprisingly large number of workers.

Intense efforts to make the market and terms of employment more flexible, the barrel of the gun of unemployment and poverty pointed at workers' heads, the huge influx of immigrant workers to whose illegal status the system turns a blind eye and which are the booty of exploitive capitalist mechanisms which plunder their labour in sweat shops in order to boost their profits, create the "unhealthy" social conditions which force workers to take employment with no social cover, exiled from any trade union activity or government protection.

Health and safety conditions, terms of employment and working relations are dictated solely by employers, who take grossly unfair advantage of workers' needs and minimal negotiating skills and make a tidy profit from their long working hours.

Immediate measures are needed in order to wipe out this plague - measures which include the strictest punishment for employers and companies using this form of employment and which do not put the sacrificer and the sacrificed on an equal footing.

We need agencies and institutions to keep a close eye on companies.

Special protection must be given to the groups which are easy prey to unaccountable employers: the young, women and, more importantly, immigrants.

Undeclared work only has a positive impact on employers, or rather their profits; it has multiple negative repercussions for both workers and society as a whole.

Less employment, lower national insurance revenues, lower tax revenues and, at the same time, increased social and public-sector spending.

Unfortunately, the European Parliament report under discussion goes in completely the wrong direction; it basically backs employers and calls for even more neo-liberal measures on the job market, ostensibly in order to wipe out undeclared work.

It basically advocates legalising and generalising undeclared work, and hence completely upsetting employment relations, at the expense of all workers, which is why we are voting against it.

I would like to express my disappointment and dismay at the PPE' s vote on the resolution on the World Conference Against Racism.

Yesterday the PPE spokesman approached the Socialist Group to ask us to withdraw my Amendment No 1 because, if it were accepted, they would be unable to support the report.

After much soul-searching in the Socialist Group we decided that we would withdraw that amendment in the interests of getting the largest majority possible in Parliament against the forces of racism, the extreme right and anti-Semitism.

I have to say I do not know what conclusion to draw because it is clear from the vote that, in fact, after making that promise the vast majority of the PPE actually voted against the resolution.

It is not clear whether they were lying or whether they were confused.

I am not sure which is worse.

What is clear is that some of those weeping crocodile tears yesterday for anti-Semitic attacks in Italy in order to get cheap publicity, today voted in a way that could only give aid and assistance to the racists, the anti-Semites and the extreme right in the European Union.

Mr President, on behalf of my Group, I should also like to express our disappointment at our failure to successfully conclude this matter, in spite of all of the efforts we all made so that the European Union could adopt a strong position, with the backing of Parliament, on something as important as the World Conference against Racism.

We did all we could to achieve this as, in my view, did Mrs Ludford, the rapporteur.

In addition to this, Mr President, on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists, I should like to say that I found the references one member of Parliament made to our support of radicalism and the extreme left, wholly unacceptable, as indeed was the reference made to the idea that the terrorist group ETA, which a few hours ago murdered someone in my home town, is an extreme left-wing group.

These people have an exclusive and partisan vision of nationalism and have nothing to do with any of us, or any European socialists, or with any ideology that is not based on exclusion and racism.

Mr President, what a heated debate this has been on racism!

We have seen the left stand up and then the right, then the left again, then the right again, both of them armed, luckily only with words.

As representative of the Pensioners' Party, I abstained in the vote on this report.

Is the Pensioners' Party on the left or the right?

I have always maintained that the Pensioners' Party is for justice, for fair measures and for fair actions, and that party political ideological formations should take a step back and be more practical.

The Pensioners' Party is against all forms of racism, whoever the perpetrator, it is immaterial whether they come from the right or the left - but I urge both the right and the left to take a step backwards - for somebody has to - and to ensure that real social developments are made in our lives, whoever they are intended to benefit, and that ideologies are, at last, laid aside once and for all.

- (DE) The amendments put forward by the honourable Members Ford, Ceyhun, Boumediene-Thiery, Sörensen, Schroedter and Lambert seek to perpetuate a notion which the Wise Men have unequivocally rejected.

A desire to link the issue of racism with the situation in Austria represents an attempt to defame the country of Austria.

Many of those who do more than propose amendments by way of voicing their criticism of the situation in Austria, come from countries in which hostels for asylum seekers have been set on fire, right-wing extremists are on the march and gaining in influence, problems to do with minorities and foreigners go unresolved, and a great deal more.

You will not find anything of this kind in Austria.

The report compiled by the Council of Wise Men has confirmed that standards in Austria are above the European average, even in the most sensitive of areas.

Yet you seek to lay all the blame at Austria' s door, and turn a blind eye to the Balkans in your own backyard.

Instead of apologising to the Austrians for the injustices they have suffered on account of sanctions, you just carry on fanning the flames of resentment.

If that is your idea of a united Europe, then that in itself is of great concern to me.

Incidentally, we intend to vote in favour of the resolution put forward by the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs, with regard to the reference to the resolution of 16 March, but not only are we not prepared to vote in favour of the related resolution of 3 February this year, on the formation of the Austrian Government, we demand an apology from the European Parliament.

This resolution is a fine declaration against racism.

On the same day, the majority of MEPs voted in favour of the amended version of the fingerprinting system Eurodac, which further criminalises immigrants seeking to move to the European Union.

There would have been a different outcome if the vote on Eurodac had been truly anti-racist.

Therefore, all we can expect from this anti-racist resolution is fine words, and no change in the policy of criminalisation pursued by a Big Brother state.

The Radical Members of the Bonino List have voted against the resolution on racism because we feel that the way the fight against racism is conducted in Europe jeopardises fundamental rights and freedoms such as freedom of expression, opinion, thought and information.

These rights are currently being eroded away, and the very basis of democracy and the rule of law is under threat from the series of campaigns the States and the Union conduct every time there is an emergency, be it racism, terrorism, organised crime or the use of the Internet for criminal ends.

In this respect, we should learn from the United States, which is the country which affords the greatest protection for this freedom.

If we think that we can combat a phenomenon by banning it or restricting rights or fundamental freedoms or by ideological crusades, then we will achieve exactly the opposite effect: with regard to freedom of expression, with regard to drugs, prostitution and immigration, but also, as this Parliament well knows, with regard to Austria and to the rights of Members to band together to form a technical group.

We Radicals consider that Parliament and Europe must also learn from their past, which lives on today through prohibitions, be they right-wing, left-wing, socialist or extreme right-wing.

Organised crime in the European Union enjoys competitive advantages; in particular, the problems associated with mutual assistance in law enforcement and the procedural obstacles frustrate the process of criminal prosecution.

The recently concluded agreement on mutual assistance in law enforcement constitutes a first step towards reducing the unfair edge certain countries have over others.

In principle, we welcome the action plan put forward by the Council, but we also join the committee in criticising the Council over its consultation obligations.

However, we reject a European-wide standardisation of criminal law provisions.

Not only would an undertaking of this kind be almost impossible to achieve because of the way criminal law systems vary from Member State to Member State, our energies would also be better invested in preventive measures.

I declare the session of the European Parliament adjourned.

(The sitting was closed at 12.30 p.m.)

I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Friday, 15 December 2000.

With regard to the report by Mr Cashman on public access to Parliament, Council and Commission documents, for which the vote on the draft legislative resolution was postponed on 16 November, the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs has informed me that it is not yet able to meet the two month deadline laid down in the Rules of Procedure.

This is why it has requested that it be referred back to committee pursuant to Rule 144(1) of the Rules of Procedure.

I shall now give the floor to Mr Watson, Chairman of this committee, so that he can present the request on its behalf.

Madam President, the House kindly agreed on 16 November to a request from the committee which I have the honour to chair to delay the final vote on Mr Cashman's proposed legislative resolution.

That delay was intended to allow time for the other institutions to consider our amendments and for the Commission to formulate amended proposals.

Since our November part-session, we have had contacts with the other institutions, though as yet no agreement has been forthcoming.

Therefore, we would ask the House for a prorogation of the delay of a maximum of two months in order to conclude the dialogue and, we hope, present to you compromise amendments for voting at our part-session on 28 February.

The next item is the final draft agenda as drawn up by the Conference of Presidents at its meeting of Tuesday 11 January.

Sittings from 15 to 18 January in Strasbourg President.

I have received no requests for amendments to the agenda for Monday, Tuesday or Wednesday.

Madam President, I would like to point out to my fellow Members and to yourself, that, whilst I understand the reasons which led you to go over the top and set such a full agenda for Wednesday, with regard to the political topics due to be discussed between 9 a.m. and 4 p.m., the Council and the Commission have exactly the same speaking time as all the Members of the European Parliament, i.e. 90 minutes for the Council and the Commission and 90 minutes for the MEPs.

I am sorry to have to point this out, as I know we have a very busy day on Wednesday, but let us try to change this, as, after all, parliamentary debate should take precedence over the institutions.

I will, of course, take note of your comment.

Madam President, I would like to take up some points made by Mr Dell'Alba and also say something about Wednesday' s sitting.

Not only is Wednesday' s agenda completely overbooked, but important reports - such as the Sjöstedt report on natural habitats, as well as others - are being handled without debate, which is wrong to my mind.

This can be put down to the disastrous decision to cancel Friday sittings, which I would like to take this opportunity to highlight.

Madam President, I have requested the floor in order to speak about Tuesday' s joint debate on fisheries.

A major debate has been scheduled for that day and the Conference of Presidents has decided to include a Commission statement on the Fisheries Agreement with Morocco without a resolution.

As you know, this is a very sensitive issue and I would ask you to clarify a few things, as the inclusion of this issue may somewhat distort the overall debate.

I would ask you first of all to state at whose behest this was included, in other words, whether it was the Commission itself that made the request or one of the political groups.

Furthermore, in accordance with the debate' s agenda, the normal course of action would be for the joint debate on the four reports to take place and then for the Commission' s statement to be made and a further debate on this to take place.

Since it no longer appears possible for events to take place in this way, because the political groups have already distributed Members' speaking times, I would ask that, in this case, the Commission statement should be the first item so that Members may speak in the debate and so that the Commission statement is not made in the middle of the debate, which would prevent all Members from being in an equal position to respond to this statement by the Commission.

Madam President, I shall be delighted to reply to Mr Varela Suanzes-Carpegna.

The Socialist Group requested this Commission statement - I do not know if any of the other groups made the same request.

We did so for a very simple reason: in the last few days we have seen Commissioner Fischler suspend negotiations on live television; Mr Prodi - I do not know if he is still in Morocco - has submitted a new proposal and restarted negotiations; some Ministers for Agriculture or Fisheries, including the Spanish Minister, have also made statements, and it makes sense that we should be able to debate this issue and that we should be at least as well informed - we are not asking for a resolution - as television newsreaders.

This really is the most appropriate time, when we are discussing the future of our fisheries policy on the basis of four reports, for the Commission to make this statement.

This is the thinking that led the Socialist Group to make this request.

Mr Varela, Mr Barón Crespo has given you your answer.

The request was made by the Group of the Party of the European Socialists, but I can inform you that it was approved unanimously by the Conference of Presidents.

Madam President, I asked for clarification; I have absolutely no intention of arguing about the appropriateness of a Commission statement. It clearly is appropriate.

I want to make it clear that we support it, and I believe that it was also supported in the Conference of Presidents of political groups, but today I have a meeting with the Committee on Fisheries, an extraordinary meeting, and this issue will logically be dealt with. As Chairman of that committee, I wanted to have all the information so that I could communicate it to the other committee members.

The statement is therefore welcome. In no way do we oppose it.

Our group has also supported it. So that the debate may be held in an ordered fashion, which is what most concerns me, because this issue could distort the four important fisheries debates which we have on the agenda, it would be normal for this statement to be made after that debate, and that would then give us time to continue discussing this issue, although it seems that that will not be possible.

The competent services had informed me that the order of interventions would be as follows: firstly the four rapporteurs of the reports, and then the Commissioner would be given the floor to make the aforementioned statement.

In that case, the rapporteurs would not be able to reply to the Commissioner during the joint debate.

What I therefore ask is that the Commission statement be made first and that then the speakers should take the floor, so that everybody might have the same right as MEPs to hear, and be able to reply to, the statement by the Commissioner.

Madam President, I wish to inform Mr Varela Suanzes-Carpegna that these are the terms of the Conference of Presidents, but I see that the relevant services have already explained this to him.

The idea - at the request of most group Chairmen - was that the four rapporteurs would speak first, and then the representative of the Commission would follow.

This was what happened in the Conference of Presidents, at which I had the honour of representing you, Madam President.

Mr Varela' s request is out of place.

Madam President, I would like to explain very briefly why my group has tabled this motion which, relates to what is becoming known, in the French newspapers in particular, as the Danone case.

This is an important issue that goes beyond the limits of responsibility of one group.

As it happens, it concerns the policy of a large food processing company which has recently achieved financial results described by the president of the company himself as excellent, and which, at the same time, decided to shed 3 000 jobs and to close several sites in various Member States of the European Union.

It seems to me that we cannot, on the one hand, make full employment a priority for European Union action and work on drafting a European Company Statute to lay down new rights for employees and, on the other hand, calmly accept this type of strategy, which puts the interests of shareholders before everything.

This is why I propose an urgent debate on this matter.

Madam President, my group will be voting in favour of this proposal because, to take up Mr Wurtz' s arguments, this is not just a French issue, but a European issue, both because of the size of the Danone Group and because of the potential repercussions of the measures proposed in various countries.

Furthermore, because the European Company Statute has been approved by the Treaty of Nice, we feel that this is an extremely topical issue and one that also needs to be addressed by the Swedish Presidency.

Bearing in mind the fact that my group has also brought up the situation of other multinational companies that operate across Europe or even worldwide in the car and steel manufacturing sectors, we feel that this issue should be given substantial consideration in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs.

Maybe this could replace another item, because the issue is serious enough to warrant a more in-depth and detailed study.

Madam President, we do not doubt that it is an important issue we are discussing here, but this is something that crops up time and again.

In the past, we always agreed that we would deal with such issues as part of a more comprehensive debate.

It is therefore inappropriate to invoke the urgent procedure, particularly as the issue which is to be left off the agenda, is so important.

I would also like to point out - although I was unable to participate in the Conference of Presidents in person, owing to our European People' s Party Congress, my colleague, James Provan, was there to represent me - that the issue has already been voted on in the Conference of Presidents and so there is no need for it to be raised once again.

We are against invoking the urgent procedure on this issue.

Madam President, first of all, Mr Poettering can be forgiven for his mistake since he was absent.

However, Mr Poettering, I would like to tell you that the Conference of Presidents certainly did not vote for or against this motion and it was suggested that I should table this motion in Parliament, which I have done.

Regarding the proposal by Mr Barón Crespo, I am in complete agreement with the proposal to refer the whole matter, i.e. Danone and similar situations, to the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs so that we can then conduct a more general debate on this.

I do not necessarily wish that this be treated as an urgent topic, but I do think that we should take note of this grave inconsistency which is stirring up considerable feeling amongst the general public in all our countries, and which, in actual fact, concerns the European Union.

Therefore, if all Members are in agreement, I would certainly wish to refer this matter to the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs.

Mr Wurtz, should I assume then that you wish to withdraw the current proposal to replace item 5 in the debate on topical and urgent subjects of major importance with this point?

May I conclude that there is broad consensus on Mr Barón Crespo' s proposal?

I can see that this is the case.

Does any Member of the Union for a Europe of Nations Group wish to present the request to replace the item with "Situation in Algeria" ?

Madam President, you mentioned earlier the horrors that have been reported, which are related to terrorism.

Consequently, the Union for a Europe of Nations Group wanted the House to be able to hold an urgent debate on the situation in Algeria.

Last week, we were all able to witness the television broadcasts of the unbearable images of recent massacres carried out in Algeria by Islamist terrorists who keep pushing back the limits of atrocity.

We cannot, therefore, understand why Parliament, which is always so particular on human rights issues, should remain silent following further evidence of fanatical madness.

Holding this debate would allow us to reaffirm that all the measures that have been adopted in North African countries, Algeria in particular, to fight relentlessly against child murderers and their accomplices have the overwhelming support of the Members of the European Parliament.

We see it as our duty to send the Algerian people a message of our sympathy and solidarity and to encourage the Algerian Government to implement, with the support of the European Union, the policy in this area that is awaited by the vast majority of its citizens, who, like us, are not used to this indiscriminate violence that is ruining their country.

I believe that anyone who has had the opportunity to visit Algeria during recent months or years can make a better assessment of what this terrible outbreak of terrorism means to the Algerian people and, indeed, I believe that it would be to our credit if we dealt with this issue in an urgent debate.

I therefore believe that this is a good suggestion.

Madam President, the big problem is that so much is happening on the world stage.

Looking at the instances individually, we wonder why they are not given the highest priority.

This is the case for Algeria.

But then there is also the visa obligation which Russia has unilaterally imposed on Georgia since 5 December 2000.

Whoever is acquainted with the situation across the entire region, knows that this is a burning issue, and we can thus expect conflicts to flare up once again.

Our parliamentary committee has explicitly asked to prioritise this topic, which was shelved last time.

So I think it is only fair that we should turn the spotlight on this region, so as to avoid conflict at a later date as far as we can, and also to bring it to the attention of the Russian authorities.

Madam President, in order to avoid competition arising between these two issues, would it perhaps be possible to discuss the situation in Algeria in the 'human rights' section, in which case, all the issues proposed could be dealt with.

Madam President, I would like to continue with the subject of the Thursday sitting.

I would like to draw your attention to the plan for Thursday' s sitting, which has the debate on reports continuing after 5.30 p.m. until 6.30 p.m..

Surprisingly, the report to be discussed at that time concerns the competitiveness of forest-based industries, which I tabled for the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy.

After that, at 6.30 p.m., there is the vote on this report, which affects the jobs of four million employees in Europe and competition in this industry and other related industries.

In my opinion, if we have to debate a report like this one, which affects the jobs of four million people, at 5.30 p.m., then the plan for Thursday' s sitting has run up against very big problems as a result of the Friday sittings being discontinued.

I know that a few dozen people at most will remain to vote.

It is degrading for Parliament that we should adopt a position on a report on such a wide issue with such a small group of Members.

For this reason I would prefer it if Thursday' s evening sitting could be used just to vote on urgent matters, and voting connected with actual reports could be switched to the agenda for the next Brussels part-session.

Madam President, on a point of order.

I draw your attention to the fact that alarming events have been taking place in Moscow in the past 24 hours, mainly aimed at the independent media and the freedom of the press.

Media-Most runs the independent television of Russia and its organisation has a number of radio stations and independent magazines.

Mr Andrey Tsimaylo, the deputy chairman of Media-Most, was yesterday arrested and subjected to five hours of interrogation, following which Mr Anton Titov, the financial director of independent television, was arrested at the home of his mother, the door having been broken in by the security police.

A number of other junior employees of independent television are being arrested and interrogated as we sit here now.

This is an alarming development and it goes beyond the personal question of Mr Gusinsky, which I have raised before and, as is well known, I am an adviser to him.

Madam President, could we take this matter into consideration?

You met the deputy chairman of Media-Most in June, Mr Malashenko.

You spoke to him about this problem of government pressure on freedom of the press and you suggested that something should be done.

Can we try to find some way of conveying our views to the Russian Government and sorting out this question of freedom of the press and expression which bedevils relations between the Russian Federation and the European Union?

Madam President, if I recall correctly, following the resolution on Tunisia which we adopted in December, President Ben Ali was supposed to have sent you, shall we say, a letter of courtesy.

If this is correct, would you share the contents of that letter with us?

I have not received any such letter.

If I had, I would naturally have informed the House.

Madam President, in recent days, even as we speak, reports have been flooding in of the increasing number of cases of young soldiers and many civilians who have fallen victim to extremely serious illnesses linked to radioactive pollution caused by the use of weapons with depleted uranium warheads.

Firstly, Madam President, I am sure we would all wish to send our deepest sympathy to the families of the young soldiers, the European civilians and the citizens of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia on the death of their loved ones following radioactive pollution from NATO shells.

Secondly, I must tell you that I greatly welcome your statements on the depleted uranium issue. In particular, I support your call for an urgent ban on the use of these lethal shells.

I am quite aware that some people deny that there is any association between the deaths and ill health and the use of the shells, but I also know that no military authority is able to prove the contrary.

Therefore, if it is not possible to obtain an immediate ban, it is essential to impose an immediate moratorium, for although these shells are not currently in use in war they continue to be used in exercises.

I trust that you will pursue this matter.

Madam President, at 8 a.m. this morning, I found myself in the good company of 24 other MEPs, staff and one Commissioner at Schiphol airport.

We were really looking forward to spending another week in Strasbourg after the holidays, but our flight was cancelled, unfortunately.

This is not the first time.

We fly to Strasbourg with Regional Airlines. Since this aviation company was taken over by Air France this year, one in two flights has been cancelled.

That means that each time we try to make our way to Strasbourg, in good spirits, we stumble across yet another hitch.

Today too, we had to fly via Paris to Strasbourg.

So, although I was at Schiphol in Amsterdam at 8 a.m., I, along with 24 others, did not arrive in Strasbourg until 4 p.m.

At present, Air France is still 100% state-owned, and the French Government has assured us that it will bend over backwards to make our Strasbourg experience more bearable.

That is why I would ask you to pass this complaint on to the French Government, because we would simply like to catch our direct flight to and from Amsterdam every Monday and every Thursday on time.

Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel, I am extremely concerned by what you have told me and I can assure you that I shall most certainly convey your justifiable unhappiness to the appropriate parties.

Madam President, on a point of order.

I wish to draw the attention of the House to an unfortunate incident which has occurred since our last part-session, and that is the case of Mr Panikos Tsiakourmas.

Many of you may be unaware that part of Cyprus is already part of the European Union because Great Britain retained sovereign bases on Cyprus and Mr Tsiakourmas was seized from one of those bases shortly before Christmas.

That seizure was an illegal act.

Mr Tsiakourmas is now being held in North Cyprus.

I would appeal to the House to express its sympathy with Mr Tsiakourmas and his family.

He has been accused of a crime of which I do not think he is guilty.

However, whatever the merits of his case, the circumstances of his abduction were unacceptable.

He was abducted from the territory of a European Union Member State.

I would ask the President to express our concern to the Ankara Government about this incident and our hope that this unfortunate incident will not affect the solution to the Cyprus problem and the peace negotiations which are continuing at this moment, and to express our hope that Mr Tsiakourmas will be released as soon as possible.

Madam President, may I start by saying that I agree wholeheartedly with what Mr Cossutta just said, although that is not why I asked for the floor.

I asked for the floor on the matter raised by Mrs Villiers, in order to decry yet another act of terrorism on the part of the Turkish occupying forces in North Cyprus.

My fellow Member has described the circumstances and I need add no further details.

I would just point out that not only was Mr Tsiakourmas abducted on soil belonging to the British bases, he was abducted and is being held by the military of a country which is a candidate for membership of the European Union.

Consequently, every avenue for taking action against Turkey is open to us and I call on you, Madam President, and all my fellow Members of the European Parliament to show compassion and demand the immediate release of Mr Tsiakourmas, who is diabetic and unwell. In fact, the whole business appears to be a set up, the sole purpose of which is to exchange Mr Tsiakourmas for a Turkish drug smuggler arrested by the Republic of Cyprus police force.

Mr Alyssandrakis, we shall see what we can do about this.

I listened closely to both your speech and that made by the Member before you.

With regard to Mr Cossutta' s speech, he is aware that I made a statement which fully supports his own sentiments.

Madam President, I too wish to add to the protests voiced by Mrs Villiers and Mr Alyssandrakis at the premeditated abduction of a Cypriot citizen. Not only is this man ill, but a bag of hashish was planted next to him so that he could be accused of drug smuggling, even though the abduction was carried out on a base belonging to Britain - a guarantor power and a member of the European Union.

We need to act fast because I am afraid that, now that Turkey has been accepted as a candidate country of the European Union, it thinks it can act with impunity in these matters.

It has already advanced to positions at two points on the border with the buffer zone in Cyprus, in violation of UN arrangements, and the protests emanating from the UN and from us and from the members of ÍÁÔÏ are so ineffectual that it pays no attention to them whatsoever. Moreover, Mr Denktash, the leader of "North Cyprus" which, I would remind the House, is under Turkish occupation, has refused to take part in further talks on the Cyprus problem because he feels he is in a much stronger position than before, now that the European Union - without, I believe, a great deal of forethought - has accepted Turkey's candidature for membership of the European Union.

Madam President, I would like to draw your attention to the fact that the Council - not for the first time, I might add - has contravened the Rules of Procedure.

The point being that we MEPs have the opportunity, once a month, to submit a written question, for priority consideration which, according to the Rules of Procedure, must be responded to within three weeks.

Now what we are finding is that increasingly often, the Council is failing to keep to this time scale.

Here is the latest example: I submitted a question in October, to which I have not received an answer to this day, namely when is the Council going to get round to implementing the salary increase promised to the Europol staff?

This is not an isolated case, rather such instances are mounting up.

I would urge you to press the Council to observe the Rules of Procedure.

Madam President, I take the floor in order to point out yet again - having written to you repeatedly on the matter - that for months now, since 20 October in fact, hundreds of political prisoners living in wretched conditions in Turkey have been on hunger strike, which they intend to see through to the bitter end - some have in fact already died - in a bid to stop the Turkish Government from going ahead with its plan to lock them up in isolation cells in order to break their morale and their resistance.

We all know what a dark day it was for the whole of mankind when the Turkish military and police forces brutally invaded the prisons.

They brutally attacked the families of political prisoners protesting outside the jails and likewise on hunger strike.

I think that it is wrong that neither we nor the bureau have as yet protested against this situation in stronger, more categorical terms; our silence makes the whole of mankind feel that both the European Parliament and the European Union are accessories to this crime.

So I ask, even now, that you raise your voice and make our sympathies known.

Madam President, with the New Year we have learned through the Spanish Boletín Oficial del Estado that eleven policemen and three guardías civiles who had already been sentenced as torturers had been pardoned by the Spanish Government.

Few cases of torture are admitted by the Spanish courts.

On the contrary, many officials are promoted because of such activities.

Inside the European Union that is simply not tolerable.

It is incumbent upon us to press the Spanish Government on this issue.

I would urge this Parliament to issue a declaration in the clearest possible terms to show our steadfast opposition to torture.

I am sure that you will want to respond fully and rapidly to this concern.

Madam President, has it been brought to your attention that the Members' register of interests was last week published on an Internet site, www.mpt2001.co.uk? This was not the result of Parliament putting into practice the principles of transparency and openness, but follows the copying of the records by a team in Parliament working for a British television comedian.

Now that the records have been put into the public domain, will you advise all concerned not to allow Parliament to continue looking secretive and foolish, but to take speedy action to bring us into the twenty-first century and get the information published on our own website and made permanently available to European citizens?

Madam President, I also regret that a British comedy programme sought to make light of Parliament and would point out that my own group has, of course, already published its register of interests on the Internet.

It remains open to Mr Davies' group to follow suit and follow our lead in putting the register of interests on the Internet.

In the meantime, I agree with him.

I think the sooner this is on the Internet, the better.

It is a matter of public record.

There is no reason why it should be kept secret.

That is the point I believe the Quaestors will be urging on the Bureau in the near future.

The next item is the recommendation for second reading (A5-0369/2000), by Mrs Peijs, on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, on the Council common position for adopting a European Parliament and Council directive on the reorganisation and winding up of credit institutions.

Madam President, the European Commission tabled a proposal for a directive on the coordination of laws, regulations and administrative provisions relating to the reorganisation and the winding-up of credit institutions back in 1985.

That so much time has lapsed, is largely down to the Gibraltar issue.

The purpose of the directive is to ensure that a credit institution and its branches in other Member States are reorganised or wound up according to the principles of unity and universality.

This means that the administrative authorities of the home Member State have sole jurisdiction in carrying out the reorganisation or winding up of a credit institution and its branches across the EU.

This applies to all cases, except where Article 20 of this directive specifies otherwise.

The aim of the directive is, thus, not to harmonise but to ensure equal treatment of all creditors and a consistent approach across the whole of Europe.

As rapporteur, I can completely identify with the thrust of this report.

In tandem with the Council and Commission, I have tried to make a few improvements to this report in the shape of two types of amendment.

The first type is related to the fact that the wording of the Council' s common position was not consistent with the existing insolvency directive and the directive on the winding up and reorganisation of insurance companies, which is to be voted on next week within the Economic Commission.

This kind of discrepancy in directives which cover the same subject matter is unacceptable, unless there is a good reason for it.

As rapporteur, I have taken great pride in rendering legislation on this particularly important subject matter as clearly and transparently as possible.

All our amendments pertain to Article 20, which deals with the exceptions to the rule.

Some amendments bring the directive into line with other directives, such as the insolvency directive and the winding up of insurance companies, as I mentioned a moment ago.

These are Articles 20(1)(h) and 20(2).

By means of Articles 20a to 20d, they are re-introduced in the report, but this time by using the same wording as in the other two directives.

The second type of amendment pertains to the deletion of a number of exceptions to the main rule.

These exceptions had been worded in an ambiguous manner and were open to interpretation.

Also, there was the risk, in the article on the regulated markets, that the exception was more comprehensive than the main rule.

Despite this, the articles on regulated markets, repurchase agreements, netting agreements and debt renewal were included as such in the common position.

In the first instance, I wanted to see these articles deleted.

The only problem was that certain parties within the Council could not live with completely deleting these articles.

For this reason, I have tried to reach agreement with the Council, and this was done at the eleventh hour last Wednesday.

The compromise still prescribes the deletion of the three articles, but three other articles will be inserted instead.

Broadly speaking, the compromise articles do not prejudice legislation of the Member State to which the contract pertains.

These articles also clarify that the bankruptcy rules of the home Member State of the credit institution in question are not prejudiced.

That means, therefore, that if contracts are concluded with regulated institutions, the proceeds from those contracts are still included in the estate.

That is what this is about, and that was the reason behind my original proposal to delete.

Everything is now spelled out loud and clear, everyone is happy and I am delighted that, by joining forces, we have probably avoided a lengthy conciliation procedure.

We are thus tabling two types of amendment.

One type is introducing harmonisation with respect to other directives, the other deleting a number of exceptions.

I hope from the bottom of my heart that this legislation, which I believe Parliament has upgraded in terms of quality, will never have to take effect.

Mr President, the main points of controversy in this report concern three different types of contractual agreement, namely repo agreements, netting agreements, and contracts conducted on a regulated market.

As Mrs Peijs' report outlined, these types of contracts were discussed in committee pending this debate and, in essence, what we are seeking to do with the compromises proposed by Mrs Peijs is to ensure that parties can choose their own contract law in relation to these particular contracts, but not their own winding-up proceedings law.

There is a separation here between the law of the contract and the external insolvency law, because it is quite important to ensure that parties, though they may choose the law of contract, may not actually choose their own insolvency law.

Now a problem arises concerning the interaction between the law of contract and insolvency law.

What we are trying to do is to ensure that the contract operates and whatever proceeds are left at the other end are then dealt with according to the insolvency law of the home State.

There is still one slight uncertainty in the text about what happens with regimes, for example, in Spain which have insolvency proceedings which kick in before the contract law actually takes place.

In essence, these are known as automatic stays and mean that in certain countries, such as Spain, I believe all contracts are suspended automatically by an insolvency proceeding.

I applaud Mrs Peijs' work in reconciling what looked fairly irreconcilable and coming up with a solution that favours home State control which is preferable in terms of the internal market, but I have some anxiety that there will still have to be some fine-tuning.

I hope that we will not have to have a third reading, but we may have to just to make it absolutely clear that these automatic stays would not affect netting contracts, repo contracts and contracts in a regulated market.

I would appeal to the House that in some ways it is more important to get a clear answer than to get one that suits everyone; one that is absolutely perfect in every respect.

Because with a clear answer people can arrange their transactions around the framework that we have set up.

It is vital to do that.

I applaud the work that Mrs Peijs has done and I hope that we have finally sorted this issue out.

I just have certain worries about the automatic stays and suspect that we might need some fine-tuning at a later stage.

The other controversial issue involves right in rem and the difference between the common position and the tidying up operation that Mrs Peijs has done, and this is something we have discussed at length.

In essence, there is a lot of common ground between what the Council proposes in the common position and the alternative wording that Mrs Peijs has proposed.

I am inclined to think, in view of the uncertainty, that it may well be worth sticking to the common position on that particular issue, because of the potential threat that it might pose to the mortgage bond market.

This is not a strategic interest to me as a British MEP, because it does not affect the British market in any way - it is much more important for the Danish, the Austrian and the German mortgage market.

I would congratulate Mrs Peijs on her work.

It is a very good report.

There are still one or two small points of controversy in it, but she has done an excellent job.

I apologise for the confusion we have had in committee over the voting and I am glad that it has all been resolved now.

Mr President, I do not feel that I will need the full five minutes, hopefully this will allow you to speed up proceedings tonight.

I would firstly like to congratulate Mrs Peijs as rapporteur on this report which, as Mrs Villiers has already outlined, has been extremely complicated.

The issue has long been problematic, mainly because of the national differences at governmental level, rather than the issues directly originating from Parliament, but compromises produced in Parliament have been both efficient and expedient in terms of their approach and are very welcome.

In an effort to provide for equal treatment across the EU, the principles of unity and universality are the central pillars, of course, of this report, and coherence and consistency are therefore attained.

Similarly the rights of creditors in Member States other than their own are safeguarded by the assurances of cooperation between the relevant authorities in the Member States, but let us be clear, in case some of you have not read the document, this is not about harmonisation, it is about mutual recognition of Member States' reorganisation measures and winding up procedures.

Parliament's success in introducing substantial changes in the original proposal is important.

There are many in Parliament who feel the issues here are of real concern since they all concern the safeguarding of European citizens' interests and rights; indeed this report helps clarify many of the elements, such as the deposit guarantee scheme.

But, of course, many of the changes in the common position which finally came back to us have to be welcomed, as they reflect many of Parliament's concerns, although some work has still to be done.

It is therefore sensible for Parliament, whilst accepting the improved document's intentions, to reimpose our priorities from the first readings but to organise and also clarify the suggestions emanating from this text.

Amendments Nos 1 and 2 bring the text into line with the insolvency regulation and the insurance winding-up proposals which had already been agreed last summer: this confirms Parliament's desire, therefore, to see a degree of coherence in this matter.

I also see great strength for creditors in Amendments Nos 3, 5 and 6 while recognising that other national delegations, especially in my group, may have other concerns in this area.

But I personally offer my support to the idea of bringing this directive in line with the insolvency regulation and the insurance winding-up proposals.

It seems to me that, finally, in the remaining amendments, following in the tradition of tidying up texts for the purpose of clarification, Parliament's rapporteur has maintained the type of quality we have come to expect from experienced Members.

Whilst issues such as netting seem to have been slotted in as an extra series of amendments, what we have here is a workable document nonetheless, capable of securing support in the House and provoking serious discussion within the Council.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, we are all agreed that the directive on the reorganisation of credit institutions is long overdue, which is also why we welcome it.

A uniform procedure is at last to be established and there is to be coherence between the reorganisation procedure and the insolvency regulation.

We would do well to stress that the provisions on protecting creditors' rights, in particular, are of crucial importance here, since they establish the principle of providing creditors with information, as well as the conditions governing payments made to them.

In this way, all creditors, including those in countries other than the home Member State, are guaranteed equal treatment under the winding up procedure, and a consistent approach.

Although the text in its current form is absolutely excellent, some clarification is needed.

Thus, for example, the all-important principle of universality was strengthened by a series of amendments in committee, and several areas of incompatibility with the provisions relating to financial conglomerates, and which could lead to legal uncertainty, were ironed out.

You will already have noticed in the course of the debate that we differ on one point, specifically in relation to Amendments Nos 3 and 5.

The close correspondence between the reorganisation and winding up of credit institutions and insurance companies is not desirable for all aspects.

Opinion differs on this because we believe what we are talking about here are different products, and sometimes different markets, and that different products and different markets should be treated differently, and not automatically the same.

The common position is well-balanced to my mind and was improved on, to some extent, by the committee' s amendments and those tabled by the rapporteur, Mrs Peijs, whom I would like to thank.

The text ought, therefore, to be adopted without delay and transposed by the Member States.

I regret that the dispute in the Council has led to this being delayed by more than a decade.

I would point out that the Commission' s first proposal was published as early as 1985 and Parliament' s first reading was held back in 1987.

The reason I stress this is because we constantly discuss the balance between the European institutions in our debates - particularly in the wake of the Nice European Council - and in many cases discuss how the procedures ought to be accelerated.

This does not just apply to Parliament, which is often the impression given in the public arena, although we would, of course, do well to consolidate and accelerate quite a few procedures of our own too.

But this is not about apportioning blame.

However, doubtless the opinion-forming and decision-making process in the European Council offers the best bet for accelerating the procedures between the European institutions.

That has been made crystal clear again here.

The Commission proposal is designed to ensure that a credit institution and its branch offices in other Member States can be reorganised and wound up according to the principle of unity and universality.

That is guaranteed under this proposed directive.

Mr President, the market and national authorities have been looking forward to the directive on the reorganisation and the winding-up of credit institutions coming into effect for some time now.

This directive, in fact, aims to provide a guarantee with regard to the regulations which, in an organic manner and in a way which is specifically tailored to the sector, govern the institutions, the assets, the rights and business relations when a bank, which is active in different EU Member States, gets into difficulty or goes under.

This directive spearheads the action plan for financial services.

In its common position, established by qualified majority, the Council displayed a discerning and keen insight into the specific characteristics of the banking sector which set it apart from the rest, both in terms of the insolvency procedure in general and compared to other financial sectors, such as the insurance business and the stocks and shares industry.

This is why Article 20 of the common position grants the banking sector special treatment on a number of scores.

This special treatment does not in any way prejudice the harmony and logic of a set of rules for the financial services as a whole.

Quite the reverse, in fact; it does justice to the specific characteristics of banking, thus giving a better guarantee for stability and legal certainty.

The report by Mrs Peijs, on which I would like to congratulate her on behalf of the Commission, and in respect of which I would like to endorse the compliments extended by Mrs Villiers and Mr Skinner, which welcomes the common position for the most part, proposes a number of amendments to Article 20, as was explained earlier this afternoon.

The Commission can approve the purport of these amendments, barring one.

It objects, at least in principle, to Amendment No 1 with regard to repurchase agreements.

After all, it is of key importance that the banks know in advance what legislation will govern repurchase agreements.

As it happens, Mrs Peijs, on behalf of the PPE-DE Group, has tabled five new amendments.

These amendments draw the amendments adopted by the Economic and Monetary Commission together in a coherent manner which does justice to the special position of the banking sector.

Under a different guise, the new amendments take into consideration the specific requirements which are prescribed in the banking sector with regard to netting agreements, repurchase agreements and agreements and transactions within regulated markets.

The Commission can go along with the spirit of these amendments, as is apparent in its explanatory statement.

If the five new amendments are adopted by this Parliament, the Commission can assent to the spirit of all amendments proposed in Mrs Peijs' report, including Amendment No 1.

However, the wording of all amendments - and I am also making this point in response to comments made by Mrs Villiers - would then have to be adapted in order to guarantee the compatibility and consistency of these amendments with Article 20.

The vote will be taken tomorrow at 12 noon.

Simpler legislation for the internal market (SLIM)

The next item is the report by Mr Doorn on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market on the communication from the Commission to the Council and to the European Parliament on the review of simpler legislation for the Internal Market.

Mr President, red tape within Dutch industry amounts to near enough EUR 9 billion per annum. This was revealed in the Netherlands last week by Actal, the newly formed Committee of Experts on the verification of administrative burdens.

The average entrepreneur spends approximately ten hours on completing administrative tasks and forms. The Netherlands, as far as this is concerned, is no exception.

Research has shown that unnecessary bureaucratic procedures within companies account for 4 to 6 per cent of the GNP of EU Member States.

This is a heavy burden, which hits small companies particularly hard.

I know of entrepreneurs who have quite consciously decided against further expansion of their businesses because they want to avoid having to take on staff at all costs.

Many are deterred by the administrative red tape involved.

In this way, the many obligations imposed by governments on entrepreneurs hinder the growth of production and employment.

Some of the time, it is not even the legislation which is wrong or ineffective, but it is often the accumulation of obligations which makes the administrative pressures so heavy, and the European Parliament contributes to this in its own way.

This reminds me of a report we discussed last year which related to the working conditions on construction sites.

One of the prohibitions in that report, thanks to an amendment in Parliament, pertains to holding a ladder while someone is standing on it.

Quite apart from the absurdity of such provisions, one wonders who subsequently monitors compliance with this kind of legislation.

One of the key problems in our complex society is probably the fact that we produce far too many regulations in such abundance and of such complexity, that we ourselves are no longer able to monitor their compliance.

The consequences can be disastrous, as a recent incident in the Netherlands proved once more.

In my opinion, the heavy administrative burden on citizens and businesses, combined with the government' s incapacity to ensure compliance with the tangled web of rules, are reason enough to tackle the simplification of legislation and improvement of its quality head-on.

While I welcome the SLIM project, which the Commission launched in 1996 and which is under discussion this evening, as I stated in my report, it is too little too late.

Compared to the legislative machinery as a whole, it is only a drop in the ocean.

That is why I argue in favour of added momentum, as well as shorter implementation periods for the results of the SLIM working parties and, obviously, for the organisation and manpower required in this respect.

However, I attach yet more importance to simplifying legislation in its entirety.

Particular attention will need to be paid to the way in which legislation is developed.

After all, it is much easier to take simplifying measures in the early stages than to adapt existing legislation later on, at great cost, also for businesses.

Every available effort must be made early on to lay down high-quality legislation and to restrict the administrative and financial consequences to a minimum.

The Netherlands has seen the recent introduction of Actal, which I mentioned a moment ago. Actal is an independent watchdog whose duty it is to examine draft legislative proposals and to expose any negative administrative burdens on behalf of citizens and businesses.

An excellent initiative which, I hope, will be copied liberally in other Member States and at EU level.

I would make an urgent appeal to the European Commission to make a maximum effort to improve the quality of legislation and to restrict the administrative burden on citizens and businesses.

If the current situation continues for much longer, the European Parliament, too, will need to consider the consequences of legislative proposals discussed here on citizens and businesses.

If others fail to come up with the goods, we might have to follow in the footsteps of the American Congress and set up a service ourselves which maps out the administrative and financial consequences of legislation.

Mr President, Commissioner Bolkestein, ladies and gentlemen, the simpler legislation for the internal market initiative is one of the most important processes now underway in the Union.

At least for my party in Finland, the National Coalition, the streamlining of legislation and an end to the needless churning out of directives became one of the main objectives in the last European Parliament elections.

I believe that much value is attached to this approach in many other quarters too.

The Commission communication on the present state of the SLIM project is very gratifying, but by no means fully adequate, as yet.

It is vitally important that the Commission is able to make the proposals for the project' s third and fourth phases into clear legislative proposals as soon and as effectively as possible.

Furthermore, the six-month deadline proposed by the rapporteur should be taken seriously.

I warmly support our rapporteur' s proposals that the users of the legislation - the customers of our decision makers - should be heard more than they have been when concrete proposals are being drafted.

Only this sort of coregulation can fully serve to speed up the development of the European internal market, and, ultimately, guarantee that consumers actually do benefit from legislation projects and the adoption of the euro.

Proposals alone are obviously not enough: they must also be able to be processed swiftly both in Parliament and in the Council.

We do have debates on speeding up the legislative process from time to time here in Parliament.

We members of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs in particular await with interest the proposals by the Lamfalussy working party on new courses of action that are to be applied in the future, at least with regard to legislation on financial services.

Although their interim report was still not very detailed, it nevertheless gives us to understand that the working party is pondering a procedure in which only the broadest policy issues would be solved through a full-scale codecision procedure, while for other amendments to directives of a more technical nature the fast-track procedure would apply.

In principle, I take a positive view of such proposals, although it is notoriously difficult for us parliamentarians to relinquish power.

I believe that the relinquishment of power in certain respects will be inevitable to remove the final barriers to the internal market as soon as possible.

My final position, and that of my group, will surely depend on what form the fast-track procedure will take.

In no case should it be an imitation of the present comitology procedure, where there is a very great need for reform, especially in the area of transparency.

Our rapporteur also referred to this.

As regards the general development of the legislative process, I also await with interest the Commission' s white paper on governance it is drafting for the Gothenburg Summit.

Whatever the Commission proposes in its paper will determine how quickly new projects for legislation are dealt with, and, how effective the Union is as a whole for a long time ahead.

Hopefully, the paper will contain good, concrete proposals, but I also hope that we can still put some effort into the SLIM project.

Mr President, it is clear that improving the quality of legislation is essential to the effective functioning of the internal market and to increasing the competitivity of the European economy.

So we all welcome the SLIM initiative, but we must all share the rapporteur's reservations about how it has worked so far.

There are surprisingly few areas which have been subject to the SLIM process and it is not always clear why those particular areas have been selected.

We need, without a doubt, a fast-track procedure to turn SLIM opinions into legislative proposals, because it all seems to take rather a long time.

So we welcome the proposal to set up a special group within the Advisory Committee and we welcome the rapporteur's suggestion that it should have more resources.

Clearly we also need greater synergy between the different Commission initiatives for improving legislation.

We sometimes think that the different parts are operating in isolation.

And, of course, we need greater cooperation between Member States and to overview best practice and seek to repeat best practice elsewhere.

And finally, it is crucial to ensure maximum involvement of the users of this legislation, particularly businesses, because they know best how this legislation affects them.

However, having said that, you could quite conceivably produce wonderful, simple legislation, yet it could be completely destroyed by the way that Member States implement it and enforce it.

We must understand that there are three stages of legislation - formulation, implementation, including transposition, and enforcement - and we have to see the process as a whole.

We often find the greatest problem is not the original legislation but how it has been transposed by Member States and the speed at which they have transposed it, how they have implemented it and how they have enforced it.

I am often quite surprised by how relatively simple ideas are turned into the most complex nightmares as we go through that process.

As part of this on-going determination by the Commission to simplify legislation, I would like to see much greater cooperation between Member States and the Commission about the whole life of legislation and, particularly, involvement with the people who have prime responsibility for enforcing the legislation, who are often local and regional actors.

So we must consider the whole process when we draft the original legislation.

In some ways, you could argue, we should start at the end and look at how we enforce it and then work backwards as a way of getting simpler legislation.

But the SLIM process ought to go much further.

We need a rolling programme which will cover all legislation and look at simplifying, consolidating, re-casting, sometimes repealing legislation.

Sometimes we may need to go for the status quo, but we need a more dynamic process than we have had so far.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I share the rapporteur' s concern about the fact that evidently, European institutions are unable to issue transparent, readily accessible regulations which are clear and understandable to people with average IQ levels.

All credit to Mr Doorn, who has managed to put his finger on the problem.

It should be highlighted, rightly so, that EU citizens and businesses consider complex legislation and red tape to be evidence of a lack of efficiency within the institutions.

As long as the Commission does not adopt a clear, centralised approach to SLIM, the SLIM initiative remains an exercise with no strings attached.

It should be anything but that.

In my opinion, two goals need to be brought into focus, in addition to the recommendations which are currently in the report.

First of all, the SLIM initiative must be lent a binding character, particularly with EU enlargement on the horizon.

Secondly, Member States must, as of now, set a good example by guaranteeing a correct, but above all, timely transposition of European directives into national legislation.

All too often, we have been under the impression that the process of simplification, which is so crucial, is much like a procession of Echternach.

Pending the Union' s enlargement, we must shift up a gear if we want to develop the internal market in a professionally responsible manner.

I am delighted that the Member State which I have the honour of representing here, has realised that special measures need to be taken, as is the case in the Netherlands, to simplify legislation in a consistent manner.

Convinced of the need for simplified legislation, the Liberal Group will be lending the Doorn report its unqualified support.

Mr President, I wish to begin by saying that although I have been allocated four minutes, I should like to do my bit for the simplification and streamlining of bureaucracy by speaking for less than half that time.

I congratulate the rapporteur on highlighting such a very important issue and also highlighting the failures of the Commission to get to grips with it thus far.

I hope that the Commissioner will say what more is to be done to give added urgency to what is such a very important programme.

However, rather than criticise the Commission more than the rapporteur has already done, rather even than refer just to the four committees involved in this particular issue, I should like to highlight one issue the rapporteur also raised, which is that it is really entirely up to us, as Members of this House, to ensure that legislation is better in the first place.

He wondered to what extent legislation should delve into details and gave an example involving people holding ladders.

That particular subject came up in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs.

It must be said that this particular committee has contributed very significantly to the extra bureaucracy that we are now passing the buck to the Commission to try and reduce.

How much better it would be if that committee, and indeed all other committees, had left such legislation alone in its simpler and purer form in the first place.

My final suggestion is that for us the acronym SLIM - "Simpler Legislation for the Internal Market" - should represent "Substantially Less Interference by Members".

Mr President, I wish to congratulate the rapporteur on his report and say that the proposals on the simplification of legislation in the internal market that were launched in 1996 are very welcome.

An attempt was made there to improve the quality of legislation, to try to cut down on superfluous legislation and to limit the costs associated with implementing legislation.

Now that we have finished the third and fourth phases, with teams of Member State officials and users identifying concrete suggestions to simplify legislation, it is right that we have a review.

We need to have clearer definitions of what is going on.

Improved selection at the moment seems to be fairly random and we need some clear guidelines for the operation of the management teams and, of course, the implementation of recommendations which, at the moment, are too little and too late.

Many of the recommendations are not implemented at all and many have to wait considerable periods of time.

So we are in favour, but there are two things we want to add.

Firstly, we have to ensure that political control remains with the Commission and Parliament.

Recent press reports on the new approach to legislation dating from the 1980s and '90s - not so new now - which allowed the detail of legislation to be worked out by industry-led standardisation organisations, seem to indicate that this is not always the best way forward.

The European Committee for Standardisation, for example, recently did work on the packaging of waste directive, which the press has described as "fundamentally flawed, undermines democratic accountability and fails to meet the demands of the directive or, for that matter, environmental protection".

So we need to ensure that there is political control there, unless of course there are strong political or consumer pressures to ensure that industry makes progress.

However, we would also wish to go further in a different direction.

SLIM seems to have become fundamentally about simplification, even though in the original proposals we talked about limiting costs.

What we would like to see are proposals for dealing with economy of legislation as well as simplicity.

We therefore welcome the proposals from Lisbon for better regulation, which will look at the costs of legislation; we welcome the informal meeting of ministers of public administration held in Strasbourg on 7 November; we welcome the establishment of the high-level group to look at recommendations on making legislation more cost-effective; but we are disappointed that the promised European Parliament representative on that high-level group has not been appointed by Parliament nor, as far as I understand, have we been approached to appoint such a representative.

We welcome the fact that Commissioners Bolkestein and Liikanen are looking at various pilot projects in this area.

However, the Commission and Parliament will have to begin to act on their own rules in looking at the financial implications of legislative proposals in order for them to be taken into account.

It can only devalue our work in the European Parliament if claims can be made, for example, that the end-of-vehicle-life directive will cost us £400m a year in terms of the cost to the producers and the consumers but will only deliver £100m a year of benefit to the environment.

While such claims can be made, obviously we in this Parliament will look rather ludicrous.

Mr President, I would very much like to congratulate the rapporteur, Mr Doorn, on this particularly constructive and well-balanced report.

It underlines the need for stepping up our joint efforts in order to improve the quality of new and existing Community legislation - with good reason.

I therefore welcome the support lent to the SLIM initiative, as well as the support shown by this Parliament.

Our review of the SLIM initiative and this report have demonstrated where and how the initiative can be improved.

Consequently, in tandem with the representatives of the Member States, we are, in this connection, looking forward to making and implementing important recommendations under the wing of a newly established internal market Advisory Committee.

With the fifth and subsequent stages of the SLIM in mind, we are currently considering suggestions with regard to sectors which could be due an overhaul.

Any suggestions in this connection from this Parliament are, of course, welcome.

As soon as agreement has been reached on a shortlist of sectors which can be overhauled, we will contact representatives of the industrial and business world, consumer organisations and trade unions, all referred to as the so-called 'consumers' , every step of the way.

That should offer them the opportunity of contributing to the SLIM initiative, either directly or indirectly, and of being informed of the progress made.

I am convinced that this approach will allow all those taking part in this overhaul exercise to focus on the key issues of simplification, and that the SLIM teams will be making relevant and practical recommendations.

I am therefore looking forward to reporting on the progress made during the next couple of months.

As you know, the Commission is required to submit proposals to the best of its ability within six months of receiving the recommendations of the SLIM team, provided that these are recommendations which it can subscribe to.

We will make every effort to fulfil this commitment, and I am addressing Mr Bushill-Matthews in particular with this statement.

We are thrilled with Mr Doorn' s recommendations that Parliament and the Council will each assume their responsibilities, by carefully considering all proposals in this connection, so as to ensure that the SLIM initiative runs as smoothly as possible.

I share Mr Doorn' s view that an increasing number of legislative areas should be simplified.

I am with him on that one. I, too, would like to see this happen.

That is, of course, only possible within the confines imposed by other priority duties and within the budgetary scope available.

I would like to underline this point.

The Commission receives many requests. The Commission has many duties, but it does not always have the means available to fulfil these duties fast and efficiently.

That is an important matter which also merits much attention in this Parliament.

Nevertheless, I have no doubt that we can accelerate the simplification process, not least as a result of the work in which the Commission itself is involved.

In response to the appeal made at the European Council in Lisbon, to reach a coordinated policy so as to simplify the legislative climate, the Commission is currently subjecting its position on legislation in general to a thorough investigation in the widest sense of the word.

It is examining areas where non-regulatory alternatives could be introduced.

Moreover, it is pressing for the development of better ways of gauging the effect of newly proposed legislation on the business world and industry, so as to minimise possible extra expense and administrative red tape.

An enquiry in this connection was also submitted this afternoon.

The efforts which are now being made to draft better legislation coincide with preparations for the white paper on better management.

I am mentioning this particularly for the benefit of Mrs Kauppi.

The Commission' s work will be complemented by the results of the discussions held in a high-level working group on better legislation, which was convened by ministers of the Public Office following their meeting in Strasbourg in November last.

It is this working group' s duty, and Mr Ford called for attention to be given to this, to examine the quality and simplification of both national and Community legislation.

I am already looking forward to the report and the recommendations of this working group.

This legislative process for which we all carry some responsibility, concerns us all, of course.

I am convinced that the current political consensus in aid of a better legislative climate within the European Union will lead to real and permanent improvements.

I would also like to thank Mr Bushill-Matthews for the alternative meaning he gave to the acronym SLIM, namely 'Substantially Less Interference by Members' .

I am very grateful to him for that.

I will try to quote this at the appropriate place and time, and those whom the cap fits can wear it.

On a final note, I would like to let Mr Doorn and your Parliament know that the amendments are acceptable to the Commission.

Thank you very much Commissioner Bolkestein, as usual, for your helpful remarks in this debate.

The vote will be taken tomorrow at 12 noon.

The next item is the recommendation for second reading (A5-0375/2000), by Mrs Sanders-ten Holte, on behalf of the Committee on Culture, Youth, Education, the Media and Sport, on the Council common position for adopting a European Parliament and Council recommendation on European cooperation in quality evaluation in school education [11540/1/2000 - C5-0565/2000 - 2000/0022(COD)].

Mr President, the quality of education is high on the political agenda of every Member State, and that comes as no surprise.

The third millennium offers unknown opportunities and prospects within a society which is becoming increasingly more aware, more global, more mobile and more knowledge-intensive, but at the same time where the concern about different speeds and opportunities for people is becoming increasingly apparent, because how does one ensure that everyone can function fully in this new dynamic society?

Education must and can help here, and all these new developments offer education opportunities and challenges, because education will undergo a sea of change, and that is only the way children are taught, and how they are taught to learn.

Consider, in addition, technology, information technology and the different cultures.

That is why it is so important that the EU Member States join forces and want to work together on future-orientated education, each according to their own tradition but, let there be no mistake, with a common goal in mind.

As rapporteur, I am thus delighted with the results of the common position as it is now before us.

Initially, I found the Commission proposal somewhat vague and very non-committal, given the huge importance of sound education, and the Council was suffering from stage fright: whatever you do, do not touch our autonomy in education.

However, in the course of the discussions, they came to share Parliament' s opinion that the quality of education should be monitored seriously and in a structured manner by, among other things, setting up sound, efficient quality evaluation systems for primary education, secondary education and secondary vocational training.

The recommendations are now clear in the amendments tabled by the MEPs and myself as rapporteur.

In these, we stipulate clearly that Member States must develop transparent quality evaluation with high-quality education as the key goal.

This was not in the first Commission proposal, and neither was the promotion of social integration.

Offering equal opportunities to boys and girls, that was also hard to sell. It was difficult to convince the Council to adopt this wording, but as rapporteur, I am delighted that both the Council and Commission are now in agreement with this.

Another aspect which was close to my heart is that parents, pupils and teachers too should be involved in the process.

This, too, has now been included, and this is important for the support structure of evaluation processes and improvements in education.

It is also important to encourage schools to cooperate at national and European level.

However, I believe that schools should not be prevented from looking for sound cooperation partners in their immediate surroundings within the region, and, in my opinion, this idea could have been given more of an airing in the report.

Finally, I should like to underline the importance of collating information and developing indicators and references, and of entering these in a database which can be consulted interactively.

That is the modern way of communicating.

It brings me pleasure personally as rapporteur to see that the Member States have got down to work both independently and under the remit of the Commission and have set up a working committee of experts that has developed a limited number of indicators and benchmarks.

Parliament will be monitoring the developments closely.

Mr President, Commissioner, the common position as it is now before us is the result of sound and constructive cooperation with the Commission and the Council in the spirit of codecision, but particularly thanks to the involvement of my fellow MEPs who have delivered their comments with great care, the recommendation has become a sound, well-balanced and stimulating one, which Member States can now start to use.

I am interested to hear your reaction.

Mr President, Commissioner, Mrs Peijs, ladies and gentlemen, I wish to begin by thanking Mrs Sanders-ten Holte for the work she has done and I welcome the fruitful cooperation that has developed between Parliament, the Council and the Commission, the outcome of which is the text that has just been presented to us, a text which, I hope, will make a real contribution towards promoting the high quality education throughout Europe we aspire to.

On behalf of my committee, the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs, I would particularly like to stress the importance of improving the quality of teaching in schools and vocational training, and seeking to implement a system for exchanging good practice and methodological tools. These are ways of achieving social cohesion and reducing unemployment.

High quality education systems must strive to achieve objectives, such as to get people into the labour market, to reduce the number of young people leaving school early, our ability to provide life-long learning and to give people access to the new technologies.

I must highlight two points in this quality evaluation as specified in the common position.

First of all, this process makes a clear distinction between administrative evaluation and the innovative procedures that we would like to see and that we would like to implement and in which, as has been said, all stakeholders must take part.

The second point which I would like to highlight has perhaps not been fully taken on board, as we would have wished.

What we do not want to do is to turn the quality evaluation process into a factor for establishing a hierarchy, classification or league table of schools.

On the contrary, this form of evaluation should allow each establishment, however different in terms of its students or the methods or resources used, to meet all the risks of dropping out, to improve the intrinsic quality of education for everyone and to accept all pupils of all abilities by offering education which is tailored to the students' requirements and by allowing everyone to discover their own personal development needs.

Mr President, this report is strongly supported by the PPE-DE Group.

Indeed, we have supported it throughout the entire procedure.

We regretted that initially there was some slight resistance from the Council but we are very pleased that, as a result of strong intervention by the Commissioner and the negotiating skills of the rapporteur, a compromise was reached last autumn that we can certainly support.

We congratulate the Commissioner and the rapporteur on their work to achieve that.

We certainly all agree here in this Chamber that education is of vital importance and that an educated workforce is the cornerstone of Europe's future prosperity.

Therefore, any attempts to improve standards in our schools must be welcomed with open arms.

We also all agree that education is rightly a matter for the individual Member States and the regions.

But there is room for the Commission to coordinate and improve evaluation systems as provided for in the Treaty and I was glad to see that the Commission was careful to emphasise that this is to be based on voluntary cooperation between the Member States.

Certainly, at the moment it is difficult to get past each country's various examination systems and teaching philosophies to reach any objective comparison of the teaching standards of the countries.

As a former lecturer myself, I would have welcomed a clear idea of how British teaching and educational standards compared to those of other European countries.

It is important in this global age to have as broad an input as possible for the evaluation system.

European comparisons will show up, one hopes, strengths but also weaknesses that are currently hidden by evaluation systems limited to a single educational system.

One of the main aims of education is to provide for the world of work as well as providing a cultural base for Europe's young people.

This report seeks a balance between the need for adequate preparation in both those fields.

The possibility of comparing education systems across borders will, I hope, lead to improvements across European teaching establishments as schools learn from others outside their immediate view.

The point made by Mrs Sanders-ten Holte about social exclusion is particularly valid.

I would like to see whether there are differences in the pattern of the school day, whether this varies in different parts of Europe, and whether this offers ways of improving education.

Then there is the use of compulsory sports activities: does this help in the educational system of different countries?

Do different countries have different patterns?

We would all be interested to know how the educational systems achieve competence in two modern languages in addition to the mother tongue.

I suspect my own country will not do so well there but perhaps we would do better on the use of information technology.

Finally, I would just like to say that the rapporteur's amendments calling for greater self-evaluation and participation of stakeholders inserts a valuable cog in the evaluation machine.

The opinion of those within the educational system is often lost within the large civil service machines and bureaucracies which run schools.

We must find ways which give power back to the schools and to the parents and to the students because that is where responsibility should lie.

Mr President, Commissioner, education is assuming an ever more important role in the European strategy.

The conclusions of the Lisbon Summit emphasised the importance of education both in improving competitiveness and preventing exclusion.

It is only natural that the quality of school education should receive attention also at Union level, although the organisation of education itself is the responsibility of the Member States.

We need Europe-wide cooperation and encouragement in all areas of education.

Systematic quality evaluation in education is still in its infancy in many EU countries.

In Finland, for example, there were legal provisions introduced on it as part of national educational legislation just two years ago.

A report on the subject prepared in Helsinki last week shows that evaluation is not yet adequately systematic in nature, although it has got off to a brisk start.

The report points out, for example, that comprehensive and high school education has not paid adequate attention to cooperation between pupils, their parents and the organisers of education.

The importance of including pupils and their home background in decision making is certainly worth bearing in mind.

Education cannot just be looked at from the limited point of view of competitiveness.

There must be room for different sorts of talent, but, at the same time, we have to ensure that the others remain included.

Education has a major part to play in building an equal and integrated society.

Well-organised education means that national resources are being put to the best possible use.

In my opinion, schools must be developed in such a way that all children starting their compulsory education can achieve success.

That is why the evaluation of quality cannot just focus on results, which give a narrow picture of the situation.

Education is not just about information and skills gathering, but also personal development, in the shape, for example, of a healthy sense of self-worth.

It is a positive sign that a common position on the quality evaluation of school education is ready to be approved so quickly.

Mrs Sanders-ten Holte, Commissioner Reding and the Council all deserve the credit for this.

We are making good progress with this important issue.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, education is one of those areas of competence which is very much part of what goes on in a community, and so it should be.

This competence must be carried out as closely to the population as possible, and that means that there will probably never be a need for a general European education system.

But it is exactly because education is so important in the passing on, not only of knowledge and in the acquisition of skills, but it is also in the passing on of cultural heritage and in the integration of the individual into the social fabric that sound education is vital.

Accordingly, we pour huge amounts of money into education and yet, there is an increasing need for European quality monitoring. That is why we would like to lend our support in this matter.

Parents know that education requires a huge effort from children and students, but at the same time they expect to see results.

In the old days, maybe attending a good school was sufficient, because it enjoyed our ideological trust.

That criterion is no longer enough on its own, and has not been for a long time.

Parents want quality education, and children who attend school want to actually learn what is important in life.

Each one of us can ask the question how important common quality monitoring is in our own environment.

What it did lead to in Flanders is a high level of self-evaluation in the schools. They sensed of their own accords that they needed to make a stand in the world of education.

It has also led to increasing levels of care and concern across the borders.

In Flanders, quality monitoring used to be a bit of a taboo subject, for example, for it was feared that this would breed hostility in the different educational networks. We now see that the opposite is true.

The desire for quality monitoring in education has opened up the door to this large European Community and to the job market of this European Community. Quality monitoring has thus increasingly become a common area of concern.

Today, I can show you the results of an enquiry which was held across the Flemish education system to check whether both primary and secondary education meet the common standards.

It is quite striking how much media attention this enquiry received, precisely because they know that parents, students and the entire teaching environment scrutinise these results.

After all, each school, each educational network, wants to come out of this enquiry smelling of roses, but at the same time, each parent wants their children to attend good schools.

It has come to my attention that the world of education has been complaining about a lack of resources. After all, not only do we want our children to do well at school, we also want their schools to be well equipped, the environments to be safe, in other words the infrastructure to be up to scratch.

Unfortunately, a great deal of resources are still needed in many countries in order to achieve this.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I would like to take this opportunity to thank the rapporteur for her work.

I welcome the report and consider European cooperation in quality evaluation in school education to be important in this age of information.

The European education systems must become attuned to the information society.

Rapid scientific and technological change, together with globalisation, demand superior educational standards.

We need an education system that can easily adapt to rapid developments in modern society.

What constitutes a good school education these days?

Is it about imparting knowledge and expertise?

There is more to it than that.

I believe it is the role of education in terms of the self-realisation of the individual and his or her participation in a democratic, socially just and tolerant society that is crucial to the definition of a high quality education.

Young people must be given the opportunity to acquire academic and social competences at school.

Everyone is entitled to a good school education, and that goes for foreign nationals and groups on the fringe of society too.

They are particularly at risk of social marginalisation because they are not as well educated.

I call upon the Member States of the European Union to ensure that everyone receives the same standard of education.

The social divide between the informed and the uninformed must be bridged.

Quality evaluation in school education is to be welcomed for two reasons. Firstly, I regard the evaluation as a way of incentivising people to improve school education, and secondly, it raises awareness of the quality dimension in education systems.

The Member States of the European Union must work together in the field of quality evaluation in school education, because this is of crucial importance to labour market policy and the free movement of workers within the EU.

In addition, organisations and associations working in the field of quality evaluation in school education should cooperate at European level.

We need European networks so as to be able to offer mutual support and to get the external evaluation process off the ground.

After all, schools, associations, and organisations can learn from one another by exchanging information and experiences and so find exemplary solutions to providing a good education.

I am committed to the idea of providing a good education, as a way of preventing unemployment and social exclusion.

A high-quality education is an investment in the future, for the sake of social progress, a peaceful world and tolerance.

Mr President, today we are discussing a draft recommendation to the Member States on quality evaluation in education which may bring some worthwhile innovations to the working methods of the European Union and a project which has already made good progress at grass roots level.

As far back as 1998, at a conference in Prague attended by 26 European countries, the national Ministers for Education agreed to implement a system of common indicators for their methods and results.

First of all, they had to establish a common language and then compare results in order to share experiences, whilst leaving each Member State with full responsibility for its own education system.

We will find this an interesting initiative as much from the point of view of its motives as the method used.

As regards motives, on the one hand, education is obviously a key factor in the age of the information and knowledge society, for both human development and economic competitiveness.

We should, therefore, ensure that we get the most from the inevitably limited resources available to us.

So we can only be surprised at the size of the gaps between the Member States of the European Union which are emerging, in particular, from the first set of statistics published by Eurostat last July.

For example, while the average level of public spending per pupil in secondary education in Europe is 100, Germany spends 84.9 and France 131.6.

The difference is thus quite considerable.

Moreover, it does not always work the same way and depends on the circumstances.

That is why it is in all our interests to share our experiences.

The advantages of doing this seem particularly obvious in the case of France, which has a very inflexible education system that would benefit from being more responsive to the needs of the 'education consumer' .

However, it is difficult to carry out any reform precisely because of this inflexibility.

As regards the methodological issues, on the other hand, the new cooperation in evaluation of education systems could, in fact, lead the way to a new, wholly beneficial, method.

It involves implementation of an open method of coordination, which has already been touched upon at the Lisbon European Council and which, if it were developed, could introduce a divide between working methods in Europe.

It would not be a question of setting targets with a view to obligatory harmonisation.

In any case, Articles 149 and 150 of the Treaty establishing the European Community do not give the Community competence in this area.

It is simply a matter of together finding out the best practices, without, a priori, setting targets in precise detail beforehand and of allowing each country to draw their own conclusions.

This new method of coordination will create a networked Europe, which organises interaction between the various seats of power, i.e. the national Ministries of Education, rather than a centralised Europe.

This networked coordination is more decentralised and flexible and more liberal than the standard harmonisation directive.

In addition, it can easily extend beyond the Union' s borders to bring together 26 or more Member States, rather than 15.

Mr President, we believe, for all these reasons, that this new and different method of cooperation seems to have great promise.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I said by way of introduction, back in the debate held on 5 July on "quality evaluation in school education" that the foundations for the future of young people are laid in classrooms, but not just in classrooms.

There are no two ways about it, education, i.e. training and further education, must take centre stage in all policy areas.

Education is not an end in itself but is the key to our being able to hold our own in the modern age, not just in economic terms but also at a personal level.

The transition to the knowledge-based society, the globalisation of the economy, social, democratic and environmental change, together with far-reaching changes in the world of work, due not least to the new technologies: these are the big challenges we face in the third millennium, and they also require renewed efforts in the educational field.

So again, I welcome the fact that this report has come before the House, because its aim is both to improve school education and the quality evaluation thereof.

Quality comparisons - be they internal or external - generate competition, and if the quality of education in European schools is enhanced as a result, and the three-fold challenge posed by the information society, globalisation and rapid scientific and technological change is taken into account, then this report will have achieved its goal of giving renewed impetus to efforts in the field of education, and a major step forward will have been taken at European level.

So let us help to ensure that the report on implementation, which the Commission is to put before Parliament in three years' time, proves successful.

Permit me though, on a final note, to say something that is fundamental to the future of education, since I have just come from an educational symposium, the Federal Conference of the Austrian People' s Party.

There is more to education than equipping people for employment.

Its goal must be the all-round development of young people as individuals.

This entails imparting fundamental knowledge, skills and competences, communicating values, and educating people in music, creative subjects, health and sport.

Secondly, a sound knowledge base, which imparts important material and leaves out what is unimportant, still forms the basis for education in the twenty-first century.

So it falls short of the mark to say that knowledge and information ought only to be obtained from the Internet.

Those who do not have basic knowledge do not know where to acquire knowledge either.

The cultural techniques of reading, calculating and writing form part of this knowledge base.

The new technologies offer new opportunities to acquire knowledge and employ our cultural techniques.

Only those who have a knowledge base know how to handle knowledge properly, and how to distinguish and differentiate, in an age that has seen an explosion in knowledge.

That is why I feel this report makes a significant contribution to placing the acquisition of knowledge at the heart of our policy areas.

Mr President, I, too, would like to congratulate those who have been responsible for getting the report to this stage.

Quality, as we have been hearing, can be a problematic concept in education, especially when one looks at any form of assessment.

There are certain areas, such as literacy and numeracy, where we can now gain some idea of what has been achieved.

There are many international studies which have thrown up difficulties, however, when it comes to making straight comparisons, because of differences in curriculum, approach and the underlying assumptions about what constitutes a good education.

It is essential not to confuse education with training.

The primary purpose of education is not to prepare people for the job market but to prepare them for a life which is fulfilling in every way.

In an increasingly flexible or precarious working environment people will be thrown back on their inner resources at many times in their lives and social cohesion is partly dependent on such personal resilience.

We only have to look at what happens to those who are thrown out of work or who are excluded from the job market.

So when we are assessing the quality of education, we want to see if we can develop people who have self-esteem and confidence, who can communicate effectively, who can look behind the information for the hidden message, who can question, who can work as part of a team and independently, and who are creative, resourceful and have an appreciation of the wider world and their responsibility to it.

I also think that when we are looking at the quality of education we need to see if it is delivering real equality of opportunity for all of those within the system or whether it is doing, as society does, so much to exclude people on grounds of a poor background or their colour or whatever.

So in our comparisons and benchmarking we have to look beyond narrow league table approaches.

After all, every football team in a league depends upon the level of investment and the selection of the very best.

It does not necessarily improve the performance of all.

I am glad to see that we are recognising the importance of involving pupils themselves in the development and assessment of our educational system.

We cannot expect to develop fully rounded and responsible individuals if they are not encouraged to be constructive and articulate about this major component of their lives.

After all, education properly done is a collaborative adventure and we know we have a lot to learn from each other.

That is why I welcome this report.

Mr President, evaluation in general and evaluation in school education in particular are not a mere formality.

Their purpose is always to check if the person being evaluated has met the predefined targets of the person conducting the evaluation, who sets both the evaluation criteria and the consequences of their being met or not.

Collaboration on the part of the Member States in evaluating school education is becoming an important tool for intervening in the Member States' education systems, the aim being to promote an education model which is a far cry from a universal, quantitatively and qualitatively broad general education.

A model which is even a far cry from the principle of ensuring that everyone is given the same start in life.

A model which costs little but which serves the needs of big business for a cheap and, more importantly, docile labour force, a labour force which is wholly adapted to its requirements.

This policy results in cutbacks in general education for the benefit of training which produces disposable labour; it even results in general education being replaced by an endless process of life-long learning.

It also results in the weaker - and generally poor - students being shifted out of mainstream education into second-class training, as is the case in Greece, where the number of sixth form students has fallen by 35% in a few years following the so-called education reform.

Evaluation also aspires to becoming a lever which can be used to force schools to operate in a competitive environment in which the best schools attract the best pupils, the best teachers and the most funding - in other words to operate on market criteria.

This will result in falling standards in the majority of schools, especially in working-class districts and the countryside.

In addition, the system of self-evaluation shifts the government's responsibility for the quality of education on to teachers, pupils and parents.

If we were truly interested in the quality of education, we would not be concentrating on evaluation mechanisms but on improving the standard of education for everyone.

The debate on how to carry out evaluation is futile and misleading.

What does make sense is to debate the essence of the problem.

What type of person do schools mould and for what sort of society?

If we were to evaluate today's schools on the basis of this criterion, we would surely conclude that they have a long way to go to meet the needs of the workers and for social progress.

Mr President, I welcome this document and fully support the European Parliament and Council decision to promote cooperation and quality evaluation in school education.

I particularly welcome the emphasis on social inclusion.

Education is an important, indeed crucial, part of society.

Our education has an impact on all our lives and our communities as well.

Recent reports, as those of us from the UK are aware, have tended to criticise the teaching of children at a very young age as this could prove damaging.

It would therefore be good to compare and contrast with other European models, within limits of course, as my colleague Mrs Lambert has already stressed.

Spain, for example, attaches great importance to social inclusion and developing personalities, working in teams; integrating.

These are placed higher on the agenda than academia and at an early age.

I also fully agree with better integration between parents, pupils and teachers and the many community players who rightly want to play a role in education and its development and achieve, as a result, the idea of the school as the community.

It will also provide an excellent opportunity to encourage schools in the different regions to share in good practices.

Partnerships between different countries are so important, as indeed are partnerships not only between countries but between rural and urban links.

This is part of a very important twinning concept and philosophy that is well established in Europe and is proving such a success throughout all our communities.

I stress that the sharing of good practices and the sharing of information between the different schools in Europe should not develop into a competitive practice.

We should at all costs discourage any attempt to create European league table of schools similar to that in the UK that has proved so detrimental.

I welcome the report, it is a positive paper and one that we can build on to create better educational networks within the European Union.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, we are only at the beginning of the new year and I believe that it is still appropriate to say to you and your families that I hope this year will see all your dreams come true.

To everyone here at the European Parliament and the Commission, I hope that we continue to work on the same good terms as we have done in the past.

Today' s business is to examine the draft recommendation on quality evaluation of school education.

This draft has already made good progress and had the full backing of the European Parliament.

I would like to thank Parliament for its enormous support which was testimony to its political will to forge ahead, something that was, at times, difficult. Parliament made many positive suggestions which, over the years, have been put into practice in the field.

I would particularly like to give sincere thanks to the rapporteur, Mrs Sanders-ten Holte, for the excellent work that she has carried out in extremely short time frames and I would also like to extend my thanks to everyone in the Committee on Culture, Youth, Education, the Media and Sport.

You have before you a draft recommendation which, as some of you have mentioned, relates to a key issue at the heart of our political priorities, to wit, can we guarantee improvements in the quality of school education and, if so, how do we go about it so that the European Union can give this a bit of a nudge in the right direction, without interfering in European systems which are, and remain, the responsibility of the national Ministers for Education?

You are aware that we have already made considerable progress towards this goal, since the launch of the major pilot project to evaluate the quality of school education took place at the beginning of the 1997 academic year. Over 100 secondary schools in 18 countries took part in this project.

The draft recommendation is, to a great extent, based on the conclusions which we collectively drew from this research.

The recommendation relates to two crucial points.

First of all, that of evaluation as an instrument to improve quality - the aim of which is not to establish who is top and who is bottom of the class, but rather simply to act as an incentive so that everyone ends up at the top of the class.

Secondly, the role of European cooperation in this area.

This is, moreover, something we know how to do very well, and we have demonstrated as much.

In this sense, the proposal encourages self-evaluation, external evaluation and urges all stakeholders to play a part in every aspect of the evaluation process so that, in the end, schools are inspired to learn from each other and can identify good practices and the most efficient tools for evaluation.

In this process, the Commission shall not prescribe any rules and is fulfilling its role as a catalyst.

It is encouraging European cooperation between schools and enabling them to establish a Europe-wide network. It is trying to set up a database of tools and instruments to be used by schools in self-evaluation and which will then by available to all stakeholders involved.

That is precisely what the Lisbon European Council asked us to do.

If we wish to place European society at the forefront of the world stage as an example of the knowledge society, then clearly, the extremely high quality of teaching in schools in every Member State, area and village should be the raison d' être for social equality amongst citizens.

Mr Karas said that, in today' s schools, we are creating the society and the success of tomorrow' s society and I agree with this wholeheartedly.

From this perspective, it is our responsibility to provide every available tool and to ensure that schools learn from each other, that the system improves everywhere and that no one is left by the wayside.

That is actually the goal of a knowledge society.

We cannot afford ourselves the luxury of 20%, at the very least, of pupils being left by the wayside because they have not received the education they need to be able to do well in society.

I agree with those of you who, on this point, said that you need to prepare for life in society before preparing for life on the employment market.

Moreover, that is a considerable loss for a society that needs all its human resources in order to progress.

Ladies and gentlemen, together with the Ministers for Education, we are making these proposals on quality analysis to enable us to give this opportunity to all young people, because if they receive a high quality education then it is likely that they will be able to do well in society and be able to find a job.

That is why I would once again like to thank Mrs Sanders-ten Holte, the rapporteur, as well as the Committee on Culture, Youth, Education, the Media and Sport and all the Members who have assisted us in this work.

I would like to inform you that, following the Education Council' s move to make evaluation and quality a priority issue, action 6 of the Socrates programme has put out to tender within this very specific area.

This will result in comparative studies being made and relevant institutions being networked.

I would also like to inform you that, at the beginning of April, the Swedish Presidency will be holding a conference at Karstadt and that the upcoming Belgian Presidency has already planned to work on this issue during its presidency.

You will, therefore, have concluded, ladies and gentlemen, that this is not the last time that we shall be discussing this issue and that I shall be coming here on a regular basis to speak to you in detail about new and, hopefully, all positive, developments.

Thank you very much, Mrs Reding.

The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon.

The next item is the debate on the report (A5-0382/2000) by Mrs De Veyrac, on behalf of the Committee on Culture, Youth, Education, the Media and Sport, on the application in the EU countries of the Convention for the Protection of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage [2000/2036(INI)]

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, it is a commonplace to say that our heritage and its protection are crucial components of European identity, a commonplace but true, nonetheless.

Our heritage is one of the most visible components, one of those closest to the culture of our fellow citizens.

It forms part of their everyday environment and their own identity.

It strengthens the sense of belonging to the European Union by identifying the roots we all share.

Protection of heritage is therefore a vital necessity in view of the ravages it suffers over time, but also in view of the new forms of attack it is undergoing, such as atmospheric pollution, uncoordinated urbanisation, demographic pressure and, unfortunately, many others.

The European Parliament has approached this matter very seriously with, in particular, two resolutions adopted in 1982 and 1988, which provide a frame of reference for the action to be undertaken in this field.

I now consider it necessary to assess the current situation on this issue, taking into account both the principle of subsidiarity and the development of the European Union due to the increased number of Member States.

It is worth recalling the objective of the UNESCO Convention, which is to protect heritage and not to enter it on a heritage list.

Since the last time sites were selected in December 2000, 690 sites have been added to the World Heritage List, 208 of which are located within the European Union.

Of these 208 sites, 192 are cultural properties, 11 are natural sites and 5 are properties of mixed type.

The fact that the European Union is highly placed on this list, with almost a third of the sites, is easily explained in terms of Europe' s contribution to world civilisation.

However, in order to obtain a better balance on the list between the various categories and also between States, UNESCO has drawn up a world strategy and an action plan for the implementation of that strategy.

I think it appropriate that Parliament recommend that Member States that can pride themselves on a significant number of listed sites should restrict the number of sites they propose in future.

I think it perfectly reasonable that they should make a contribution towards making the world list more representative and more balanced, both geographically and in terms of its content.

When this report was adopted by Parliament' s Committee on Culture, Youth, Education, the Media and Sport, the two provisions on self-imposed restriction were withdrawn by a very slim majority.

I do however feel, ladies and gentlemen, that these provisions should be reincorporated, and I have therefore tabled two amendments to this effect on behalf of the PPE-DE Group.

Another proposal was made in the report for a European list to be drawn up, for UNESCO sees heritage sites primarily from a geographical point of view, which restricts their concept of what a site is.

A port may be classified, for example, without any regard for the boats.

A steel plant may be classified without regard for the equipment.

I feel that Europe, the European Union, on the other hand should look at things from a dynamic point of view.

It could therefore take action on dynamic aspects of heritage and, from this point of view, a European list may represent real progress.

It would make it possible to raise the profile of sites which are of more than purely national importance but which are not yet accorded world recognition.

That would moreover help to bring Europe closer to the people, giving them an awareness of a shared cultural heritage.

There is often need for heritage to be restored.

The Commission should draw up a report on the position of restorers in Member States with a view to structuring the restoration sector in order to guarantee the quality of such work.

High-quality restoration requires sufficient funding, and the need for economy should not override the need for quality work.

Finally, I suggest that the European Commission should, in liaison with the Council of Europe and UNESCO, look into the viability of a legal and fiscal instrument in order to facilitate forms of patronage relating to the conservation of the cultural and natural heritage.

This aspect might be included in the deliberations on the harmonisation of European tax systems.

Protection of heritage is an area over which we must be continually vigilant.

It is our responsibility to hand this heritage on to future generations.

The young people of Europe must be able to identify themselves in this in order to build their future and to be able to perceive their European identity more clearly.

Surely the feeling of being European relates far more to cultural references than to economic and social data?

In conclusion, let me repeat this expression which you will all recognise as emanating from one of the great founders of the European Union, "If I had to start again, I would start with culture."

It is something which could have been said by Haydn composing in London, da Vinci painting in Amboise, or Byron dying in Missolonghi.

It is the feeling, the pleasure we all experience when travelling through the European Union and marvelling at the treasures we find there and the pride we feel that, thanks to the existence of the European Union, we are in some small way owners, and also their custodians for all time.

Mr President, Commissioner, world cultural heritage - we have just heard the statistics - is distributed relatively unevenly.

Most of it is here in Europe, which is something we can be very proud of, although it also shows that there are certain inequalities.

Also, there are very few sites, i.e. places that have been deemed part of world cultural heritage, in comparison with the number found in the rest of the world, and it is a real drop in the ocean, because there are many more sites that would merit this kind of status and support.

This simplifies neither the decision-making process nor the selection procedures.

More applications are rejected than are accepted, and I think there is a need to redefine the criteria.

The diversity of cultural heritage underlines the identity of a country' s own regions, which is why responsibility must primarily be taken and asserted at regional level, whilst acknowledging that they must be afforded substantial support from outside, from the European Union and from all those who are jointly responsible.

These regional responsibilities include the preservation of homelands, customs and traditions, the development of a country' s own regions and so on and so forth.

As I see it, these are criteria that can primarily only be managed at regional level.

The importance of world cultural heritage sites transcends the scope of regional development.

They are cultural treasures, and bear witness to epoch-making changes and unique occurrences in nature.

Architectural cultural heritage, land developed and cultivated by man and urban cultural heritage belong together, but the picture is not complete unless it also includes monuments to contemporary history, from the world of work for example, such as developments in working life, the building of factories, machines and so on and so forth.

They trace the development of the working process of our document, and also elsewhere in the world.

It is therefore just as important to tackle the plundering of architectural finds as it is to combat the thoughtless destruction of the remnants of social institutions.

Rapid technological development and changes in our environment really bring home how important it is to spare a thought for our natural heritage and take responsibility, in other words development planning and changes of designated land usages must feature more prominently in our responsibility for the conservation of our cultural heritage.

Accordingly, when selecting world cultural heritage sites, there must be more emphasis on striking a balance between historic sites, religious monuments, the various religions from prehistoric times, contemporary history and natural heritage, and the assessment criteria must be amended with this in mind.

The conservation of our cultural heritage is associated not only with a high level of responsibility, but also with high levels of cost.

We therefore need to find ways of alleviating the financing aspect, of considering the legal and fiscal instrument and providing sponsors with incentives to make us more conscious of this responsibility.

Mr President, in the European Union and in this Parliament, we must deal with what is essential for European cooperation, namely that which creates a stronger and slimmer Europe, and we must be very careful not to take on any tasks which more properly fall to the Member States.

It is important to protect cultural heritage, and the Union' s common cultural heritage is its diversity.

It is a great and vital responsibility to safeguard this diversity in every single Member State.

I therefore consider this report to be superfluous.

On the basis of the principle of subsidiarity, it is my view that protecting cultural heritage is a task for the Member States.

Up until now, the Member States have helped implement the Convention Concerning the Protection of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage by tabling proposals - many of them - for inclusion on UNESCO' s list of values of specially universal significance.

There is probably a disproportionately high number of European topics on the list and, as the rapporteur remarks, a little more modesty might well be in order.

I do not think it goes without saying that there should be a special list detailing European cultural heritage. Nor do I think it necessary for the Commission to take on the major task of coordinating the initiatives, as many have requested.

On behalf of the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party, I have therefore tabled a series of amendments whereby Parliament is to call upon the Member States, and not the Commission, to implement the necessary cooperation in consultation with UNESCO and the Council of Europe.

I have done this in order to honour the principle of subsidiarity and also with reference to Romano Prodi' s words here in Parliament last year when he said, "Let us remember how often we have been made into a laughing stock because we deal with things that are absolutely ridiculous, which defy common sense and conflict with the interests of our population" .

I think that this is an area in which we can put the Union' s work on hold for a short while.

Mr President, the Committee on Culture, Youth, Education, the Media and Sport deserves our congratulations on its initiative to draft this report on how we can protect our cultural and natural heritage in the European Union, as does the rapporteur for the ideas and measures which she recommends, the majority of which I agree with.

Naturally - to come back to what the previous speaker said - every Member State of the European Union has a policy on these issues.

Obviously, we have no intention of superseding national policy.

However, we really do need a more general perception and a policy at Union level.

And the reason is clear: it is because all Union policies have a considerable impact on how we preserve and promote our cultural and natural heritage - mainly a negative impact.

For example, the Union frequently funds projects and interventions through the Structural Funds which destroy or seriously affect monuments, the landscape and other elements of our cultural and natural heritage.

There are, unfortunately, numerous examples from Greece alone.

We fought long and hard some time ago to stop the Egnatia motorway from being routed alongside the ancient Dodoni theatre, where it would have prevented the audience from hearing the performance.

Because of pressure from numerous organisations, the question of electricity pylons on the Cyclades islands was taken to the Privy Council, the Supreme Administrative Court in Greece, which broke new ground in its judgment and recognised, yet again, the value of the beauty of the landscape on these islands.

Today, the question is still in abeyance of the new Olympic facilities in Schinia in Marathon, an historic site par excellence for the whole of Europe as well as a particularly important wetland which was initially included in the ÍÁÔURA 2000 lists, Commissioner.

We should like to save it, quite how I do not know.

The construction is also in abeyance of the new museum on the Acropolis, a stone's throw from the sacred rock and the Parthenon. It is to be located on top of older archaeological remains, thereby endangering both the remains in question and the aesthetics of the whole area and the vista leading up to the world-renowned sacred rock and the Parthenon.

This project and many others have one thing in common: they hope to receive, or they are already in receipt of, Community funding.

It is therefore quite clear why I wholeheartedly support the particular points in the resolution which call on the Commission to examine projects from the point of view of their impact on cultural and natural heritage, their historical importance and their visual impact, all of which should be made into eligibility criteria, before any funding is approved.

Mr President, Mrs de Veyrac' s report seeks to extend the concept of heritage and the criteria for the selection of national heritage sites in particular.

The UEN Group will vote in favour of this report.

No one can question the need to extend this concept to sites which are not just monuments, natural sites or moveable property.

There is clearly a great deal of ethnographic data which can be collected and protected as world heritage.

The importance of musical heritage or literature in the oral tradition may be emphasised, the task of collection, analysis and protection of which still remains to be carried out in a good many countries.

This heritage, which goes beyond the traditional concept which often embraces only monuments or sites, is often a factor in the daily lives of the people living on this earth.

It is this presence and permanence in culture and daily life which should define the very concept of heritage, as indeed Mrs Prets mentioned.

I should therefore like to emphasise, for example, particularly here in Strasbourg, the importance which our fellow citizens attach to their national currencies and their determination to consider it as a part of their heritage.

The German magazine, Focus-Money, recently published a survey showing that 70% of Germans are committed to the Deutschmark and wish to retain it.

This percentage is an average, because in eastern Germany the rate is as much as 80%.

The French Finance Minister, responsible for implementing the withdrawal of the franc, recently published on his website a very interesting survey on the French people' s commitment to their currency.

This is, admittedly, a 'reverse diagnosis' because they were, of course, asked their opinion on the euro and not on the franc.

Only 26% of the French have confidence in this artificial currency.

I think it worth informing you of the real state of affairs, given that this is something that does not appear to have been taken into consideration or to have any influence over the European Parliament.

In Great Britain, which has for the moment decided to protect its national heritage in the form of the pound sterling, only 14% of young people in the 18-24 age range wish to give up the pound.

By this standard, the 45% of Danes who gave a yes answer would make the recent referendum in Denmark look like a vote in favour of the single currency.

Europeans are committed to their own currencies just as they are committed to their own values, their own nations, their own natural heritage sites, their own languages and their own cathedrals.

This is how national currencies should be protected, as if they were part of world heritage.

This is the thrust of the amendment I have tabled on behalf of my group and which I urge you to support.

Mr President, I should like to congratulate Mrs de Veyrac, who has set out and elaborated on the subject of a Convention concerning the protection of world cultural and natural heritage in the Member States of the European Union, confirming in her report the undiminished interest which Europe needs to have in this important issue, together with the initiatives which need to be taken throughout the world.

Although Nice did not take the crucial decision of exempting culture from the unanimity ruling, thereby enabling us to take a more decisive step towards convergence, what is important, as the report confirms, is that the European Union is working to develop a diverse cultural area.

Equally important, in my view, is Europe's awareness, as the report states, that it is over-represented on the World Heritage list and that this over-representation applies both to historic towns and to religious buildings, as compared with other categories of countries, to Christianity in relation to other religions and beliefs and to 'elitist' as opposed to vernacular architecture.

This awareness demonstrates that the concept of cultural diversity and respect for what is foreign is an accepted idea right at the nub of the problem and will help Europe play a fundamental role in relation to the rest of the world in the era of globalisation.

As far as the proposals are concerned, I think that the proposal to take the initiative on harmonisation at ministerial level is especially important, as is decisive action by the Member States to stop the plundering of and the illegal trade in archaeological finds within the countries of the European Union.

Moreover - and here I agree with Mr Papayannakis - I think that cultural impact studies should be a compulsory criterion when deciding which projects to fund with European money, so that we avoid causing what is often incalculable damage.

It is to be welcomed that the Culture 2000 programme has allocated one third of its budget to cultural, archaeological, underwater and architectural heritage and to museums, libraries and archives, thereby strengthening national action.

However, as the report points out, attention must be paid to rural heritage, to ancient and Palaeolithic forests, to habitats and wetlands, in other words to what are considered more or less marginal issues.

Education and training in all professions involved in protecting, preserving and promoting cultural and natural heritage are also important, as are raising pupils' and young people's awareness and developing a movement of voluntary activities which can also make a decisive contribution.

Mr President, Commissioner, this is a sound and very instructive report. I would therefore like to thank the rapporteur for the amount of work she has put into it.

It shows, at least, that the European Union and the Member States have done their homework, and have done it well.

They have submitted many applications, so much so that this has led to an imbalance.

In my opinion, this is due to the opinion that it is especially buildings that must be registered. There are, of course, also other aspects, and I believe we should encourage Member States to take measures so that we can redress the balance and be more selective.

My own group is debating whether or not the European Union has a task here.

First of all, the preservation of our cultural heritage, also at European level, appeals to the citizen.

Our historic monument days are always very well attended.

Our cultural heritage is an excellent tool to make the European dimension visible.

Secondly, European added value is evident in many areas, for example in cross-border projects in the Wadden Sea region and underwater archaeology.

The European Union can encourage Member States to cooperate, and can offer support in all cultural areas, for example.

Another point where the European Union can fulfil a typically European task is research and education.

So is creating clarity as to which areas transcend national interests. Drafting inventories and lists is necessary at every administrative level, and it is important to weigh up all the pros and cons when taking environmental action.

Thirdly, I would mention the deployment of structural funds.

Preserving cultural heritage is important for tourism. It brings cultural diversity into focus.

It has a bearing on employment.

The question of whether the European Union has a task is not a question to me.

In this area, the European Union has a task to stimulate, support and make visible Europe' s common cultural heritage.

Accordingly, I, along with others in my group, will give my unqualified support to the rapporteur' s report.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, it so happens that I was involved in the practical application of the UNESCO Convention in a particular case.

At a UNESCO meeting some years ago in Casablanca, the issue was raised of whether to make the entire Alpine Region a World Heritage Site.

I confess to feeling somewhat perplexed at this point, for I found the idea of lumping the entire Alpine Region, which covers a whole range of different areas, together as one site rather odd.

I was amazed by the frequent discrepancies between the sites selected - certainly not due to any fault of UNESCO's but because of the varying natures of the sites put forward by the States. I also noticed the conspicuous absence of some cultural, natural or mixed sites.

In this regard, Mr Costa of our group, who is the mayor of Venice, reminded us ironically, a few days ago, that Venice has never been classified as a World Heritage Site.

Well then, upon reading the Convention my suspicion was confirmed: the 30 year-old Convention is now prehistoric.

In the meantime, we have become much more sensitive towards culture and the environment - consider the buzzword 'sustainable development'.

This is why I am afraid that the report will prove to be full of inconsistencies: some issues need to be simplified because of the need for coordination between European countries rather than European interventions, which can be unnecessary and are sometimes used by the Member States as an excuse to avoid their responsibilities.

Moreover, in certain cases, the structures already exist. I would point out - and this is a positive fact - that the text refers to regional minority languages, which are covered by a range of protective measures.

Nevertheless, there are some good points.

I would point out that there must be a policy of active interventions inasmuch as the protection of sites works well if the interventions also include the commitment of financing; the sums referred to by the Convention, which are minimal, are certainly not sufficient for active interventions, especially in Third World countries.

It would be a good idea for the Commission, sooner or later, to indicate the limit which State aid may exceed, as laid down in Article 87(3)(d).

Mr President, Commissioner, I am going to discuss that area of Europe' s cultural heritage which is not included on UNESCO' s list and which is scarcely included on our own lists.

It has to do with the fact that almost every second square metre of the European Union is cultivated, both the agricultural landscape and land given over to forestry.

The whole of Europe' s current biological diversity is a result of nearly 10 000 years of struggle and hardship.

It is the fruit of cooperation between nature, the climate, technology and the human being as cultivator.

That is what has given us the incredibly diverse and many-sided Europe with which we are familiar.

I naturally believe that cultural heritage is a responsibility for regions and nations and not, in the first place, for the European Union.

There is, however, one area in which the Union has complete power over cultural heritage, namely agricultural policy.

If I were in a position to decide, I should exchange the EU' s current agricultural policy for a policy which favoured cultural heritage and biological diversity.

I should like to use subsidies to preserve the cultivated terraces around the Mediterranean and to preserve the biologically rich and fantastically beautiful meadows in the mountain areas surrounding rivers and lakes in thickly wooded Scandinavia.

In short, a good cultural policy for Europe would be a transformed, modern and relevant agricultural policy.

Approval of the Minutes of the previous sitting

The Minutes of the previous sitting have been distributed.

The next item is the report by Mrs van der Laan (A5-0397/2000), on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control, on the progress report of the Commission on the measures taken in the light of the observations of the European Parliament in its 1997 discharge resolution [COM(2000) 224 - C5-0223/2000 - 2000/2113(DEC)].

Mr President, there have been further developments regarding the report on the 1997 discharge.

That is a new departure, but then again it comes as no surprise, for this was a special case after all.

It was the first discharge after the fall of the Santer Commission and thus the first opportunity for this Parliament to have a say in the European Commission' s reform policy.

Since then, Parliament has made its views heard on a regular basis, notably in the excellent reports by Mr van Hulten and Mr Pomés Ruiz.

Needless to say, the reforms should help restore confidence in Europe.

The question today is whether those initial steps, which were promised at the time in order to obtain the discharge, have actually been made.

All in all, it is fair to say that the Commission has made every effort to meet the requirements of this Parliament.

A serious start has been made on reforms.

It is, of course, too soon to determine whether all the required results have been achieved; too many words still need to be translated into action for that to happen.

Although things can still go pear-shaped, even at Commissioner level - and naturally the abominable Commission proposal on access to documents is one of the things that springs to mind - it is quite clear that this Commission is highly committed to making a break with the past.

I will give you a few examples.

In its discharge resolution, this Parliament demanded an end to an unacceptably high percentage of error in bills.

The Commission subsequently submitted proposals to streamline the Financial Regulation, and produced a plan to eliminate all abnormal arrears by the end of 2003. Parliament is issued with six-monthly reports on this.

In addition, Parliament asked for a reform of the rules on whistle-blowers and for disciplinary procedures; the Commission ensured that this reform was made.

Parliament asked for improvements in the field of bureaux for external aid; tick.

Parliament requested a list of current fraud and corruption inquiries; again tick.

Parliament asked the Commission to clarify its foreign aid strategy; tick yet again.

Mr President, these are but a few examples, but they do demonstrate that the European Parliament can yield substantial results if it makes a concerted effort.

One section of the discharge which this Parliament has every reason to be proud, is that concerning the hospital in Gaza.

In 1996, this project, which is subsidised by the European Union, was 97% complete.

Due to mismanagement and a lack of follow-up, this hospital still stood empty up until the end of last year, at the very time - we are familiar with the images from the Middle East - when there was a desperate shortage of medical help in an area which very much needs it.

In April 1999, this Parliament found out about this scandalous state of affairs.

From that moment, we gave the Commission hell, with no let-up, until we finally had results.

Since the hospital opened three months ago, more than 2 700 patients have already been treated and more than 370 healthy babies have been born there, which is good news in an area where death is an every-day occurrence.

If this Parliament had not made it so clear that enough was enough, I am convinced that the hospital would still be empty now.

Unfortunately, the hospital is now having to face other problems, namely it is impossible to make any deliveries to this hospital due to the closure of Gaza, and even ambulance services cannot get through the Israeli blockades, but that is another story.

I would like to take the opportunity to go into Mr van Dam' s amendment very briefly.

I believe that, although it is an extremely kind and considerate amendment, the content of which must be given due follow-up, I cannot recommend approval of it as rapporteur, because we have very consistently rejected new elements in the discharge, so I hope that there will be some understanding for this.

Needless to say, there are also areas of concern with regard to the 1997 discharge.

For example, a higher level of transparency must be achieved within the personnel policy with regard to recruitment of staff and the proposed redundancy scheme.

I also expect the Commissioner to shed some light on how the Commission will guarantee that each individual Commissioner will ensure that recommendations from the Court of Auditors do not end up in some drawer somewhere, but will be implemented with due care.

This Parliament will monitor the follow-up of all reports brought by the Commission.

The extensive pledges for the coming years must be translated into action, and I hope that we can do this together, and in doing so, close off this sad chapter and be able to work together on the future with confidence.

Mr President, the van der Laan report gives a clear overview of the measures which the European Commission has taken further to observations made by Parliament in the context of the 1997 discharge.

From that point of view, my group will support the report, and I would congratulate Mrs van der Laan on her achievement.

However, I would like to point out - and that is also mentioned in the report - that although some progress has been made in five areas, they have a long way to go yet.

This applies to the closure of accounts, improving institutional management and control problems, the technical assistance offices and the fight against fraud and corruption.

I will not go into all these areas but highlight a few.

I believe it is of utmost importance for the Commission, in its attempts to reduce the unacceptably high percentage of error, to identify the Member States which fail to achieve any improvement in the percentage of error in the case of the biggest expense items, for example.

The Member States will obviously not like this, but why could we not keep a scoreboard for this, just as we do for the Member States' performance rating in terms of implementing European legislation?

An added benefit is that the national parliaments can bring their governments to book.

In the fight against fraud and the careless handling of European monies, we must rely far more on cooperation with national parliaments.

The trust of the citizen in the powers that be, and specifically in the European Union, is at stake.

It cannot be that we here in Europe get the blame for the negligence and carelessness of national governments.

In the near future, the Commission will need to pull out all the stops in order to set up an efficient management and control system.

We will soon be discussing the new Financial Regulation which, I hope, will better accommodate the requirements of modern management.

Continuity, transparency and clear competences are vital parameters in this.

We must avoid a situation where different bodies responsible for fighting fraud and corruption, such as OLAF and the financial irregularities panel, cancel each other out in their efforts.

There is nothing worse than having investigation offices putting all their energy into mutual competence-based squabbles.

Finally, we set great store by the Court of Auditors systematically examining the annual reports to see how the Commission has acted upon critical remarks made previously.

Control without referring back to errors detected previously is a job half-done.

Mr President, I wish to thank Mrs van der Laan for giving the Committee on Budgetary Control and the European Parliament a model on which to base future discharge reports.

From the outset she was very clear that she wanted to concentrate on a few areas where we wanted to see real improvement. They were clearly set out last year.

Now we have a follow-up to check that those points have been implemented.

We shall be following her lead in not supporting the amendments tabled because we want to keep to that clear-cut approach.

On the whole, the Commission has responded positively, and this now has to be set within the context of the more general Commission reform.

We are pleased that the Commission will present annual activity reports for each Directorate-General but, for that to work effectively, we need to know the targets for these DGs very soon.

Work on staff policy has also gone ahead but things seem to be moving very slowly.

We appreciate the sensitivity of negotiations on staff issues but we and the European public will soon lose patience if the talking does not stop soon and the action start.

The CAP and Structural Funds are the areas where most mismanagement problems lie in the EU, partly due to the scale of the finance received by these areas.

That is why it is critical that we, as the controlling and accountable body, have access to information on the financial management of these two areas.

We look forward to receiving regular reports from the Personal Representatives Group.

External aid, however, is an area where we still see substantial problems.

The rapporteur has referred clearly to the disastrous way the aid to Palestine was handled, which gives a very poor signal at a time when the utmost political delicacy and sensitivity were needed in that region.

Another Court of Auditors' report on external aid has come out very recently and we shall be looking at that in the future.

Once again, I thank the rapporteur and congratulate her on a job well done.

Mr President, in her report, rapporteur Mrs van der Laan looks at the progress which the Commission has made over the past year with regard to following recommendations set out in the report on the 1997 discharge.

She is rather pleased with the reams of paper which the Commission has produced.

I am waiting for more substance, for results.

The intentions are good, but the effect will not be evident until we see the results, once, for example, OLAF is working truly independently, once the backlog in payments has been cleared, once fewer errors are made in payments and once we finally gain access to confidential documents.

Furthermore, I am unconvinced by all the Commission' s good intentions.

The scheme for whistle-blowers, much applauded by Mrs van der Laan, leaves a great deal to be desired.

Instead of openness and transparency, the scheme exudes an atmosphere of damage limitation.

According to the new rules, whistle-blowers must prove that they have followed the correct procedures. Is this not a case where the burden of proof should be reversed?

We should let the Commission prove that it applied the procedure correctly.

Mrs van der Laan devotes much thought to the aid to the Palestinian regions and displays an astonishing degree of faith in the decisiveness of the European Union' s delegation in the process.

I would like to see a report in which the role of our Palestinian counterpart is explained.

Moreover, the recent executions force us to revisit the conditions for European aid.

In this connection, I would draw everyone' s attention to the fact that the teaching material in Palestinian schools contains many anti-Semitic statements, which, in our countries, would fall under the heading of incitement to racial hatred.

That is why I have tabled an amendment in which I urge the Commission not to support the spreading of anti-Semitism in schoolbooks in any way.

There should be no question of European money being used to pay for the spreading of racist views.

I therefore heartily recommend my amendment, and hope it will meet with broad support.

A formal condemnation is not doing anyone any good.

, Chairperson of the Committee on Budgetary Control. (DE) Mr President, it is amazing that the follow-up report on the discharge seems to be generating far more interest this time than the discharge itself, which was, in fact, prepared by the previous Parliament.

I welcome this with open arms, but there is nothing new in the fact that we have compiled such a report and are sticking to it, as we vowed to at the time.

Yet I believe we have done justice to our task of verifying whether the Commission has met our demands in relation to the discharge.

I am extremely pleased that the rapporteur has taken all these issues up again and would like to congratulate her to this effect. However, I am also delighted to be able to tell the Commission that it has fulfilled these demands extremely well.

We are talking conditions, and not just comments.

However, there are still a few matters to be resolved.

This is also clearly brought out in the report, by the way.

I would single out the closure of accounts for special mention in this respect.

It is truly alarming when we put in excess of EUR 70 billion to one side, which inflates the budget and is then unavailable for other tasks that the EU has set itself.

We must do more to tackle this than just compile a report once every two years; we need to cut back.

Commissioner, this is a matter for you.

Secondly, I do not think much to the idea of setting up a second office for internal investigations.

We have set up OLAF and ought to concentrate far more on ensuring that OLAF is able to carry out its work properly and in an independent manner, particularly its internal investigations.

I believe it is important for us to uphold the demand that we raised during the discharge process, namely that of creating a disciplinary chamber, which could be attached to the Court of Auditors or the Court of Justice.

I would remind the Commission not just to issue statements on this, but also produce a legal basis.

Finally, I would like to say a big thank you for the efforts made in respect of the Gaza hospital.

I am delighted that after all these years, it has at long last started work and is evidently serving the people well.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, allow me to carry on straightaway from where Mrs Theato left off.

Commissioner, we are actually finding it quite hard to imagine what the point would be of having an advisory office for financial irregularities of the kind you envisage.

The same applies to the new agency for internal administrative investigations that the Commission is planning to set up.

What purpose would this office and agency actually serve, when by the Commission' s own decree, OLAF is responsible for all serious breaches of duty against the interests of the Community, and not just for fraud-related offences?

I would remind you once again that you, yourself, decided that that is how it should be, yet you are evidently on the point of allowing some kind of pointless superstructure to form part of your proposals.

Mrs van der Laan' s report quite rightly maintains that the Commission has not yet made sufficient progress on the personnel policy front for Parliament' s taste.

This particularly applies to the already long overdue reform of the disciplinary procedure.

Of course, this has a great deal to do with the budgetary discharge, because one thing that also concerns us is the issue of the liability of officials in respect of damage they cause.

Do Commission officials have to defray the costs of damage they cause, themselves, at least as far as their financial means permit?

In principle, the answer to this question has long been 'yes' .

Only, the corresponding provisions of Articles 73 and 74 of the Financial Regulation have never actually been applied in a single case yet.

The excuse used was always that the relevant procedures were unclear.

Anyone hoping that this will now change under the reform process has been disappointed so far.

It is this very issue, an absolutely crucial one, that the consultation paper on the reform of the disciplinary procedure put forward by Vice-President Kinnock on 29 November, ignores, and it postpones a response until a later date.

Understand that if you will, because I find it incomprehensible.

This House has repeatedly and clearly opposed this and called for an external chamber for budgetary discipline to be established at the European Court of Auditors or Court of Justice, which should be called in whenever the financial accountability of officials is at issue.

This demand from the report by Mr van Hulten on the reform of the Commission has now been on the table since January last, and was expressly re-confirmed in the Stauner report on the 1998 discharge.

I also believe that this discharge, the excellent report by Mrs van der Laan, leaves these issues, which are key to the credibility of EU administration, unresolved.

We have pointed the way, and now all we can do, Commissioner, is to invite you to follow it.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the fact that we are discussing the follow-up measures to the 1997 budgetary discharge at the beginning of the year 2001, is, to my mind, rather anachronistic in procedural terms, given that the 1998 discharge procedure was concluded more than six months ago and the parliamentary committee responsible is already working on the discharge for 1999.

A modern, efficient administration should respond forthwith to Parliament' s criticism and recommendations for improvement, particularly when misdemeanours need to be dealt with.

Turning now to matters of content, despite some welcome progress, the fact remains that key demands lodged by Parliament have not been fulfilled and are therefore to be carried over into the discharge procedure for subsequent years, which means that the clear delimitation we desire will become more blurred.

There are two points in particular I would like to highlight. I am at a loss as to why the Commission has, as yet, failed to take steps to set up a chamber for budgetary discipline at the Court of Auditors or the Court of Justice, and so guarantee the effective application of the provisions of the Financial Regulation concerning the financial liability of officials for damage they cause.

How many times do we have to ask, urge, beseech - and I do not know what else - the Commission to get round to doing something at long last?

Surely this is a reasonable demand?

The same goes for our demand that Parliament, as a discharge authority, should be given at least the same amount of access to the Commission as the Court of Auditors.

After all, the duty to provide information is clearly Treaty-based, i.e. it derives from Article 276 of the Treaty of Rome.

Incidentally, it also seems to me that the advisory office, which was mentioned earlier, would be surplus to requirements, and I do not intend to go into this matter any further at the present time since previous speakers have already taken care of it.

However, both demands are reflected in our amendments and I consider them indisputable.

I would appreciate your support in this.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, Mrs van der Laan. I should like to congratulate the rapporteur on this report, and to express my utter admiration for the way in which she completed the task, the skill with which she handled the matter, without getting carried away by the excesses which are always possible in the matter of discharge, as we have already seen.

I believe the discharge procedure is a very important one, which should be handled with care, as the saying goes, and I think it is reasonable for Parliament to look into the shortcomings detected in the management of public monies, of which there have been many in recent years, generally attributable, it must be said, to the Member States.

This is a point to which we shall return when discussing other Court of Auditors reports. I think that Parliament must focus especially on this aspect during this term of office.

There were also shortcomings within the Commission.

Discharge for 1997 was a rather special case, coinciding as it did with an extremely difficult time for the Commission.

I think the report, and the way it has been settled, and the way I should like to see it definitively settled without it forcing us to take another turn around the discharge procedure, will enable us to look to the future, taking as our model, to some extent, this discharge which is the fruit of lengthy deliberation by Parliament and which has given rise to certain responses from the Commission.

We have examined these responses, and have found the majority of them satisfactory, as is recorded.

A new approach has now been adopted to ensure that discharges are confined to the business of the budget.

I think we are moving in the right direction and, in this spirit, we shall be voting in favour of the van der Laan report.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, Mrs van der Laan, the Commission welcomes your report.

You have ascertained that in most areas that were central to the 1997 budgetary discharge procedure the measures taken by the Commission merit approval because we are heading in the right direction.

I might therefore venture, at the start of this new year, to take pleasure in the fact that Parliament has commended the Commission.

But I want to do more than just give pats on the back, and instead go on to look at the areas where you continue to voice criticism or rather, demand that further measures be taken, namely in the fields of staffing policy and external aid.

As far as staffing policy is concerned, in your report you specifically focused on the issue of the legal basis for the early retirement scheme.

I would again draw attention to the fact that, before Christmas, the Commission adopted a proposal that is now undergoing the consultation procedure between the institutions and will be forwarded to Parliament in February.

The key figures are as follows: it should be possible for 600 people to participate in the early retirement scheme.

However, owing to budgetary neutrality there are to be only 248 new appointments.

Who will qualify for the scheme?

It is conditional on the official being at least 50 years of age and having been in service for at least ten years.

The scheme also makes provision, according to a person' s age and service affiliation, for 60-70% of their salary to be counted as early retirement money.

Nor is there any legal entitlement, instead, the Commission, using objective criteria, will select who is able to take up early retirement, thereby ensuring that the object of the exercise, i.e. an overall increase in efficiency on the staffing front, is actually achieved.

The second aspect relating to staffing policy concerns the disciplinary procedure.

In its January report, Parliament proposed that an external chamber for budgetary discipline should be set up within the European Court of Justice or Court of Auditors.

You have also mentioned this proposal again today.

I think I should just run through the reasons again - which my colleague Neil Kinnock has outlined in great detail - as to why the Commission has distanced itself from this proposal.

The European Treaties assign specific tasks to the Court of Auditors and to the European Court of Justice respectively. The Court of Auditors is responsible for the external control of finances and it is the role of the Court of Justice to oversee the disciplinary procedures pursued by the Commission should the need arise.

As the Commission sees it, it would lead to conflicts of interest if the Courts were to be directly involved in the Commission' s internal procedures.

The Commission would also point out that, in all international organisations, it is the institutions themselves that are responsible for disciplining their staff.

The Commission is convinced that the same should apply here.

Naturally, there is a need for action.

That much is obvious having viewed the matter objectively.

We adopted the proposals that are now undergoing the consultation procedure, and which Mr Bösch mentioned, even before the end of the year.

Firstly, we are talking in terms of steps that can be taken directly, without changing the statute, and secondly, there are steps that will require amendment of the personnel statute, and will therefore take a little longer to implement.

As far as the first steps are concerned, it is absolutely vital to set up an investigative and disciplinary bureau within the Directorate-General for Personnel and Administration.

In response to your query, I can tell you that the question is constantly raised as to whether OLAF is already involved in the procedure or intending to become involved before this bureau starts work.

Only if OLAF answers this in the negative will this bureau take action.

The scenarios can vary a great deal.

I would like to cite an example: sexual harassment in the workplace.

Since OLAF may well not be called in to deal with such cases, it would, of course, be necessary to invoke an administrative investigation or a disciplinary procedure.

So various areas come to mind.

I think it is an excellent idea to take a complementary approach.

We are not about to strip OLAF of its tasks, as it were, or undermine its remit, which was determined by Parliament and the Council, because OLAF investigations take precedence here, and that is a fact.

Secondly, it is very important for the disciplinary council to be chaired by an external expert.

This would demonstrate that the Commission is keen to implement fair and objective disciplinary procedures.

I have just a few more words to say about your critical comments on foreign policy.

Mrs Theato mentioned the need to reduce outstanding commitments.

We submitted a report on this as part of the 2001 budgetary procedure and made it clear that, of course, these abnormal commitments, which have long been known as dormant commitments, must be reduced as soon as possible. Indeed, the field of external aid is already showing the first positive signs in this respect.

Turning now to the matter of the hospital in Gaza, which plays a significant part in the report by Mrs van der Laan.

There were certainly a great many infuriating delays.

Indeed, there were repeated and emphatic demands from within this House for progress to be made and for something to be done about all the problems.

Yes, it is most gratifying that the hospital is now fully up and running and that it has been treating patients since the summer.

One thing I would say though, is that developments on the political front, i.e. the violent clashes, have thrown up barriers again.

It is even the case sometimes that, owing to the blockades in the Gaza Strip, supplies cannot be delivered and patients cannot get there. Many members of staff are unable to reach the hospital at the moment.

We really must - also within the scope of this debate - make repeated calls for the violence to end.

The European tax payer was willing to deliver aid to the people of Gaza.

It is high time the people were able to make use of it.

The vote will take place today at 12 noon.

Special reports of the Court of Auditors

The next item is the joint debate on the following reports:

(A5-0331/2000) by Mr Garriga Polledo, on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control, on the Court of Auditors' Special Report No 8/99 on securities and guarantees provided for in the Community Customs Code to protect the collection of traditional own resources, together with the Commission' s replies [C5-0228/2000 - 2000/2132(COS)];

(A5-0396/2000) by Mr McCartin, Committee on Budgetary Control, on the European Court of Auditors' Special Reports Nos 1/1999 concerning the aid for the use of skimmed-milk and skimmed-milk powder as animal feed, 2/1999 on the effects of the CAP reform in the cereals sector, 1/2000 on classical swine fever and 8/2000 on the Community measures for the disposal of butterfat, together with the Commission' s replies [C5-0236/2000, C5-0237/2000, C5-0238/2000, C5-0239/2000 - 2000/2130(COS)];

(A5-0389/2000) by Mr Staes, Committee on Budgetary Control, on the Court of Auditors' Special Report No 2/2000 on aid given by the European Union to Bosnia and Herzegovina with a view to restoring peace and the rule of law, together with the Commission's replies [C5-0229/2000 - 2000/2131(COS)];

(A5-0359/2000) by Mr Dell'Alba, Committee on Budgetary Control, on the Court of Auditors' Special Reports Nos 6/1999, 7/1999, 3/2000 and 7/2000 on budgetary implementation of the Structural Funds, together with the Commission's replies [C5-0240/2000, C5-0241/2000, C5-0242/2000, C5-0243/2000 - 2000/2129(COS)].

(ES) Mr President, I should like to begin by praising the fine work done by my colleague, Salvador Garriga Polledo, in the report he is presenting on own resources, a subject he has been following very closely for some time.

The Community budget comes, in part, from the traditional own resources raised by the Member States' customs services and therefore the principal role of Community legislation on guarantees and securities is to protect the financial interests of the Community.

The defects in the procedures applicable to the security and guarantee system mean precisely that the corresponding Community revenue is not collected and has to be covered by additional GNP contributions from the Member States.

Therefore, I understand that interest should be levied on traders who effectively use unauthorised credit in their deferment accounts as part of release for free circulation operations.

The Garriga Polledo report deals with cases under Member State responsibility in which a failure to enforce Community legislation on securities and guarantees harms the Community' s interests.

According to the Court of Auditors, in cases of mandatory securities the basic principle is that the customs authorities should fix the security at a level equal to the precise amount of the customs debt where this can be established with certainty, or if not, the maximum amount, as estimated by the customs authorities, of the customs debts which have been, or may be, incurred.

In practice, it is the security or guarantee body that assesses the risks of the operation.

In order for these risks to be assessed, the guarantee should be fixed at the closest possible level to the customs debt for which the security or guarantee is provided.

If these rules were observed, the pertinent financial interests would be fully protected.

A number of difficulties arise in this and I shall highlight half a dozen:

First of all, there are no reliable statistics on the volume of guarantees currently granted.

The data on these securities and guarantees, which are clearly identified in accounting and legal terms, certainly exists in the customs accounting departments of Member States, but there are no procedures to enable it to be collated and known at Community level.

Secondly, some customs authorities cannot - I prefer to think this rather than that they do not collaborate - effectively monitor observance of the requirements set out in Community legislation on guarantees because of failures in their accountancy operating or computer systems and procedures.

I must stress the need for the New Computerised Transit System (NCTS) to come into operation soon in all the Member States and the countries associated with the common transit system.

It is clear that the fulfilment of Community securities will depend, to a large extent, on the development of all the operations of the NCTS.

To solve the problem of the high level of undischarged transit operations, we should emphasise the importance of operational measures and, again, the need for swift development of this new system.

With the multiple guarantee certificate system and the NCTS we shall achieve centralisation and greater administrative clarity.

Thirdly, incomplete declarations must be mentioned.

At the end of the periods allowed under Community rules the Member States should transfer the duties covered by a guarantee which are not contested into 'A' accounts.

Fourthly, the need for a change to Community customs legislation in order to ensure that the securities which guarantee the right to credit should also guarantee the automatic payments made by the customs offices after release of goods.

Fifthly, the large number of cases reported by the Court of Auditors in which the amounts owed to the Community budget have not been paid or received with the relevant late payment interest.

Lastly, I should like to mention the difficulties giving rise to the failure to collect the considerable amounts of customs duties and other taxes arising from TIR operations, which are attributable to ineffective implementation of existing mechanisms and a lack of monitoring of transit operations.

To conclude, Mr President, I want to stress that the Commission must study the various problems raised and, in particular, review the computer system in order to take into account the interest owed in this respect to the Community budget by the Member States.

Mr President, I want to acknowledge the important role of the Court of Auditors in preparing these reports.

I am dealing with four reports relating to the dairy sector, the cereals sector and swine fever involving total spending of approximately EUR 16 billion, which is a considerable proportion of the budget.

The study by the Court of Auditors involves a great deal of detail and we must acknowledge the important role it plays in assisting Parliament in its work, because, obviously, without this interaction between the Court of Auditors and Parliament, Parliament would be in no position to evaluate or judge the effectiveness of Commission spending.

We can also acknowledge that the Court of Auditors plays a role in assisting the Commission to identify weaknesses in its administration and difficulties which it may not have observed in the way Member States implement our various schemes.

The Court of Auditors, in this particular report, has drawn attention to the weaknesses in the basic regulations, weaknesses which make it difficult for the Commission and indeed even the Member States to effectively control spending.

In the special report on the reform of the cereals sector, the Court of Auditors has drawn attention to the question of whether or not the policy itself attains its economic and social objectives.

To go back to the dairy sector - there are two reports here, one relating to skimmed-milk powder, the other to butter - we should remember that even though we have a quota system which is designed to bring production close to the level of consumption, we still have to spend approximately EUR 3 000 million a year disposing of surpluses, and of the skimmed-milk powder which we produce something like only 37% of it is sold at market value.

In other words, the rest of it must be subsidised for use in animal feed and other things.

Similarly, in the case of butter, only 75% of the butter we produce is sold at market prices.

This identifies the weaknesses in the policies where we have a quota system and at the same time require vast Community resources to subsidise surpluses.

The Court of Auditors' report - and Parliament supports this - draws attention to the fact that we should perhaps utilise our resources better in a way that might encourage greater consumption of dairy products on our European markets, rather than subsidising unused quantities.

In the cereals sector, the main concern of the Court of Auditors was the fact of overcompensation which has been well documented and which we acknowledge, and it also draws attention to the fact that it is necessary in designing policy at all levels - Commission, Council and Parliament - to take account of market changes. When we designed this policy we did not foresee the rise in world prices which led to gross overcompensation in the sector.

The report also draws attention to the fact, and Parliament notes this, that something like 40% of all the EUR 14 billion spent in the cereals sector goes to 3% of farmers, and 54% of farmers only get approximately 5% of the aid.

This again draws attention to the whole thrust of the policy and whether or not we should review it with the idea of making it more compatible with regional policy and with social policy.

These were the main concerns expressed.

We should also say in relation to the cereals sector or to the dairy sector that we have noted that the Commission has undertaken a root and branch review of the policy and has already set that study in motion.

So we look forward to its completion.

I want to thank the Commission for its cooperation and the fact that it has already taken action on some of the weaknesses identified in the various reports.

Mr President, since the end of December 1995, when the Dayton peace accords were concluded, the European Union has contributed to peace in a major way.

A great deal of funding has been freed up for reconstruction, the organisation of elections, contributions to human rights, etc. We also financed 53% of the High Representative Office.

The Court of Auditors' Special Report which is before us, is the third in a series.

There have already been reports on the situation in Mostar, and a second report dealt with the reconstruction in former Yugoslavia.

I believe that these special reports, together with the report which is now before us, have consistently made us as a European Parliament sit up and face the facts, and also try to act upon these reports in an effective manner.

I also believe that progress has been made in this area thanks to the Court of Auditors' way of working, together with the follow-up by Parliament, via the Committee on Budgetary Control.

Ladies and gentlemen, the task of budgetary control cannot be carried out from a little office in Brussels or an office in Strasbourg.

I believe that sometimes, it is necessary to visit the relevant location. Expertise in the field is necessary; you need to meet the people; you need to know what people have to put up with there, what the conditions are.

For previous reports, other MEPs have been given the opportunity of going to Bosnia and Herzegovina.

They learnt a lot from their visit, and I visited the place myself between 16 and 19 October of last year.

That is very important. I would like to reiterate as well as underline this.

In actual fact, I learnt more in those four days in Sarajevo than I could have learnt from wading through reams and reams of written material.

I would therefore like to urge the Conference of Presidents to take this into consideration when, at a later date, they decide for or against giving rapporteurs the opportunity to have this experience.

What was the criticism about, ladies and gentlemen?

First of all, criticism was levelled at the Commission for not deploying sufficient resources and staff and for a Brussels-based management which is too centralised.

I gather that this criticism by the Court of Auditors has been acted upon by the European Commission.

All credit to the Commission for this.

Improvements have been made and staffing levels have increased.

I would like to stress here that the people in the delegation in Sarajevo are better organised, highly qualified and highly motivated.

That is thanks to the Court of Auditors' criticism and the fact that Parliament has acted upon this criticism.

Furthermore, the Commission has, under pressure from the Court of Auditors, adopted a deconcentration policy, which has given the people in the Sarajevo delegation, but also in other delegations, more clout. It has also meant that the head of the delegation can meet the needs on the ground in a more powerful manner, and has also ensured that all overdue payments have now been cleared.

So, as far as this is concerned, well done to the Commission.

Other criticism concerned the High Representative' s Office and how the European Union works with that office.

The European Commission has been blamed for not keeping a close enough eye on it.

Thanks to the Court of Auditors' report and the action taken by Parliament, there is now a new mentality in the Office of the High Representative.

It is indeed the case that, since March 1999, there has been a new financial director who has written a veritable tome on the rules to be followed.

Apparently, when the High Representative first took up office, rather a lot was being wasted.

His commitment, and that of the Commission and the office as a whole, has slimmed down the budget of the High Representative' s Office by nearly EUR 5 million over a period of three years.

I believe that this is an extremely positive result.

Moreover, one of the key criticisms directed at the High Representative was also in the shape of Paragraph 17 on the conflict of interests generated by the former financial director.

Parliament, at least in the resolution now before us, is asking for a full explanation in this regard.

I have to let you know that I have now received a document from the High Representative, and from the Commission, and that the key criticisms have been addressed in this document.

That is why I propose the adoption of my amendment, which takes this into account.

Other criticism was expressed with regard to human rights.

I have to say that the Commission is doing a truly creditable job on this in Sarajevo and Bosnia and Herzegovina in general.

I believe we should make more funds available to those people, but in terms of human rights, we are still waiting for responses from the Commission with regard to Paragraphs 29 and 35.

A final - important - point I would like to make is the recurring theme of the media policy.

The Commission has come under very strong criticism with regard to its media policy.

It is reported that with regard to this policy, EUR 2 million' s worth of equipment was subsidised which was not eligible for subsidy.

I am still waiting for a detailed report from the Commission.

It is included in the resolution, and so I hope that a response will be forthcoming in the very near future.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, my report is really a combination of four separate reports.

From this point of view I should like to thank Commissioner Schreyer for attending.

I hope that, through her, the managers responsible more specifically for the administration of the Structural Funds, both in the Commission and in the Member States, will be made aware of the content of our report and of our conclusions, since this matter concerns the Structural Funds, which, as we know, are generally managed by the Member States directly.

So, to the four distinct reports: one report on the principle of additionality, one report on the development of industrial sites, a third report from the Court of Auditors on the European Social Fund and the European Agricultural Guidance and Guarantee Fund (Guidance Section) - Measures to assist the employment of young persons, and a fourth report on the International Fund for Ireland and the Special Support Programme for Peace and Reconciliation.

Regarding this last report, I should particularly like to thank the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism for its contribution.

Our Committee took on board all the amendments they presented.

Although these four subjects are quite distinct, the same sort of comments can be made about them all, and these are of three types.

Firstly, the major criticisms which may be levelled at the Commission with regard to the administrative procedures which the Court of Auditors, like us, considers too time-consuming and too complex and which occasionally hinder the smooth running of projects.

It must be said that the same criticisms are also made of Member States.

There is never sufficient monitoring once projects are underway, either at grass roots or from Brussels.

The same lack of resources and staffing is continually remarked upon - other speakers have raised it on other points - even despite the frequent comments by the Court of Auditors on the subject.

The Commission is currently engaged in a radical reform of its organisation and is asking for additional resources.

I hope that Parliament, which has always believed in the myth of the zero growth of officials despite the multiplication in their duties, will accept the Commission' s proposals and objectives and will also step up its monitoring tasks and its role.

Obviously, this will cause some overlapping of funding, since funding is not sufficiently well monitored, and hence the poor use of European appropriations.

The final criticism that may be made concerns the delays in payments, a recurrent problem which the Commission does not appear to be capable of resolving or putting a stop to.

Secondly, a major criticism that I would like us to emphasise in our dealing with the Member States is the poor use of appropriations, often due to a lack of cooperation between the Member States and the Commission, and the reluctance of the Member States to make better use of the funds.

Too often they are treated as donations, funds to be substituted for national funds.

In some instances, the Member States attach little importance to the principle of additionality which stipulates that this is cofinancing which must be complemented by national financing.

They seem to think the funds cover 100% of the financing, which is clearly not in line with the reasoning behind the Structural Funds and their use.

The Member States should not forget that these are public funds and, as such, the concern of all the citizens of Europe.

They should hence be used with even more care than national funds.

In order to remedy such inefficiencies, a new regulation was adopted in June 1999, which I hope will enable us to make progress.

When it uncovers inefficiencies we would urge the Commission to use all the means available to it, such as the suspension of payments, and if there is sufficient justification we shall be right behind the Commission in this.

Finally, I think the Commission itself should pay more attention to the eligibility criteria before authorising funds to be released.

This would prevent the funding of projects that were not viable and the 'rag-bag' projects that are often seen in the Member States.

Thank you, Mr President, for the extra few seconds you allowed me.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the fact that the European Union is making considerable resources available for the reconstruction of democracy in Bosnia and Herzegovina and for its consolidation fully justifies the seriousness with which we are now addressing the motion for a resolution on Special Report No 2/2000 of the Court of Auditors.

I say this because it was only at the beginning of 2000 that the Court was able to complete and approve its report on Community aid granted between 1996 and 1998, in other words, between four and two years previously.

The obvious consequence of this regrettable delay is that many of the observations in the report are out of date, since, in the meantime, major changes have taken place in the legal framework and the political situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

But this does not mean that the report' s observations should not be taken into account in future, particularly in Kosovo, in order to avoid similar problems arising with identical actions promoted by the Union.

This type of monitoring is crucial for identifying and solving existing problems, which exist on two levels: one involving direct funding and the other cofinancing with other donors.

In the first case, one problem that stands out is the inadequacy of support for actions designed to protect human rights, support for civil society and support for the media.

There have been many situations which, fortunately, have been rectified. These range from identification of centralised procedures inappropriate given the urgency with which actions have to be carried out, to the fact that the Commission found itself confronted with various faits accomplis which subsequently had to be financed.

With regard to cofinancing, we welcome the transfer of financing from the Office of the High Representative to the first pillar, which meant that it had to be implemented in accordance with the provisions of the Financial Regulation.

Furthermore, we believe the same will have to apply to financing for monitoring electoral procedures and, consequently, to cooperation with the OSCE.

To conclude, Mr President, these were the observations that we in the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy felt should be considered in the report by Mr Staes - whom I congratulate - given the volume of the total funding for this type of aid, the shortage of resources and the obvious need for them to be used in a rigorous and transparent way.

Mr President, I wish to begin by welcoming Mr Dell'Alba's report and its recognition that the International Fund for Ireland and the Peace and Reconciliation Fund are an innovative means of consolidating the peace process.

The difficult environment in which the Funds have had to operate, their role as a pump primer, the approach in giving priority to disadvantaged areas and the unique role in pioneering the joint management and delivery of cross-border programmes have all been given the recognition they deserve.

I understand that the International Fund for Ireland has produced a comprehensive response to the issues raised in the Court of Auditors' report, which can be made available to Members.

That response includes a number of specific actions that the Fund is taking to address matters raised in the report.

It is important to stress one crucial point in relation to the International Fund for Ireland: this is not a European Union programme.

The Fund is, in fact, an international organisation with its own governing body, rules, audit procedures and so on.

Furthermore, the European Union is just one of five donors involved in its financing.

The European Union's annual contribution constitutes 35% of the total.

The International Fund for Ireland was established by the British and Irish Governments in 1986 with the objective of promoting economic and social advance and encouraging contact, dialogue and reconciliation between the Unionists and Nationalists throughout Ireland.

Contributors to the Fund are the United States, the European Union, Canada, New Zealand and Australia.

Since the Fund was set up it has provided assistance of EUR 597 million to 4 600 projects, which have helped to create 38 000 jobs, leading to an additional investment of approximately EUR 1.193 billion, bringing the overall investment in these projects to almost EUR 1.79 billion; directed almost 90% of its commitments to the most deprived areas; encouraged over 9 000 participants in cross-community groups and encouraged 5 000 participants in cross-border structures.

Mr President, may I say that Mr Staes has done an excellent job in his report. May I also point out to everyone that the Balkans are a separate area of Europe, both geographically and from the point of view of their customs and their way of thinking.

So we need to study every incident from every possible angle if we are to be efficient both in our criticism and in the measures which we take.

What it comes down to, as Mr Staes has said and done, is going and seeing for yourself.

From where we stand, we cannot see what is happening in these particular regions, which are pretty much a law unto themselves.

We cannot monitor what is going on from behind a desk.

We cannot understand the Balkan way of thinking from letters, faxes and e-mails.

What we need to do is to get close to them, and we need to get close to them not just by expressing an interest which, it goes without saying, is manifest on all sides; we need to get close to them in practice, both physically and geographically, but mainly by learning about their history and what makes them tick.

Everything that has happened, the comments made by the auditors and the Commission, demonstrate that something that is good can always be replaced by something that is better and that something that is better can always be made better still.

That is the direction we are all pulling in. I am certain that the interest evinced by us and the critical spirit which exists cannot but lead in the right direction and, if you like, we can take the results of the practices applied to this sort of cofinancing and adapt them in other directions.

The European Agency for Reconstruction is now up and running in Thessaloniki and Pristina.

It has attracted a great deal of criticism, but we cannot presume that Sarajevo is the same thing as Pristina and we need to make that clear, which is precisely why I referred to different ways of thinking, customs and situations which need to be borne in mind.

Many honourable Members - and to some extent they are right - said that the agency in Thessaloniki should be decentralised and should move to Pristina.

Many of us categorically opposed this as out of the question.

We have been proven right in keeping the agency in Thessaloniki because if we had moved the Thessaloniki agency to Pristina, Yugoslavia would now be unable to obtain funding from the European Agency for Reconstruction because it would have been impossible for a Serb to go to Pristina and claim so much as a single euro.

Which is why I repeat that criticism is a good thing, but everything we do must be adapted to the circumstances, the needs and the peculiarities of each region.

Mr President, I would like to start by giving my thanks to the Court of Auditors for its very useful report this time on a range of issues.

We were very critical of it at the time of the annual report but I think these special reports are very valuable.

There are clearly a range of areas where the Commission has yet to act to improve matters.

Today, I am going to concentrate on a response to the report written by Mr Dell'Alba on various aspects of the Structural Funds.

Certainly, in my country, this is one of the areas where the European Union can visibly claim to be making a difference, and there is a recognition that Structural Funds and the attempt to increase wealth, and improve social conditions and employment rates in an area give a positive image of the EU.

But we cannot stand by and uncritically applaud.

The reports by the Court of Auditors clearly show that there is room for radical improvement, and the Commission has already introduced a new Structural Fund regulation to improve the situation and will obviously be checking very carefully to see whether these reforms have gone far enough.

In the case of additionality, we must remember that European Funds are intended not to finance but to cofinance operations and must not take the place of public expenditure by national authorities.

That is all very well, but even the new regulations only allow for assessment of additionality at a national level and not at a regional level.

Rules are rules, but if there is no effective punishment after breaking them, they become weaker and unenforceable, so we need to see a solid legal basis to develop the possible imposition of sanctions.

On the issue of the development of industrial sites, the Commission should not wring its hands but say that this should only be seen as part of a wider policy to assist SMEs.

Substantial sums go into these developments.

In Wales, for example, we know that this is a clear target; we need clear targets and objectives and we will be looking forward to seeing those within the Structural Fund programmes in future.

Mr President, I would like, in double-quick time, to take you through a number of observations which concern the Court of Auditors' reports which were, indeed, useful.

First of all, there is the Garriga report.

I believe the Committee on Budgets has already made plans to this effect, but I think it is vital that we evaluate the results of the committee of inquiry on transit fraud. What has the Commission done so far with the recommendations in that report?

Next, there is the McCartin report on agriculture.

It is always an interesting topic, and nobody will deny that the agricultural policy is not static, but that it should move along with the times, especially in connection with the negotiations within the World Trade Organisation and enlargement.

I would also like to raise two points without making a judgment either for or against.

The following considerations are currently of importance to my group: first, what would the effect of cofinancing agricultural expenditure be, and income allowance, in particular?

Another point, which is very topical at the moment, is animal disease control.

This is taking a huge chunk out of the European budget. Would it not be possible, in imitation of customs in the Member States, to obtain insurance cover against the outbreak of certain animal diseases?

Could the Commission look into this matter at the earliest opportunity?

Turning to the Staes report, it is encouraging to see that the European Union can make a difference in the Balkans, which is much like a hornet' s nest.

We are delighted about this, and we believe the Staes report is excellent.

We particularly support the fact that it is not the Office of the High Representative which is calling the shots; it is the European Union which coughs up the funds and which will have to check whether these are well spent.

I would like to make a general comment on the climate of corruption which is supposed to prevail in the Balkans.

In our opinion, it is necessary for the Commission to decide on the way in which this should be allowed to affect Europe. Is this having an impact on European aid?

Finally, I would like to make an observation with regard to the Dell'Alba report.

In my country, there are indications that the price of industrial sites is rising considerably thanks to European aid.

This is not desirable in our eyes. Could something be done about this?

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the reports from the Court of Auditors have been given a whole new relevance by the current BSE crisis.

The European agricultural policy must be given a thorough going over.

BSE is only the tip of the iceberg.

Subsidisation of quantity increases, overproduction and then more subsidies for reducing surpluses, not only is all this very difficult for the ordinary citizen to comprehend, it is also extremely susceptible to fraud, and the quota regime cannot begin to cushion the effect.

This is very clearly borne out by the McCartin report.

It is to the rapporteur' s credit that he constantly draws attention to this, and not just in times such as these.

Unfortunately, Parliament does not have full co-determination powers in agricultural matters and is therefore only able to make very limited use of the political room for manoeuvre.

The decisions are taken in the Council of Ministers; they are reached behind closed doors by the national Agricultural Ministers, with their diverse client interests.

Yet whilst they reserve the right to make the decisions, they are not prepared to actually take on responsibility.

When it comes to errors, misdemeanours, irregularities or fraud, they are not the ones who immediately take responsibility; no, they always point the finger at Brussels, i.e. the EU instead.

There has to be a fundamental change on this score.

Not only is control called for, but also political co-determination for Parliament in all areas of the agricultural policy.

We need more transparency and openness.

This is not about working against the farmers; it is about fighting for a different kind of consumer policy, in the interests of the farmers.

Mr McCartin has already mentioned the right key words in his report.

What we are talking about here is the issue of direct aid and cofinancing.

Something needs to change here, also in the light of eastwards enlargement, if we want to pursue the agricultural policy in such a way that it will lend itself to eastwards enlargement.

Even after the Nice Summit, it is clear that the Council is incapable of actually solving these problems, and so to conclude, I would like to stress once again, and this will be a matter of concern to the whole of Parliament, that Parliament needs full co-determination and codecision rights in agricultural policy.

Mr President, in the report of the Court of Auditors for 1999 we can read that Great Britain, Belgium and Holland have been huge net payers into the EU budget.

These three countries have rendered account in the budget of their customs duties, i.e. own resources, to a much greater extent proportionally than other countries.

There are large ports in these countries and a lot of traffic in transit passes through them.

Both the documents of the Court of Auditors and Mr Garriga Polledo' s report feature an embarrassing element.

In many countries abuses have been revealed, although there is no mention of countries' names.

This consequently gives rise to the suspicion that crimes are mostly committed in those countries that have large transit ports.

If there is no mention of countries' names, suspicion must fall on Great Britain, Belgium and Holland.

If they are not guilty of covering up crimes and protecting criminals, they are, nevertheless, the object of suspicion, as the countries' names are not mentioned.

Huge volumes of goods pass through the European Union, which are then shipped outside the Union from its ports.

Studies by both the Court of Auditors and OLAF have shown that there is major abuse associated with tobacco imports and transit traffic in particular.

It is difficult to assess the extent of this, but the size of the damage caused to the Union is estimated to be between one and five billion euros.

Tobacco comes mainly into the Dutch and Belgian ports and is transported on through EU countries, often to the area of the former Yugoslavia, to Montenegro, for example.

Last year the EU decided to grant financial aid to Montenegro to the tune of EUR 15 million for political reasons, free of any conditions connected with the prevention of smuggling.

Every night contraband tobacco is taken by 50 or 70 speedboats from Montenegro to Italy from where it is distributed to EU markets free of customs duty or tax.

To prevent this sort of thing from happening, we need determined effort and answers to the problems Mr Garriga Polledo referred to in his report.

From the Union' s point of view, we are talking about a project costing billions of euros.

Mr President, today' s debate is certainly a welcome one, but it covers some very different subjects.

I shall therefore confine my comments to the subjects raised by Mr McCartin and Mr Staes.

Regarding the first of these reports, the French Members of our group cannot endorse its comments on butterfat, which challenge the Council decision to maintain guaranteed prices until 2005.

This is a decision we think is particularly justifiable, and one that is essential for farmers.

Similarly, we do not think that the fact that 92% of appropriations available in 1998 under the disposal measure "butter for non-profit organisations" was spent in just three Member States, none of which is among the poorest in the European Union, as the resolution points out, is worth including as a serious argument.

It is rather jumping the gun to forget that the phenomenon of the development of a fourth world and the impoverishment of certain social strata in our countries is a horrendous reality, and the return to still vulnerable growth is not about to make it possible to quickly reintegrate that sector of the population which has often been marginalised for a long period.

We do not find the report' s critical attitude to the aid given to the major cereal-producing regions to be satisfactory either, even though the report does, admittedly, pay special attention to the smaller cereal-producers within the European Union.

We do not share the report' s opinion, on the subject of swine fever, that pig farmers should bear the greater part of the financial burden involved in combating epidemics. One might well ask just why they should be expected to bear these additional costs when they are weighed down by considerable costs already.

They are clearly not the parties responsible for epizootic disease; they are its victims.

So, unless we are seeking, once again, to renationalise the common agricultural policy on the quiet, there could be no question of accepting this proposal.

Mr Staes' report on European Union aid to Bosnia and Herzegovina rightly condemns the serious financial mismanagement in the Office of the High Representative (OHR) during a dramatic period, what is more, and once again, at the expense of monies belonging to the citizens of Europe.

Our group also notes the request for the OHR and the Commission to provide information detailing the reasons leading to this confusion of interests.

Nor is it acceptable for EUR 2 million to be allocated to ineligible material in the sector of ....

(The President cut the speaker off)

Mr President, I would like to say a few words concerning the excellent report by Mr Staes.

Firstly, I would, however, like to direct my comments at you, as a member of the Bureau of Parliament.

It was a disgrace to this House that we had to tolerate such a bureaucratic administrative hold-up over the question as to whether or not we can send the rapporteur of Parliament 's Committee on Budgetary Control to Bosnia and Herzegovina.

I hope that for the sake of those whom we are supposed to represent here, there will be no repeat performance.

I make no bones about the fact, because this is something we - myself included - normally criticise the Commission for.

This time, I am sorry to say, we are forced to acknowledge that the problem lies with us, which is insupportable.

Secondly, this report by Mr Staes raises our hopes in two respects.

Firstly, the Commission is receptive to new ideas.

A most welcome development has taken place between the first visits under the leadership of the Committee on Budgets and the Committee on Budgetary Control, and the status quo as ascertained by our rapporteur, and I can only congratulate the Commission on this.

At the start of this programme for the Balkans, aid was granted in the typical EU manner, i.e. the decision was taken around the green table in Brussels and private firms were then commissioned to determine the aid requirement at local level, and to divide and distribute the funds.

This method has been abolished and the system almost revolutionised - partly under pressure from this House.

It shows that our initiatives are valuable and that the Commission is receptive to new ideas.

Commissioner, perhaps you could even use this receptiveness to new ideas, which you displayed in the delegation in Sarajevo, as an example for other delegations in other countries to follow.

Mr President, despite the resources that the Structural Funds have been devoting for years to furthering territorial balance in the European Union, the 25 richest regions still have a per capita income two and a half times higher than the poorest, and despite the many needs put forward by these least-favoured regions, not all the appropriations earmarked as development funds are actually used each year.

I believe we should think about the real causes behind this incomprehensible fact.

Perhaps there is a lack of initiatives and the least-favoured areas do not know how to develop.

If that is the case, we should not just cross our arms and justify our inaction with the excuse that we give them money but they do not use it properly.

We should push forward with an additional policy of analysis, information, training, motivation, consultancy and monitoring to give a boost to new structures and opportunities for development and progress.

But it is also possible that what is happening is that from our more developed and more technocratic positions we are being too perfectionist and demanding, imposing too many regulations and conditions, and thus preventing and stifling the appearance of valid ideas in keeping with the level of development of the regions addressed by Community policies.

Perhaps we should adapt the Community policies to these regions instead of expecting the regions to adapt to an elitist European policy.

(The President cut the speaker off)

Mr President, I should above all like to congratulate Mr Staes on a most outstanding report.

His conditions of work were not the best.

It is unfair that we in Parliament should have to deal with a report from the Court of Auditors concerning events going back many years, but the fact is that Mr Staes has done his homework and gone out into the field.

Now, it is not that I do not trust Mr Staes, on the contrary, but I too happened to be in Bosnia last week, and he is right in his assessment.

The history of the Commission' s delegations in Bosnia has become a success story.

The Court of Auditors' report concludes that the Commission' s control over funds for the High Representative' s Office and the UN, for example, has not, by any means, been good enough.

Many of the problems are due to the projects having previously been administered centrally from Brussels.

Now, the EU delegations on the spot have been given more powers and more staff.

This shows that the idea of giving the delegations more duties and more responsibility does, in actual fact, work in practice.

The Court of Auditors proposes that, in future, the EU should give organisations such as the UN, the OSCE and the High Representative' s Office a sum of money which they can administer themselves.

At the same time, the Court of Auditors would like to see tighter control.

I really do not think that this adds up.

If we simply give money as a direct form of budget aid to the organisation, then the Commission will completely lose track of things and no longer have any control.

The issue of cooperation between the EU and the organisations will become part of the 1999 discharge.

The Commission is calling for clear guidelines from the Council and Parliament.

That is something I can well understand.

We cannot demand both better control and more of a free hand.

We merely need to retain a certain degree of control over taxpayers' money.

The UN system is unfortunately becoming more and more bureaucratic, inefficient and corrupt so, in spite of everything, I have much more confidence in our own EU system.

Mr President, this debate covers ten special reports by the Court of Auditors on subjects of such varied kinds and importance that they range from a study of the principal of additionality in structural actions to a specific and thorough analysis of the Community cereals policy.

I would therefore like to limit myself to the latter issue and to begin by congratulating Mr McCartin and the Court of Auditors on their excellent work and by highlighting the final points of the Court' s analysis.

Between 1993 and 1997, overcompensation in the cereals sector amounted to over EUR 13 billion.

Every European citizen contributed more than EUR 37 to the cereals budget in 1997.

Arable crops represented 43% of agricultural expenditure but only 10.7% of final production.

Almost 40% of subsidies went to 3% of farmers, and 57% of the beneficiaries received 4.5% of subsidies.

The Court of Auditors concluded from this analysis that the current system of support for farmers' incomes, which is based on factors such as price, yield or area farmed, needs to be replaced by a system based on a standard net income per farm household or working unit, with farm support only being triggered to make good any fall in that income.

The COM in arable crops provides the greatest argument for the need to reform the CAP.

The thorough political remodelling that has been applied to the structure of Germany' s federal government is a clear sign that, even at the heart of Europe, where this CAP was conceived and where it has always found its greatest support, it is becoming increasingly difficult to sustain an agricultural policy model that was designed to protect an industrial approach, based on large-scale farming.

We must come up with a rural policy geared towards regional needs and fairness between farmers if we are to preserve Europe's cultural heritage and the environment.

This will require reform of the current CAP.

Mr President, I shall comment on certain problems raised by Mr Dell' Alba' s report to which I should like to draw your attention.

The measures to assist young farmers setting up in business are inadequate, since in far too many cases the target group exceeds the age limit on the date of receiving aid even though it was eligible at the moment of presenting an application.

Given the difficult situations experienced by a large number of these young people and the hardship faced by people working in that sector, a situation where some of them cannot receive European and national aid due to inaccuracies and delays is not acceptable.

As regards the measures to assist the employment of young persons, we would need a precise assessment before being able to consider the impact of this policy.

This assessment should take account of the variety of routes to employment to be implemented.

As regards the measures for the redevelopment of industrial sites, on the contrary, the funding has been too generous, since the ERDF aid has been used to fund projects of types other than the development of industrial sites.

This is compounded by the fact that different forms of aid, if not coordinated at regional level, can engender competition between promoters and a subsequent scattering of aid and reduced effectiveness.

This does not make it possible to conduct a redevelopment policy which takes account of the diagnosis of needs and the assessment of achievements, ultimately enabling the active administration of regional development.

In this respect, I cannot go without mentioning the restructuring planned by the Danone Group, a procedure we find in various Member States.

We cannot tolerate firms which have been able to receive European subsidies being allowed, even though they are in good financial shape, to decide, for reasons of structural adjustments, to lay off thousands of people and causing as many family crises which, once again, will be a drain on national and European public monies.

In conclusion, one of the major objectives of the European Union is to combat unemployment, which is a priority of the Member States but also of the Commission.

We know how difficult it is to reach the whole of a target group with any measure.

However, in view of the inaccuracies and shortcomings that have been observed, demands have been presented to have the necessary arrangements made immediately, in particular in order to better define the measures and to actually pass the benefit on to the recipients by curtailing delays in the handling of cases and the payment of beneficiaries, in order to ensure that the results achieved are...

(The President cut the speaker off)

Mr President, I thank the rapporteur for the specific references in his report to two major fundings in Northern Ireland relating to our peace process and for his positive response to the International Fund for Ireland, which is funded not just by Europe but also by the United States, Canada and Australia.

I would advise other regions with serious problems of unemployment to study the work of the International Fund in Northern Ireland and the border counties.

It has done such outstanding work.

For example, it has funded some 4 600 projects, creating 38 000 jobs, and almost 90% of these jobs are in areas of high unemployment and in deprived areas.

Some 9 000 people from cross-community groups have been involved in these projects for creating jobs in Northern Ireland and some 5 000 people have been involved in the cross-border projects.

It has done an outstanding job and I welcome the positive response in the report to it.

There is also the Special Peace Programme from the European Union itself.

At grass-roots level in Northern Ireland it too is bringing together people from both sections of our community, in particular with projects for young people - young men and women.

There are shared-city initiatives to promote community; there is development and training for unemployed women - I am just singling out some of the very successful operations that are going on - the development of the food industry and, of course, the new housing development.

We very much welcome and deeply thank the Commission for this, and the Council of Ministers for the Special Peace Programme for Northern Ireland.

I should like to express my deep gratitude to all my colleagues in this Parliament for their unanimous support for this peace project because it is making such a very positive contribution to the development of peace in my country.

Mr President, as a Member of Parliament representing that part of Ireland which benefits from both the IFI and the Peace and Reconciliation Fund, I would like to praise the track record of both these funds, and as a representative who works closely with the local groups and projects making excellent use of the funds I would like to state that I am perfectly satisfied that all monies disbursed through the funds are rigorously accounted for.

The IFI and the Peace Fund are unique funds so it is understandable that certain misunderstandings should have arisen owing to a lack of familiarity with the special nature and operation of these funds.

As was pointed out previously, the EU makes a major contribution together with the United States, Canada, Australia and New Zealand.

The Fund has committed in excess of £400 million which has triggered an investment of £1.2 billion creating 38 000 jobs for 150 projects right across the border countries and Northern Ireland.

I deem it wholly inappropriate that the Committee on Budgetary Control should question the effectiveness of the IFI funding system.

I believe that these funds have made a major contribution towards the peace process and that Mr Dell'Alba should familiarise himself a little more in detail with these funds.

I would invite him to visit Northern Ireland and the border countries and to see the situation for himself.

Mr President, it was with great apprehension that we read the McCartin report, which, I regret, we did not discuss until yesterday afternoon.

Quite frankly, we were rather perplexed at the evaluations it contains regarding the agricultural sector, for, if the data and figures are to be interpreted so harshly for a sector which is undergoing such great, all-encompassing change as the world of agriculture is due to the common agricultural policy, we are concerned about the decisions to be adopted.

Of course, the rapporteur, Mr McCartin, has recommended a path to take: a thorough review must be carried out of the agricultural sector and the rules governing it.

It is regrettable that the codecision process on the decisions to be adopted for agriculture was not closed at the Nice Council.

There will certainly be a great deal to do in that area.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, firstly I would like to thank Mr Garriga, Mr McCartin, Mr Staes and Mr Dell'Alba for their reports on the reports by the Court of Auditors, which total ten in all and cover the period 1999/2000, or were published in addition.

I feel this debate has shown how valuable the Special Reports by the Court of Auditors are, because they investigate particular problematic areas in great detail.

As Commissioner, I can only welcome these Special Reports with open arms because they enable us to deal with criticisms as they arise, and the Court of Auditors constructs its Special Reports so well that they can have a direct bearing on new Commission proposals.

Of course, I must be brief and I am only able to go into some aspects of Parliament' s very detailed and valuable reports.

Firstly I will deal with the report by Mr Garriga, and then I will consider your comments on the own resources, Mr Pomés Ruiz.

EUR 14 billion is raised annually in customs duties, for the purpose of financing the EU budget, and a substantial proportion of this amount is accounted for by securities and guarantees.

Over the last few years, the Commission has endeavoured to substantially improve the legal provisions in this area.

I might mention that in 1999 and 2000, new legal provisions on the transit procedure in the customs field entered into force.

They allow for better monitoring of transit processes and the handling of securities undertaken for the purpose of safeguarding these processes.

The Community Custom' s Code has just recently been amended and the amendment has entered into force.

Last year, seven Member States were connected up to the new computer-supported transit procedure.

Parliament initiated a great deal in this area through its committee of inquiry, which produced some very practical results that are now being worked on by the Commission.

Above all, it is highly significant that the candidate countries are now to be directly involved in this computer system, i.e. in this new procedure.

There are two ongoing sets of infringement proceedings against Germany relating to the consequences of impropriety in respect of customs procedures, and the question as to whether this should attract interest payments, and consideration is being given to invoking similar proceedings against Austria, Belgium and Denmark.

In addition, I might point out that at some point in the next few days, the Commission will present its report on the own resources system for the period 1997-1999.

All in all, it is the Commission' s intention to transfer more responsibility to the Member States in the customs field.

I take the view that in the event of administrative error which leads to losses in customs revenue, a different regime should apply in future to the one currently in force, i.e. it is the Member States themselves that should be liable for the loss of revenue in the event of error.

It is quite simply a bad system, in that the last pillar of financing within the EU budget has to come into play in such circumstances, i.e. all Member States then have to pay according to their share of GNP.

In other words, the present system is such that those who practise sloppy management are rewarded, whilst those who make a special effort are, in fact, the mugs.

It ought to be the Finance Ministers' first priority to want to change a system of this kind.

There is no sign of this happening yet, but the Commission will continue to press the point.

I will now turn now to the extremely important report on agriculture by Mr McCartin.

I would like to express my gratitude for these reports.

They cover the following subjects: milk powder, butterfat, cereals and swine fever.

I have several brief comments to make on these, and, Mrs Rühle, all I can say is how right you are that this report too illustrates, once again, the number of areas in which urgent reforms are needed.

We have one surplus in the entire area of milk production, and this causes a whole host of other problems, particularly in terms of financial control, because this surplus has led to specific sales promotion measures for skimmed-milk powder and butterfat, which raise enormous problems for financial control time and again, or, to put it another way, they create opportunities for fraud.

The criticism raised in the Special Report prompted the Commission to improve on and simplify four aspects relating to skimmed milk.

The definition of skimmed-milk powder eligible for financial aid was stated more precisely, the control procedures, particularly in relation to the detection of the presence of whey in skimmed-milk powder, were reviewed, and the aid for liquid skimmed milk destined for use in animal feed was abolished following a cost-benefit analysis, which is something that attracted a great deal of criticism.

This was a necessary measure though, because the vehemence of the Court of Auditor' s criticism on this point meant that steps had to be taken.

On the subject of butterfat - there is also an issue here arising from the overproduction that occurs in this sector - I can confirm that the fact that payment of aid is concentrated on only a few Member States is to be reviewed at the forthcoming assessment of the milk sector.

This concentration is not unusual but we will take up your comments on this again nonetheless.

The Court of Auditor' s observations with regard to shortcomings in the exercise of control are currently being given consideration under the clearance of accounts procedure.

The Court of Auditors assessed the reform measures introduced in 1992 in the third Special Report on the effects on the cereals sector.

The Commission used these measures as the basis for its own assessment.

In the motion for a resolution, Parliament, and yourself, Mr McCartin, call for direct payments to be differentiated, in a bid to redress the currently uneven distribution of incomes between prosperous and less prosperous regions, but also between large and small farms.

This would be possible subject to certain constraints, although not all Member States would accept it, and there is room for improvement here too.

You also address the important issue of cofinancing of direct aid in the report.

We know what became of this matter in Agenda 2000.

However, the Commission feels that this is another topic that must be brought up for discussion again in the course of the midterm review.

Very briefly on the subject of swine fever: the Commission is of the same mind as those who feel that after the last epidemic, there is an urgent need to revise the relevant legal provisions.

It has therefore submitted proposals accordingly, and, has also restructured the Commission' s veterinary service as a result.

The Commission would agree with you, Mr McCartin, that pig producers should carry a greater share of the financial burden of measures to combat animal diseases.

In this connection, the Commission will carry out an investigation into risk management instruments in agriculture, the findings of which will be available in the next few months, and they are bound to be the subject of intense discussion in this House thereafter.

I will now turn to your report Mr Staes, for which the Commission is in your debt.

In the period from 1996 to 1998, which is the period the Court of Auditor' s Special Report relates to, the Commission - and you acknowledged this - operated under extremely difficult political conditions on the ground.

You mention the extraordinary circumstances, particularly with regard to the financing of the open broadcasting network.

Firstly, it was necessary for equipment of a very high quality to be made available for this network, and secondly, it was important to ensure that the transmission of information was of a very high quality too, with a view to preparing for the 1996 elections, and allowing for independent reporting.

However, the Commission is forced to concede that, in many areas, there was much cause for criticism and so it has taken the appropriate steps.

I will go on to discuss the relationship between the EU as donor, and the Office of High Representative and the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe as recipients of the financial aid. This relationship is indeed complex.

The Commission has been reprimanded for quite a few administrative shortcomings, when the fault actually lies with the international organisations.

It is not a case of denying responsibility.

It just goes to show that there are even difficulties on the cooperation front sometimes, which are partly structural in nature.

The Court of Auditors is now proposing, as it did back in its 1999 Annual Report, that international organisations should not be granted project financing but should be allowed budgetary grants instead.

But how is the Commission supposed to support international organisations with an exclusively political mandate when these organisations find it difficult to properly implement the administrative and financial standards of Community aid programmes?

Further talks and regulations are called for here.

On the subject of the repatriation of refugees and the construction of housing in Bosnia and Herzegovina, which also features in the report: the Commission was able, with the aid of projects financed by the PHARE and OBNOVA programmes, to achieve similar successes where rehousing is concerned to those of other donors.

A criticism was raised in the 1999 Annual Report to the effect that there were shortcomings with regard to the repatriation of refugees, but this situation has now improved.

I would also remind you once again that the Commission has learnt from all the errors committed in Bosnia and Herzegovina when it came to granting EU aid, and has taken the necessary steps, and it has also placed the administration of EU aid, for example in Kosovo, on an entirely different footing.

Turning now to the comprehensive report by Mr Dell'Alba, which concerns the principle of additionality as applied to the Structural Funds, industrial areas, youth employment initiatives, the International Fund for Ireland and the PEACE programme. Here, too, I must confine myself to a few remarks.

The structural funds regulation of June 1999 now includes new provisions regarding the principle of the additionality of measures, which will hopefully help to ensure that, in future, there will be no more cause for the kind of criticism raised by the Court of Auditors about the previous support period, and the criteria will be clearer.

I have this to say about the Court of Auditor' s report on industrial areas: one of the key aspects of the 1999 reform of the structural funds has been the strengthening of the monitoring and assessment instruments, which will enable us to establish more effectively where the money goes to.

The regulations now provide for a clearer distribution of responsibility between the Commission and the Member States.

Finally, permit me just to say a few words about the report on the PEACE programme.

Parliament has expressed its profound concern at the often slow-moving materialisation of the PEACE programme in Northern Ireland and has called for a transparent budget.

The furtherance of the consolidation of the peace process in Northern Ireland and the support, particularly of the cross-border cooperation afforded by local initiatives, which Mr Hume made reference to once again, was not just an innovative goal, but was also the right programme to my way of thinking, and I am delighted to be able, once again, to acknowledge the fact that it has Parliament' s support.

This programme too was launched under very difficult conditions initially.

As the Court of Auditors report shows, it was still able, in the end, to play a part in supporting the peace and reconciliation process in Northern Ireland.

I believe that was the object of the exercise and to that extent, I am delighted that it could be judged a success at the end of the day.

Management of European Monetary Institute and European Central Bank (1998)

The next item is the report (A5-0395/2000) by Mr Heaton-Harris, on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control, on the report of the Court of Auditors on the operational efficiency of the management of the European Monetary Institute and the European Central Bank for the financial year 1998 together with the replies of the European Central Bank [C5-0319/2000 - 2000/2163(COS)].

Mr President, I would firstly like to acknowledge the work that the Court of Auditors did in producing the report that my report is based on which contained lots of detailed work.

I would also like to thank the services of our committee which helped me a very great deal and indeed the ECB itself which kindly entertained me in Frankfurt for a day and told me where my report was going wrong.

There is a tiny bit of history behind this report.

On 31 May 1998 the European Monetary Institute changed to the European Central Bank.

The president was still the same person and 402 of the 407 staff that were working in the EMI changed also to the ECB.

The ECB took on all the assets and liabilities of the EMI.

The Court of Auditors' report identified a number of problem areas which I will come to shortly.

The European Central Bank replied to the report, but its replies were certainly short, I would say 'terse' , and the Court of Auditors found them quite inadequate since they did not give any indications of actions that the ECB intended to take to remedy the shortcomings exposed by the Court of Auditors' report.

There were two main areas where the Court of Auditors identified problems.

There are equally two areas in which Parliament, and in particular the Committee on Budgetary Control, took a great interest.

The Committee was obviously interested in the Bank's relationship with OLAF, and this is summarised in my report's Conclusion 4 which, if will allow me, I will read.

This states: "Welcomes the public commitment of the European Central Bank, in its annual report for 1999, to establish a cooperative relationship with the European Anti-Fraud Office OLAF but regrets clear incompatibility between the public commitment assumed by the ECB in its 1999 annual report to establish close cooperation with OLAF and the decision by the ECB itself to prevent OLAF from carrying over internal investigations, pending the ruling by the European Court of Justice."

That is a court case that is ongoing.

The other part that the Committee was very interested in was the contradictory procedure.

It took ages in this particular case, and when I asked both institutions why, they both said that they had replied in the time that they were given and quite within the guidelines.

So, I can only blame the postal services of Frankfurt and Luxembourg, and I guess they need greater liberalisation.

However, I am sure these problems will not occur in future.

The main areas specified as problems in the Court of Auditors' report concerned the ECB's project management and monitoring.

The Court of Auditors' report noted a lack of any commitments accounting system which had caused great concern; that it was difficult to track project development simply and coherently; and that the ECB had engaged a company of consultants to run some foreign currency reserve subledger projects in July 1998, but by the end of the year the ECB had still not designated a full-time manager for this project, although that was essential for the monitoring of the consultants' work.

It also pointed to a number of IT problems.

The other point was extraordinary bonuses.

I still find it extraordinary that the Bank whose primary objective is price stability saw its way to paying some staff the equivalent of a 38% bonus. The excuse is that they had worked a lot in the past - worked a lot of overtime - put a lot of work in - and that some of these staff were being paid only 9% over a period of years and this was almost like catch-up pay.

But that is just shoddy management and really should not occur in a Bank like this.

As to my tactics, I was not really sure what I should do.

As someone who is not a great fan of the European single currency and certainly not his country's entry into it, I had a dilemma with this report.

Whilst I would like to demand that the ECB take note of what the Court of Auditors has said, I could have used this report to attack the ECB and got great headlines for myself back home, but that was not the role of the rapporteur.

So I went to the ECB and asked for a meeting.

They kindly took me to Frankfurt, and I was told that they had changed their bonus policy, that they had understood the problems in project management, and so my report is, if not actually nice, then enhanced by this meeting with the ECB.

At my meeting with the ECB, I was told that it had solved its problems especially relating to the bonus and this would not happen again and it would send a letter to the Committee detailing its current bonus policy.

As it transpires, this letter has never turned up, and that is a great shame because the European Central Bank should not really fear criticism from this institution.

We are simply doing our job.

When problems occur, and they always will, it should not be the job of the ECB to paper over the cracks and pull down the shutters.

It should deal with the problems and tell the EU and its public how it has dealt with them and not have a panic attack over how it communicates these things.

As my speech has suggested, the report could easily have been a lot stronger, and the ECB has got off fairly lightly this year.

If similar or more problems occur next year, they might find such a report a bit tougher, unless they choose to actually open up, have a dialogue with our Committee, become more transparent and talk to all of us in this Parliament.

Mr President, the Court of Auditors' report on the ECB relates, of course, to the period of transition from the EMI to today' s ECB, a fact which characterises the report itself.

A number of the problems pointed out in the report are specifically concerned with the transition.

Some of the criticism is levelled at project follow-ups focused more upon how much money had been spent than upon how much had actually been achieved.

However, the main criticism from both the Court of Auditors and the Committee on Budgetary Control concerns the extra bonus which the Bank' s employees received over and above their normal bonus and which substantially exceeded both the maximum levels set and the budgeted costs.

The methods for deciding about this additional cost were also criticised.

The ECB has commented on the criticism and stated, among other things, that it has improved its procedures and taken the criticism of its project management on board.

The ECB also acknowledges that there has been a lack of clarity surrounding this extra bonus.

We are also pleased that the ECB now recognises that OLAF must be able to carry out internal audits. However, it is a great pity about the delay involved.

I am responsible for the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs' opinion on this matter, and our conclusions are simple and succinct.

First of all: even though this was a difficult transitionary period, there is a great deal of substance in the Court of Auditors' remarks on, for example, project management, and these must be taken account of in future.

Secondly: the type of bonus system discussed is quite usual in the banking world, but the levels of bonus allocated in this case and the way in which the system was dealt with genuinely merits criticism.

What is most worrying and a matter of serious concern is the fact that, in the Swedish and other media, the Bank' s public relations manager dismisses both the Court of Auditors' and the European Parliament' s criticism which, he maintains, is not taken seriously in the banking world.

If the Bank, which is already criticised for lack of transparency, does not take the criticism seriously, it is in danger of losing public confidence.

My committee does not, however, believe that the criticism is so serious in nature that it needs to affect confidence in the ECB or cause the institution' s effectiveness to be questioned.

On the contrary, the Bank deserves substantial credit for the well-managed transition from EMI to ECB.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, my point is that the European Central Bank is going through a rough patch, what with mounting criticism, the fall in the euro against the dollar, the lack of confidence in the guidelines being issued and the unnecessary sniping against the Bank, which is a luxury neither the European Bank nor the European system can afford.

It is not enough for Caesar's wife to be respectable, she must also appear to be respectable.

I see the European Central Bank as Caesar's wife and she is respectable, but she must make more of an effort to show the outside world that she is respectable.

Today, if the truth be told, quite a few of our partners are not overly keen on the euro.

We must try not to give others an excuse to join their ranks; we must create the potential for the euro to win more supporters who will then accede to the euro zone.

I would also point out, as regards the famous bonus which has caused such a stir, that if there is justification for paying every employee at the European Central Bank an annual bonus of 9% of their salary, then 38% over a period of 54 months comes out at 8.5% per annum.

So I fail to see what there is to criticise about something which is within the bounds of both what is acceptable and what has been planned.

Presumably the figures have been misinterpreted.

However, I would point out that, whatever is done must be done in the best, most transparent, most efficient manner and with the maximum possible credibility vis-à-vis the outside world.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, we approved the report tabled by the rapporteur, Mr Heaton-Harris, in committee, and we will support it in this House, for it avoids both exaggeration and undue reserve in its comments on the issues raised by the report of the Court of Auditors on the management of the EMI and the ECB.

The three points raised by Mr Heaton-Harris are the insufficient monitoring of projects, the granting of an extraordinary bonus to ECB employees and the refusal to be subject to OLAF investigations.

I would not imagine that it occurred to any of us that the euro would weaken or that such a thing would be engineered.

That is not the point. The point, in our opinion, is that the greater our recognition of the authority of the monetary bodies in question - and I endorse this recognition, although I also take note of the clear need for political administration of the economy at European level as well - the greater the need to require them to provide clear evidence of efficiency, wage moderation and transparency.

There is an old saying, applied to people whose actions do not match their words, which goes like this: "Do what I say, not what I do".

Those whose role and prestige makes them a point of reference for such a huge public and for all the institutions - such as the European Central Bank, which has our confidence - cannot permit themselves even a minor imperfection, and still less can they say, "Do what I say, not what I do" while advocating price stability, management efficiency and the greatest possible rectitude and transparency.

It is precisely because of the major, valuable role of these institutions - and I wish to stress this by way of conclusion - and because the issues condemned can be resolved that we are confident that the recommendations of the Court of Auditors and the European Parliament will be given practical effect.

The vote will be taken at 12 noon.

The next item is the report (A5-0335/2000) by Mr Bushill-Matthews, on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs, on the report from the Commission to the European Parliament and the Council: Growth and Employment Initiative - Measures on financial assistance for innovative and job creating Small- and Medium Sized Enterprises (SMEs) - As at 31 December 1999 [COM(2000) 266 - C5-0507/2000 - 2000/2245(COS)].

Mr President, I wish to begin by just reminding the House of a few statistics.

There are at least 16 million businesses within the EU, 99.9% of them are micro to medium-sized.

There are 100 million people working in the EU in the private sector and, of these, 32 million people work in micro-businesses, which is businesses of less than 10 people; 33 million people work in small to medium enterprises, with less than 249 people.

So a total of 65 million workers in the EU are in the small and medium sector, which shows that it is very important for us to be discussing the growth of such a sector.

In particular, it is absolutely right that this specific initiative - growth and employment - should be discussed within the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs, although it is clearly also of interest to other committees.

This particular report is concerned with funding programmes, which was an important initiative from this Parliament a few years ago.

But it is worth saying straight away, as confirmed at the Lisbon Summit, that the issue of the development of SMEs is not just a matter of funding.

It is also very important that all of us secure the right climate for enterprise, with less red tape and less bureaucracy, to encourage SMEs and risk-takers to actually consider taking out risk capital in the first place.

1999 was the first full year of this particular set of initiatives and, therefore, as a start-up phase it should have been relatively straightforward to report upon this without being too controversial.

However, there are some controversial elements in the report, essentially because of the Commission timetable in issuing its report.

I have annexed the detailed timetable to the report.

It shows that whereas the initial draft proposal from the Commission came out in November/December 1999, it literally took a full five months before the report came before Parliament.

Then there was a further delay within Parliament, because we are not perfect in that respect either.

It took over a month to allocate it to a rapporteur and then, because of the summer recess, it was not possible to programme the internal debate and discussion until October and November.

Despite this long delay, there was further incompetence, dare I say, within the Secretariat because the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy under Mrs Flesch as the rapporteur had produced some very useful amendments to the report which only came to the Committee on Employment after we had voted on the report.

So that again was not exactly impressive.

I have agreed with Mrs Flesch that amendments from the committee today have my full support to go through unchallenged, as there are a number of useful contributions there.

I should add that I asked the Commission back in August about a particular comment in the report, which stated that in August there would be some feedback from SMEs about their response to the project.

However, the Commission did not reply.

I asked again in October where this information was and it finally replied: "What information are you waiting for?

It was literally only yesterday that I received an e-mail from the Commission stating that there was such information but it had been sent to the Committee on Budgets rather than to our committee - again, not too impressive.

Yesterday, I spoke in the debate on the Doorn report on SLIM concerning bureaucracy. I should like to reinforce those comments now, because the fact that this report had to go through so many different Directorates before it emerged - including legal, budgets, financial control, general secretariat, regional, innovation, employment and social affairs, research, internal market and competition - is not an impressive way of dealing with an important subject.

I speak not only on behalf of this report but also, I am sure, of other reports that need to go through the same system.

This is just too much micromanagement.

There are too many managers involved and, as a result, the project ends up not being fully managed.

Finally, I have made a few comments about the European Investment Bank taking a controlling interest in the EIF.

This may be absolutely right given its expertise, but we want to ensure that these particular projects are given the priority they deserve.

I am not particularly confident but we shall watch to see how that goes.

I have also called for a full audit, not because of any doubt about the financial probity, but just as a basic management control system.

In conclusion, may I say that the Commission has apparently already written the draft report for the year 2000.

I should like to ask that we see it now so that we can make a positive contribution now in good time, rather than repeat the timing of the current report.

Here we are in January 2001 debating and voting on a report that was issued back in 1999.

On such an important subject we want to deal with the present, thereby being better able to shape the future.

Mr President, I should first of all like to congratulate the rapporteur and to emphasise that there is basically no difference in the attitudes of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs and the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy.

We therefore endorse the rapporteur' s conclusions, particularly his comments on delays, which should be avoided in future.

The Committee on Industry perhaps emphasised to a greater extent the importance of SMEs for employment, the need to facilitate access to risk capital, the need to simplify bureaucratic and administrative procedures and regarding improving the coordination between the various Commission programmes of interest to small and medium-sized enterprises.

We therefore tabled a number of amendments and, as the rapporteur has just explained, due to an unfortunate combination of circumstances, the rapporteur did not receive the amendments in time.

I should like to thank him, nonetheless, for having tried to accept Amendments Nos 1 to 8, which constitute the bulk of the Committee on Industry' s amendments, which complement the rapporteur' s report.

Mr President, the Nice Summit was characterised by weak decisions. However, it will not impede progress towards an ever stronger European Union.

When national measures have no effect, that is when Europe comes into play.

We are experiencing this with BSE.

Suddenly, all sides are calling for effective cross-border consumer protection and robust action where wrongly labelled products are concerned.

We are also experiencing this with the fight against unemployment.

The SMEs feel the effectiveness of union-wide initiatives for growth and employment, which are designed to underpin the measures introduced by the Member States.

One of the first things to come out of this programme is that EUR 450 million is to be made available for growth-orientated SMEs.

On behalf of the PPE-DE Group, I would like to congratulate Philip Bushill-Matthews on his report, which bears witness to his exceptionally detailed knowledge.

We concur with his criticism of the Commission for providing too little information too late.

Just how are we supposed to oversee matters properly, or even submit solid programme proposals under such enormous pressure of time?

We need clarification on which of the three facilities - start-up capital, guarantees, or joint ventures - have achieved the best results, in which States and which sectors companies were set up, whether the small enterprises had access to foreign capital too, or whether statements originating from SME circles are correct, according to which, more than 50 000 new jobs were created simply by means of interest subsidies to the value of EUR 100 million, which age groups are especially required, and to what extent women were involved.

In talking to SMEs in my constituency, I constantly met with complaints that the funds are virtually only ever granted to enterprises in state-of-the-art technology.

Other innovative enterprises, from the craft industry for example, ought to qualify, too, to my mind.

We must also take greater account of the sustainability of services.

Mr President, let us seize on the initiative emanating from Mr Bushill-Matthews' excellent report.

The more detailed the information, the sooner confidence in EU initiatives will grow.

Mr President, on behalf of the Socialist Group, I very much support this report and in particular the initiatives behind the ETF Start-up Facility and the Small and Medium-Sized Enterprise Guarantee Facility.

I am sure there is a shared opinion across this House of how important small businesses are.

In my own country, the United Kingdom, the small business population has actually increased in size by one half since 1980 and there is now one small business for every 13 adults in the population.

Small businesses are important not just for jobs but also for trade in this European Union.

I recall talking with the counsellor in the British Embassy dealing with Belgium and the Benelux countries and exports into those countries, who told me that the vast majority, over 90% of the enquiries which he deals with, are not from large companies seeking to export but from small businesses.

So that is very relevant to us in this House too.

It is relevant because of the Lisbon process.

We welcomed the conclusions from the Lisbon Summit last year: the move towards flexibility, the move towards entrepreneurship, towards innovation that were reflected there.

These facilities should be seen very much as being at the heart of trying to achieve those economic goals.

I would also like to change past practice by congratulating Mr Bushill-Matthews.

I have sat in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs with him for the last year or so and I have heard him make the same speech time after time about de-regulation and too much bureaucracy at European level.

He has actually come up with something constructive here, so well done Mr Bushill-Matthews.

Nice to see that you can do some work, or at least others can do it on your behalf.

I particularly congratulate you on your conclusions regarding the need for more transparency and speed - absolute support for that - and on the importance of the high technology sectors - yes, but not just those.

Also, I am very surprised to see you putting emphasis on the need to increase female participation in small businesses.

Congratulations to you for supporting that.

I would have liked to see more on the social economy.

Our cooperative businesses should be seen fair and square as part of the small business sector.

They are particularly important in terms of job creation amongst disadvantaged groups in the labour market.

They are particularly important in terms of socially useful employment and it is an omission that they are missing from the report.

They should not be treated differently; they should be given extra help.

Perhaps the Commission could comment on that at the close of the debate.

I would also like to particularly support Amendment No 3 from the Socialist Group.

We will be supporting all of the amendments to the effect that bank guarantees behind venture capital are still far too strict, far too conservative and actually prevent entrepreneurs from creating jobs in the UK and in other European countries.

Let me conclude by saying that yesterday the UK Government published Think small first, a document about ensuring that every department of government thinks about small businesses, not just about the availability of finance that we are discussing in this debate but about the overall macroeconomic framework and the sorts of advice and skills that they need to support them and become prosperous.

We in this European Union should follow that lead and ensure that every Directorate-General, every service of the European Union puts small businesses first.

Mr President, I want first of all to congratulate Mr Bushill-Matthews on his report.

He has produced a good piece of work in spite of difficult conditions, and we in the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party very much agree with his conclusions, as well as with the amendments tabled by the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy.

There are, of course, many different ways to create full employment, but this cannot be achieved without economic progress and a high degree of competitiveness.

This was also, of course, the conclusion reached by the Lisbon Summit last year which specifically emphasised growth and development as the means to higher employment in the EU.

Moreover, every politician has a soft spot for small and medium-sized enterprises.

At any rate, that is true whenever we raise our glasses in praise of their importance to economic development and employment.

When it comes to everyday practice, however, the reality is all too often different.

Far too many obstacles are placed in the way in the form of bureaucratic rules which deter many people from setting up in business.

There are not enough incentives to take risks, and this generally impedes development and dynamism.

We cannot, of course, get away from the fact that, in general, there is less willingness to take risks in the EU than in the United States, something which is reflected in less dynamic new business development.

I therefore also think it is important to ensure that these programmes which, through the European Investment Bank, provide small and medium-sized enterprises with new financing opportunities operate as efficiently as possible in the eyes of the enterprises concerned.

The programmes must be made more widely known and linked to other programmes, and it must of course be ensured that the payments are not dragged out, indeed that the programmes operate with a minimum of bureaucracy.

Mr Bushill-Matthews' s excellent report and the amendments tabled by the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy contain criticism of experience to date.

That criticism should be taken on board so that our friendly feelings for small and medium-sized enterprises do not only find expression in fine celebratory speeches, but also in practice.

We must also ensure that the programmes are effective overall, and I am therefore particularly pleased about Mr Bushill-Matthews' s request that the Commission follow up the programmes and examine their effect on employment.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, it is quite amazing what excellent reports are produced, although the Commission basis is completely inadequate.

The rapporteur puts forward the proposal that enterprises that have not taken up support programmes should be interviewed.

I consulted numerous colleagues on this, in my capacity as owner of a medium-sized enterprise.

The almost unanimous verdict was as follows: when it comes to the European Investment Fund, and especially the various components of the Amsterdam Special Action Programme (ASAP) on SMEs and job creation, we small enterprises lose track of things because there is a plethora of individual sub-programmes, responsibility for which is in all kinds of different hands, I might add.

For example, there is the normal SME guarantee facility, the growth and employment initiative, the growth and environmental initiative, the EIF technology facility ETF, the ETF start-up-programme, new sub-programmes for innovation attached to EIF-ETF since Lisbon, e-Europe, e-Learning etc.

How are these distinguished from one another and where must I, as entrepreneur, submit the applications for my project ideas?

Parliament has the same problem from the opposite perspective, if it wants to assess how the ASAP is developing overall, because the reports from the EIB and EIF do not contain a coherent account.

Sometimes there is talk, in general terms, of the full range of SME support, and sometimes the individual components of the ASAP are cited in different contexts.

There are also a few things wrong with the organisation of the ASAP on the policy side.

The growth and environmental initiative has not received any more funds.

What is more, it strives for a completely antiquated after-care style of environmental protection.

The remaining areas, i.e. growth and employment, ETF, etc. have received continuous boosts, I grant you, but they concentrate on a few high-tech sectors alone, predominantly innovation, communications and genetic engineering.

In many cases, these SMEs are not dealt with directly; instead the application procedure is handled by middlemen, usually traditional risk capital and investment funds, which receive the credits and guarantees from the EIB, and which the SMEs have to go to with any complaints.

That being the case, in fact nobody but the EIB knows which SMEs are receiving support for precisely which projects, and how many jobs are being created in the process.

That is why hitherto, when assessing the effect these programmes have on employment, rather than providing concrete figures, the EIB has performed a simple macroeconomic model estimate.

More detailed information will be available on the outcome of the whole exercise in 5 to 10 years' time.

Rumour has it that essentially, the ASAP serves to strengthen the European risk capital market for information and communication, genetic engineering and starting up new businesses, and that the job creation aspect is not actually examined in greater detail or assessed.

The EIB homepage showing the list of funds to which the EIB has given credits and guarantees, fuels this notion.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, this is one of those subjects on which we cannot and, in fact, do not have any doubts or hesitations as to our political approach.

First of all, programmes aimed at promoting employment and growth are still vitally important, despite some positive signs in recent years.

Secondly, the strategic importance of small and medium-sized enterprises in this area is quite clear and crucial, as was stated in the definition of the initiative for greater employment, which was strengthened recently by the guidelines laid down at the Lisbon Summit.

I too, like the rapporteur, whom I congratulate, wish to highlight the Lisbon Summit conclusion that calls for a climate encouraging the promotion of small and medium-sized enterprises, and in particular a regulatory framework which is conducive to investment, innovation and entrepreneurship.

Thirdly, we are all fully aware of the particularly tough challenges as well as the new opportunities that economic globalisation presents for small and medium-sized enterprises.

Fourthly, it is crucial for the European Union and the Member States to overcome the relative gap that exists in many areas between the EU and the United States.

If we are to fulfil our responsibilities in this area, we must have good information in good time.

This has, until now, not been the case.

I agree with the rapporteur' s criticisms and I also call for the draft 2000 report to be submitted to us in time, by March of this year, otherwise the harsh criticism that we have refrained from making this year will have to be made with even greater severity next year.

In its reporting procedures, the Commission must acknowledge the priority and the importance that we attach to these areas and ensure that these are reflected in the quality of its analysis tools.

In conclusion, I think that we must improve our commitment: I agree with the rapporteur when he advocates that our interest in high technology and knowledge-based industries must not mean that we forget the more traditionally structured businesses involved in tourism, trade, crafts and in services in general.

We must consider the amendments, since we need to demonstrate a greater ability to harness venture capital. The amendments also, in my opinion, complement the report well.

Mr President, Europe normally finds it hard to assess the impact of government policy. That is not the case in this report.

I therefore find the assessment presented here of the effects of the programme on actual job creation particularly interesting.

Furthermore, since the agreement of the Council for Employment and Social Policy on 20 December 2000 regarding the creation of articles of association for the European company, the legal and administrative prospects for SMEs are looking up.

This is essential, since SMEs form 99.8% of all firms and employ 66% of the European workforce.

Yet the concept of an SME continues to apply to a catch-all category embracing a wide range of company structures and situations.

The great majority of them are firms employing at most 10 employees.

It is to be regretted that their special characteristics have not been recognised and that they do not benefit from special measures.

Unlike the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy, which mentions it in its opinion, the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs does not mention any such recognition.

Similarly, the aid programme should not be reserved for the large SMEs using or producing leading edge technology.

The traditional sector should also be able to benefit in full.

I am thinking in particular of the craft sector, which provides employment, know-how and innovation.

From this point of view, I support the programme of start-up facilities for smallSMEs.

On the other hand, I am more sceptical of the idea of urging Member States to amend their tax laws.

There are plans to create a single European structure for risk capital investment funds operating in parallel with national structures.

This is liable to make administrative procedures more complicated for the small SMEs who do not necessarily have the resources to deal with them.

Mr President, I am happy to be speaking on this major document tabled by Mr Bushill-Matthews, whom I have the honour to call my friend.

I am glad to see that this report, which is so important for the development of small and medium-sized businesses in Europe, has been so well written, and I hope that Mr Bushill-Matthews will continue to be a beacon of light for all those drawing up European Union legislative measures on small and medium-sized businesses.

He is certainly one of the greatest authorities on the matter, which became extremely important after the fall of communism.

As we are all aware, communism and the countries of the Eastern Bloc stifled free initiative. There were no small entrepreneurs in communist states.

We have now proved the superiority of the economic system of free initiative.

I therefore urge Mr Bushill-Matthews to remember in future - and Commissioner Schreyer to bear in mind both now and in future - that, in addition to the major initiatives proposed in this report, it would be appropriate to call strongly upon the Member States to exempt small businesses which are just starting off from taxes for at least the first five years of activity.

Whoever undertakes a free initiative creates at least one job - his own - and often employs family members and other people as well.

I am sure that this proposal will be music to Mr Bushill-Matthews' ears, for he is well-known for being opposed to taxation, and I therefore hope that both he and Commissioner Schreyer will accept it.

Mr President, I would like to start by congratulating Mr Bushill-Matthews on this major report.

I also have to say that I am extremely grateful to him for having accepted the amendments I proposed which supplement the main part of the report on certain points and certain basic issues.

In my opinion, it is extremely important to be focusing on the development of small and medium-sized businesses and what that involves, in order to offset the unemployment in large businesses, apart from anything else.

Europe must, therefore, make it a priority to support businesses, create a favourable climate for their establishment and development, encourage research and, above all, encourage the leading sectors.

It is also of primary importance that the European Parliament succeeds in monitoring both the projects and the results made possible by European funding.

This would appear to be of extreme importance, together with the fact that small and medium-sized businesses in the small craft, trade and tourism sectors - as I pointed out - and other services will also benefit.

We must take on board the fact that the era when people stayed in the same job all their lives has passed, that we must change our perception of employment and that the sector of small and medium-sized industry and craft trades will provide increasingly realistic job opportunities for our young people and for the future European citizens.

It is vital for Europe to focus on these factors and we must continue to have confidence in this approach.

Mr President, I would like to thank my colleague, Mr Bushill-Matthews, for the great expertise he has demonstrated in drafting this report.

Although SMEs now employ two-thirds of the workforce in the whole of the European Union, there is still employment potential in the SME sector.

Support and venture capital while a company is being set up are enormously important for the creation of jobs, as, according to certain studies, SMEs use as much as 80% to 90% of venture capital market resources in taking on staff.

We must give SMEs that have potential for growth our strongest support, irrespective of what sector they operate in.

More attention must also be paid to making it easier for companies to globalise, so that SMEs may take full advantage of the benefits brought by the internal market.

Also great in this regard are the expectations connected with harmonising systems of guarantees and legislative reform regarding mortgages, which we are expecting in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs.

I fully agree with the rapporteur that the Commission should, in future, provide information more promptly on how this important initiative is progressing.

In future, the Commission' s reports should contain feedback on the users of the fund so that defects in the system can be speedily rectified.

Finally, I would like to focus attention on those legal provisions which aim to make it easier for bankrupt companies to begin trading again.

Although these companies have proved to be a risk once, that does not mean that the same thing will happen in the future.

Bankrupt companies should rather be viewed as a resource for Europe, which we should not fail to exploit.

I would also like to stress how important small businesses are for competitiveness with regard to Europe' s big companies.

Small companies often work as subcontractors for our European mammoth organisations, and, as a result, the position of small businesses is more important than ever for competitiveness throughout Europe.

Mr President, I am delighted that this report has been put before the House.

Especially with my being an entrepreneur, I would like to congratulate the Commission on having brought out, to excellent effect, what is lacking in Europe.

What it boils down to is that there is not enough start-up capital available for people who want to set up in business, and so numerous young entrepreneurs have to give up again prematurely.

Exports constitute a risk of course, and so it is particularly important for joint ventures to receive financial support in the early stages, more than at any other time.

The guarantee system serves to ensure that not everyone who is willing to become an entrepreneur automatically jeopardises his livelihood in the process and faces the risk of financial ruin, at the very least, for the rest of his life.

When we consider that approximately EUR 7 billion is available in risk capital in Europe, whilst in America the figure stands at EUR 12 billion, then we ought to give thought to how we can make good the difference.

What steps can we take, particularly as regards agriculture?

The very word BSE ought to inspire us to reflect on what kind of young enterprises we could establish in order better to guarantee food safety, carry out blood tests, develop treatments and so on. Urgent action is called for here.

I would also like to stress that it is important for young entrepreneurs to be given a commitment they can rely on as speedily as possible.

Deadlines should be set by which a decision must be given in the form of a clear 'yes' or 'no' , so as to avoid any unnecessary risk.

It is also important to apply the directive on tackling default in payment, so that people actually get their hands on the money within a set period of time.

There is still too much hesitancy on this score for my liking.

The Commission should submit proposals on project management, develop best practice methods, introduce benchmarks, on the basis of which it will be possible to examine how much time elapses between the first application and the successful creation of jobs. It also needs to monitor payment flows, and finally, promote the entire strategy in the public arena.

When it comes to PR, one idea would be to have a 'young entrepreneur of the year' prize, awarded to the entrepreneur who has created the most jobs in absolute terms and in percentage figures.

This would demonstrate at European level, and correspondingly in the Member States, that we are going the right way about this.

Mr President, as I am here instead of my colleague Pedro Solbes Mira, I will give his speech in English, also in honour of the rapporteur.

This report concerns the first annual report on the Growth and Employment Initiative.

This initiative aims to provide financial assistance for innovative and job-creating small and medium-sized enterprises as a step towards the development of a business climate conducive to investment, innovation and entrepreneurship.

It is also in line with the Lisbon European Council conclusions of March 2000 where the objectives of strengthening employment, economic reform and social cohesion as part of a knowledge-based economy were set as a new strategic goal for the Union.

I would like to address the main points raised by the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs' report prepared by Mr Bushill-Matthews.

Firstly, the report notes that the Commission reporting process is too lengthy, causing delays in the receipt of the report by Parliament.

At the same time, Parliament's report states that there is a lack of information particularly concerning feedback information from small and medium-sized enterprises, beneficiaries of the Growth and Employment Initiative.

In my view, these two matters are inter-linked and are a result of the way the financial instruments that form part of the Growth and Employment Initiative are constructed.

These are designed so as to commit budgetary resources to financial institutions such as venture capital funds, national guarantee schemes and commercial banks which would act as intermediaries for final SME beneficiaries.

In this respect, the information regarding commitment and draw-downs made to financial institutions in a given year is available during the first quarter of the following year.

On the other hand, feedback information from small and medium-sized enterprises concerning a given year is only available for all the instruments in the last quarter of the following year.

This implies that an annual report drawn up by the end of April will include year-end statistics for the previous year at the financial intermediary level and at the SME level, detailed statistics for the preceding year.

These time-scales indicate why last year's annual report referring to 1999, which was the first full year of the programme, could not include detailed information at SME level.

This leads us to the following point: streamlining the initiative is an objective shared by both Parliament and the Commission.

However, a re-shaping of the financial instruments of the initiative cannot be done annually.

First of all, market players could be confused and find it difficult to appreciate the reasons for these changes.

Furthermore, a detailed evaluation of these instruments based on a bottom-up approach is needed.

Regarding the JEFV programme which has had the weakest take-up out of the three financial instruments of the Growth and Employment Initiative, the multi-annual programme for enterprises foresees a simplification of the scheme to enable SMEs' requests for financial contributions to be dealt with more quickly by the financial intermediaries and the Commission services.

The possibility of adopting the eligibility criteria will also be examined in order to respond more effectively to the needs of small and medium-sized enterprises.

Concerning the reform of the European Investment Fund, the report is incorrect in stating that the Commission can no longer use the EIF directly as a tool for financing SMEs.

As before, current and the future Community schemes entrusted to the European Investment Fund will be managed separately from its own resources under the principle set and controlled by the Commission services.

Finally, the report questions the tax structure of venture capital funds and calls on the Commission to encourage each Member State to adopt laws permitting tax-transparent funds to be created in their country and to recognise transparent funds established in a similar way in other Member States.

This matter, which is of great interest to the Commission, has recently been dealt with in the Commission communication on the risk capital action plan which was finalised in October 2000.

To quote from the report "the tax structure might hinder cross-border investment by creating specific tax obstacles or even discriminating against foreign investors.

A comprehensive response to such barriers might be achieved most effectively through coordinated action on EU level.

In any event, Member States have to make sure that tax treaties and all other tax law instruments prevent double-taxation of dividends in cross-border investment'.

To conclude, now that the restructuring of the European Investment Fund is complete, the Commission services and the EIF are working together to progressively implement the ECOFIN and Industry Council's decisions, in particular with the multi-annual programme for enterprise.

To be realistic, Parliament should not expect any substantial result before 2003 or 2004, although preliminary indications in particular from guarantee schemes might be available earlier.

Let me add as the Budget Commissioner, that the Commission has welcomed Parliament's decision for the 2001 budget to increase amounts for loans and grants available to SMEs.

This was an important signal to the small and medium-sized enterprises and an important step to achieve the aims of Lisbon to create a knowledge-based modern economy in the European Union.

The vote will be taken at 12 noon.

The next item is the report (A5-0338/2000) by Mrs Oomen-Ruijten, on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs, on the situation of frontier workers [2000/2010(INI)].

Mr President, it came as a surprise to me as well that this debate was being squeezed in today.

The topic of frontier work has fascinated me for over 21 years, the length of time I have served in politics, in the Dutch Lower Chamber, but also in the European Parliament.

It fascinates me not only because I am faced daily with problems which frontier workers experience when they live in one Member State and work in another, but also because the mechanics behind it are quite considerable, mechanics which have to be adjusted annually.

It also fascinates me because it demonstrates that parliaments, national parliaments that is, are not getting things moving quickly enough.

Another reason why it fascinates me is that what politicians appear unable to sort out, the European Court of Justice manages to settle, and Member States are always being lectured about putting right any existing mistakes.

This brings me to a remark which I would like to make vis-à-vis the European Commission.

I have no axe to grind with the European Commission.

It is particularly the Council, the members of the Council, who are unwilling to grant frontier work the flexibility it needs, and so we politicians, national politicians that is, leave this for the European Court of Justice to solve.

I think this is no longer acceptable, or necessary, for that matter, and that we must make every effort, and employ all means, in order to change this situation.

What I want in my report - and I would like to thank my fellow MEPs who have helped in the drafting, as well as predecessors who have worked on this dossier - is four things.

First of all, I would make an urgent request to the Commission to draft a directive which provides for frontier effect reports.

This request has been put to the European Commission and the Member States since 1990.

Such reports would oblige Member States, when changing their legislation on social security, taxation or public health, to draft an assessment straight away in order to study the impact on frontier workers. Why?

Not because this will make amends, but because it will help us to operate in a preventative manner; and help us to prevent problems from arising.

My second request to the Council is at long last to incorporate the amendments in Regulation 1408 without any further delays.

I believe this dossier has been with the Council of Ministers, the Social Affairs Ministers, for two years now.

It includes a number of improvements for frontier workers, as well as - and Mr Doorn mentioned SLIM yesterday - a whole host of provisions which make everything more simple, easy and more readable.

The Council must do something about this; Parliament has codecision rights on this dossier.

However, the Council must decide unanimously, and I hope that something can be done there.

Thirdly, in my opinion, the Commission should be more alert when it comes to all bilateral taxation agreements which are being concluded, in order to check whether the principles, whereby tax law should be brought into line with social security in the country of employment, are being upheld. This is to prevent problems arising and to prevent people from falling between two stools.

As far as this is concerned, the Commission should get its act together a bit more, and check and verify the bilateral taxation agreements more, also in the preliminary phases.

The fourth point I want to make concerns medical expenses, or the possibility of benefiting from provisions for medical care in another Member State.

Court judgments have been passed on this.

This is another area where politicians have let themselves down. There are judgments of the Court of Justice, Kohll-Decker being the most prominent, and I know a few people from my own region, which is a border region, who went to Court.

Mr President, neither the Member States nor the Commission have ever submitted any notes to Parliament on this matter.

We should not leave matters in the hands of the courts; we as politicians must be able to do something about this.

I know very well that when the previous Commissioner, Mr Flynn, was in office, a note was being circulated.

I know that the outcome of this was thought to be unpleasant.

But it does mean that for once - and I would like to push the Commission in this respect - we had clarity and transparency.

The position of active frontier workers, but also that of post-active frontier workers is at stake here.

As far as Kohll-Decker is concerned, it applies to all people who live near the border.

I would ask the MEPs to vote in favour of the report and certainly also for the amendments which I have tabled.

The reason for this is that frontier work is no longer a problem of the old Union of the 15.

It impacts on the day-to-day running of the market, also with regard to the candidate countries.

I would therefore call for the broadest support possible.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I would like to thank Mrs Oomen-Ruijten for highlighting the situation faced by frontier workers in an own-initiative report from Parliament.

Many and varied are the situations and problems that we continue to encounter in the European internal market, one of the key aspects of which is the freedom of movement of frontier workers.

These are problems which cause the people to question the raison d' être of the European Union.

Being an MEP in a region bordering Luxembourg, Belgium and France I can identify with all the facets of these issues.

Why is a German pensioner, who is undergoing dialysis, only permitted to have access to this for a limited period of time when holidaying in France?

The mother of a family in Germany is immediately entitled to child benefit for her second child, but not if her husband works in Luxembourg.

Is it permissible for an aunt who is insured in Belgium to be cared for in a nursing home near her family in Germany?

Pension entitlements acquired in Italy are subject to enormous outlay before they reach the German pensioner.

And why should an honorary mayor working in Germany suddenly have to pay tax on his whole salary, which he earns in Luxembourg, because he receives an expenses allowance?

Luxembourg firms are fighting against additional expenditure and additional costs, and so jobs are at risk.

This is why people decline the office of mayor.

Frontier workers must be flexible, so as to be able to cope with the confusion of laws on both sides of the borders.

Those who look for a job over the border within the European internal market need legal certainty in a united Europe, particularly in the sphere of social legislation.

We MEPs from the border regions in the European Union call upon the Commission and the Council, to provide for more cross-border social justice.

We have achieved a great deal, but there is still much to be done.

The report by Mrs Oomen-Ruijten illustrates the legitimate demands of the people in the border regions.

The internal market must also be completed within the labour market if we want to make Europe an integrated whole.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I would like to begin by thanking Ria Oomen-Ruijten for the sound cooperation we enjoyed within the framework of this report.

I thought it was a splendid idea to dust down a number of requirements which this Parliament put forward in 1998 further to an own-initiative report and following my own report which is based on a frontier workers petition.

It has to be said: not a great deal has happened legislatively speaking over the past three years.

We have often said that border regions are good barometers for European integration.

If this is the case, then I do not think integration is in terribly good shape these days, because, except for the European Court of Justice, little progress has been made.

Moreover, I also regret the fact that the frontier effect test has not even been included in the social agenda and that the Treaty of Nice has not made any decisions with regard to Regulation 1408/71, which only complicates matters.

Meanwhile, the world moves on, and in all manner of countries, tax reforms are under way, social security legislation is in full swing, statutory schemes are being supplemented with additional schemes, and quite a few countries, in a bid to reconcile work, family and leisure time, are coming up with all kinds of schemes for career breaks which will only apply to the country' s own citizens and unfortunately not to frontier workers.

I am therefore in total agreement with the European Commission, which intends to institute an inquiry into the Belgian career break scheme, which - I regret to say - does not cover Dutch citizens, whilst the Dutch scheme does apply to Belgians.

Frontier workers have an added disadvantage compared to other citizens who avail themselves of the free movement of persons principle.

They often work in one country and live in another, and pay taxes in one country and their social contributions in another.

To have some coherence between the tax policy and social security system in one country would already be something, but to expect this to happen between countries is nothing short of utopia. As a result, frontier workers continue to be at the receiving end of this unsatisfactory situation.

Even the most dyed-in-the-wool European federalists among us dare not dream of a time when we could ever achieve the utopian vision of a harmonised social security system or harmonised taxation across Europe.

We must therefore look for creative solutions.

I would like to mention two.

First of all, the Oomen-Ruijten report is right to breathe new life into the EP requirement on compulsory frontier effect reports on the part of the Member States in all legislative changes which pertain to social security and taxation, with compensation for frontier workers to balance out any drawbacks, a practice which, in fact, is already being implemented in some countries, albeit with some reluctance.

Accordingly, my group has some difficulty with the fact that Mrs Oomen-Ruijten toned down the text at the time.

We believe that the test must remain in place as a matter of urgency and that compensation must be made compulsory.

Secondly, we must have the courage to take the conclusions reached in 1998 a little further.

We were unable to halt the Russian roulette for frontier workers at the time.

We must, at long last, opt for one levy principle, either in the country of residence or the country of employment.

I think there is a whole raft of arguments in favour of the country of employment.

I think that, accordingly, my group will be voting against the amendments tabled by Mrs Oomen-Ruijten and against those of Mr Manders who wants to eliminate this principle.

I hope that this report will emerge from the plenary unscathed and that frontier workers can at long last make some more headway.

Mr President, I would like to thank Mrs Oomen for the huge amount of work she has done.

She, herself, has also indicated that this is an important issue for which little is being done, for which politicians hardly have any consideration, and, as we can see, it is extremely difficult to lend this matter some clarity.

Despite this, I have some observations in this respect, which is also apparent from my amendments.

I, myself, live in a border region and every day, I see people from my area who commute to another country. Whether this is Germany or Belgium, they cross the border at any rate.

What I have noticed is that the regulation on social security, No 1408, also applies to workers who decide to move to the country of employment and actually live there.

I welcome clarity in this matter, and I have tabled two amendments to this effect.

I agree with this position and I have also told Mrs Oomen.

But I do believe that we should include a caveat so that, if it transpires that after eighteen months or two years, an assessment should be made and if, based on this assessment, it appears that frontier workers are suffering disproportionate drawbacks, a different choice can be made, and I would like to see this caveat included in the report.

Mrs Oomen takes the country of employment as the guiding principle.

I believe that it is not so evident that the country of employment principle always works in the interests of, and benefits, the frontier workers.

I am of the opinion that we work to live and not the other way round.

For that reason, I believe that all the money and certainties we obtain on the shop floor should be brought to bear in our living environment.

That is why I am in favour of considering the possibility of using the country of residence principle.

I have included the above in an amendment.

I would therefore ask my fellow MEPs to vote in favour of this amendment.

I have also tabled two amendments to Articles 6 and 7 to have these deleted, because I believe that the Commission is not competent to take measures to intervene in bilateral agreements.

Mr President, I also wish to thank Mrs Oomen-Ruijten for her work on this issue.

I share many of her criticisms and frustrations about the scope, implementation and speed of change to Regulation 1408/71.

As a member of the Committee on Petitions, it is clear to me that there is a considerable and growing number of residents, including third-country nationals and frontier workers, for whom the current arrangements are not working satisfactorily.

Enlargement will make a complex system of coordination even more complex and it is not surprising that many citizens simply do not believe that the Union takes the free movement of citizens as seriously as it takes its commitment to the free movement of goods.

We have to find a way of simplifying things for citizens themselves and for the administrators of these systems.

It would not be surprising if we were to hear an increasing number of calls for a single European agency that would deal directly with national administrations on the citizens' behalf.

The call for a directive concerning frontier effect reports is to be welcomed.

At least these would be proactive and could hopefully deal with some of the problems before they arise, which would make a pleasant change.

It is also clear that as more countries integrate their taxation and social security systems, we need to take action to tackle the resulting anomalies, which can result in double payments.

However, the key issue is that Member States need to prove their commitment to free movement by tackling problems openly and in a spirit which favours residents of the European Union.

The debate is suspended until 3 p.m.

We shall now proceed to the vote.

Mr President, on a point of order.

As more and more Members come into the Chamber, I would like to announce a welcome innovation.

We have today opened a smoking zone behind the Hemicycle, a lovely sunny place with lots of good views.

I hope that all colleagues who continue to ruin their health by smoking, will find themselves comfortably installed outside the Chamber and will stop smoking in the non-smoking zones.

I hope everybody has heard that.

Thank you, Mrs Banotti, for looking after the interests of non-smokers.

Mr President, on a point of order.

I welcome the fact that there is now going to be a smoking rather than a non-smoking zone.

I hope now that all Members and all members of staff observe the no-smoking areas across the whole of the European Parliament building.

I am still having problems being able to get into the part-session and being able to get in and out of committee meetings, both here and in Brussels.

So I plead with everybody, now there is a smoking area, to use it and not the no-smoking areas, including the corridors and going up to the lift.

Mr President, on a point of order.

I was just wondering whether anybody is going to inform the particles of smoke where the smoking zone and the no-smoking zones are.

We shall now proceed to the vote.

Ladies and gentlemen, this is an interesting report in that the first reading took place as long ago as March 1987.

(The President declared the common position approved as amended)

Recommendation for second reading (A5-0375/2000) by Mrs Sanders-ten Holte, on behalf of the Committee on Culture, Youth, Education, the Media and Sport, on the Council common position for adopting a European Parliament and Council recommendation on European cooperation in quality evaluation in school education [11540/1/2000 - C5-0565/2000 - 2000/0022(COD)].

(The President declared the common position approved)

Report (A5-0351/2000) by Mr Doorn, on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market, on the Communication from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament on a review of SLIM: Simpler Legislation for the Internal Market [COM(2000) 104 - C5-0209/2000 - 2000/2115(COS)].

Report (A5-0382/2000) by Mrs de Veyrac, on behalf of the Committee on Culture, Youth, Education, the Media and Sport, on the application of the Convention Concerning the Protection of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage in the Member States of the European Union [2000/2036(INI)].

Report (A5-0397/2000) by Mrs van der Laan, on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control, on the Commission report on the measures taken in the light of the observations of the European Parliament in its 1997 discharge resolution [COM(2000) 224 - C5-0223/2000 - 2000/2113(DEC)].

(NL) Mr President, from a contents point of view, this is an extremely caring and considerate amendment.

However, I have advised voting against it, and I wanted to have the Commission' s comments on this, for as far as I understand, this matter has already been studied by the Commission and it is absolutely out of the question that Europe should fund textbooks for schools.

I myself advised against the amendment, because we are not out to score any additional points in this discharge, but if the Commission could confirm this, we could then all vote against the amendment with a clear conscience.

Peijs recommendation for second reading (A5-0369/2000)

Mr President, I was afraid I was going to have to make my explanations of vote in writing.

I was concerned in case my fractured foot prevented me from speaking.

However, I hope that I am not one who often puts his foot in it when he opens his mouth and that I will be able to make my usual contribution to the proceedings.

Well then, I would like to declare my support for the Peijs report and call for a European Bank to be established in practice.

In recent days, I am glad to say, the euro has gained against the dollar and the pound.

I would therefore like to take the opportunity presented by this explanation of vote to express my satisfaction at the European monetary policy and to call for an increase in the European Bank's activities, including the establishment of offices throughout Europe.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, unfortunately, Amendment No 5 to the draft directive on the reorganisation and winding up of credit institutions has received majority support.

This is extremely regrettable because it will give third-party creditors the opportunity to gain access to the general resources as a result, which will mean that mortgages ordered abroad for the benefit of the bank will no longer be competitive.

This, to my mind, is reason enough to reject this report.

That is what I have done, and I regret that the Commission' s common position in its present form failed to receive majority support.

The objective of the Commission recommendation is to harmonise creditors' rights in the event of the winding up of credit institutions Union-wide.

Yet nowhere is there any specific mention of the rights which the employees of the credit institutions in question ought to have.

A number of national legislative systems do acknowledge the employees as creditors, but they are only, at best, entitled to the payment of their wages due.

They receive no compensation, on the other hand, for the loss of their job, i.e. the loss of their future wages, even though there are attempts to guarantee that creditors will receive compensation for the sums they are owed, in other words their capital, the source of their future income.

Employees bear no responsibility in the difficulties of banks or credit institutions since they have had no part in taking decisions.

They are the ones that should be compensated first and foremost for the loss of their jobs.

We voted against this recommendation which is concerned only with capitalist creditors, and not with the employees who do the work of running these credit institutions.

Sanders-ten Holte recommendation for second reading (A5-0375/2000)

Mr President, I voted for the Sanders-ten Holte report.

A few days ago, I was the guest of a university of the third age, where people go because they want to learn rather then merely to get a certificate.

These universities are, of course, frequented by many elderly people.

The head of this university - the university of the third age of Bergamo, where I live - was lamenting the fact that there is no grading list or quality evaluation of universities of the third age.

He said to me: "Many universities are poorly organised, but ours is well organised.

Therefore, you should mention in your explanation of vote that it would be as well for some interest to be taken in the quality of universities of the third age too".

We certainly have nothing against "European cooperation in quality evaluation of school education" , but it is a well known fact that the quality of education depends on the resources made available to state schools.

In order to provide high-quality education, we need sufficient numbers of schools, classes with limited student numbers and a great many teaching assistants, teachers and administrative and technical staff at all levels of education, starting with primary classes.

Throughout Europe, differences start to show at primary level, causing children from working class areas to fall behind in their education at this stage in an often irreversible way.

In order to move towards harmonisation in Europe, we first need to align ourselves with the countries that allocate the most resources to education.

Even in those countries, however, there is a tendency to cut back on the resources allocated to education and, more generally, to public services in favour of other budgetary expenditure, mainly aid and grants given to corporations or, rather, their owners.

If the resources allocated to education are not increased throughout the European Union, especially in those that have the lowest levels of funding, the European recommendation on quality of education will remain a pious hope.

The main thrust of this report relates to the need for greater European cooperation in evaluating the quality of education within our overall school systems in the EU This could prove quite a valuable exercise because different EU governments can mutually benefit from successfully proven educational programmes that have been tried and tested within the educational system in Europe.

We should also recall that this is now even more important in light of the new information society that is now upon us.

EU leaders in Portugal last year laid down a framework of proposals whereby training in the use of the Internet would be extended to all primary and secondary schools across the European Union.

This is a fundamentally important social and economic objective if the European Union is to take advantage of new e-commerce and related business activities.

The reality is that new information technologies are changing all the time.

This means that educational training in the field of information technology is also changing all the time.

That is why the European Union must respond in a coordinated and structured manner so as to guarantee that the best educational methods in the field of information technology are available to all our students.

This will ensure a higher quality of education and will also ensure that a stronger foundation is laid to entice new information technology industries to be set up and located within the territories of the European Union.

Cooperation in the field of education has been a proven success within the European Union in recent years.

Currently, 18 countries participate in the Erasmus programme, including countries from Eastern and Central Europe.

Approximately 90 000 students benefit from this initiative on an annual basis.

While I welcome the proven success of the Erasmus initiative, I would recall that there is certainly room for improvement in the manner in which this scheme is administered now within the European Union.

Still students are encountering financial problems while studying abroad.

I do not support a system of inequality between the levels of funding available to students from the various Member States participating in the Erasmus programme.

I would strongly urge the Education Ministers from within the EU to put in place a system which eliminates any element of inequality with regard to the administration of the Erasmus programme.

We should recall that it is a very good policy of the European Union to encourage students to study in other EU Member States. This affords real and tangible opportunities for students to improve their practical language skills while promoting the free movement of persons across the EU.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I voted in favour of Mrs de Veyrac' s report, not just because I feel it is very positive and thorough, but because we are going to have to devote a great deal more attention to this theme in future.

I also believe that not only do we need to undertake the necessary public works, as provided for in this report, we must also make more funding available, so as to achieve the necessary level of acceptance amongst the general public for these areas.

A great deal still remains to be done, but we are on the right track.

That is why I voted in favour.

Mr President, I voted against this report.

And why did the Pensioners' Party vote against Mrs de Veyrac's report?

Because, before I left for Strasbourg, I met a former Member of the European Parliament, Mrs Monica Baldi, who is very au fait with cultural issues. While we were discussing this report over a good coffee in a bar, she said to me: "Why is it that this report hopes to reduce the number of cultural sites listed in Italy?

It' s not the quantity but the quality of sites that counts.

It is hardly our fault that Italy has so many ancient monuments to preserve".

Mrs de Veyrac's report shows willing and contains certain constructive proposals, which is why the MEPs of the Communist Party of Greece voted in favour of it.

However, we fear that these proposals will fall on deaf ears.

We all know that our cultural and natural heritage risks being wiped out by activities which damage or destroy the urban and local fabric in which priceless examples of our cultural and natural heritage are to be found.

Excessive and uncontrolled use of land, buildings springing up in historic town centres, in the countryside and in green belts and the lack of any proper measures to protect forests and the natural environment are evidence of our rape of the natural and cultural landscape.

Of course, this is not the random work of a few villains, it is the direct consequence of a policy which commercialises everything and is driven solely by the profit motive.

A typical example is the TVX Gold site in Olympiada, in Halkidiki, near Stayira, the birthplace of Aristotle, where the forest has been destroyed and monuments have been put at risk. As if that were not enough, the residents in the area have been dragged through the courts and sentenced for daring to defend their historic and natural environment.

We could cite numerous other examples in connection with the destruction inflicted or which it is planned to inflict in order to stage the Olympic Games in Athens in 2004.

Not only does the European Union do nothing to check and deal with these incidents; on the contrary, it is the main advocate of this policy.

It funds projects on archaeological sites which will bury and destroy ancient monuments - witness the case of the Acropolis Museum.

The Greek Government is repealing Article 24 of the Constitution as we speak, thereby abolishing what little legislative protection there was for forests and without the slightest objection on the part of the ÅU.

The ÅU has a penchant for waxing lyrical about culture, but while it preaches that cultural heritage is a basic factor in the individual identity and historical development of a society, it has done nothing to get the Elgin marbles returned to the natural and historic site of which they form an integral part, even as a gesture of respect for our cultural and historic heritage and for the need to protect historic monuments.

It is also indifferent to the fact that monuments in North Cyprus are being plundered and vandalised by the Turkish occupying forces.

Finally, it bears a huge responsibility for the destruction of monuments during the bombing campaign against Yugoslavia.

This situation cannot be rectified with half measures or wishful thinking or, of course, within the context of a market philosophy.

We need to mobilise the masses, all the cultural agencies, all the workers, and we need to impose a different policy, one which respects the working man and the fruits of his creation.

. The ELDR Group considers that the de Veyrac report is a very important contribution to better protection of world cultural and natural heritage.

We are of the opinion that the application of the Convention for the Protection of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage in the EU is a task for Member States rather than for the European Community.

It is difficult for us to see the added value of EU intervention in this matter.

The ELDR amendments to the de Veyrac report reflect this position.

Thus, for reasons of lack of added value and the principle of subsidiarity the ELDR Group will abstain in the final vote.

Protecting and promoting our heritage in each Member State is fundamentally important as, in so doing, we are safeguarding our identities and special characteristics whilst still respecting differences.

Our heritage, be it cultural, architectural, economic or natural, is the legacy of our past and in protecting it we are not fighting a rearguard action. On the contrary, it shows that we are preparing for our future.

The author Ernest Renan wrote that the only true men of progress are those who take a deep-seated respect for the past as their starting point.

We must, therefore, take advantage of the wealth of our past, our heritage, our roots and our traditions, even the very oldest, in order to prepare for the future. This cultural diversity and wealth will allow us to gain a better understanding of ourselves.

To achieve this, however, we must respect all the diversity of our various heritages, all our differences, and the only way to do this is to invoke the subsidiarity principle.

In line with this principle we can preserve, develop and transmit our heritage, culture and traditions.

When these disappear or fade away (in the way of hunting, rural life and gastronomic tradition) we are breaking the chain of transmission by which we hand down our wealth and our way of life and this brings about cultural impoverishment. At the end of the day, we will create a mould into which everyone has to fit in order to live in an insipid but more malleable society that can be controlled by 'rulers and governors' .

Therefore, to protect, preserve and promote our heritage, we must save our architecture, support our arts and craft industry, preserve and enhance the value of our countryside, but I would like to stress that we must not wrap it in cotton wool or exclude the cultural traditions and customs which are practised there.

In so doing, we must also respect the right to be different and help to preserve all these values since rural life has its own rightful place in this predominantly urban society.

Therefore, to come back to the report, it is, of course, important to protect the heritage of both the European Union and third countries, but it is equally important and vital to protect the heritage of our own countries and regions.

We are therefore pleased to note the proposals to take our heritage into account in the various training programmes set up to protect and restore our heritage.

The same goes for funding and support of the arts and craft industry, a sector which creates many jobs, as long as it is not suffocated by unrealistic pernickety regulations, as has been possible for market traders.

We must however state our reservations regarding the European regulations which, on the pretext of environmental protection (a term applied too narrowly), will serve only to wipe out local traditions and customs that are a vital part of the local culture of our regions. Yet, this is the opposite of what this report sets out to achieve and so, although we support the report, we are abstaining from the vote for this reason.

Since 1972, when the UNESCO General Conference adopted the Convention Concerning the Protection of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage, which has already been signed by 158 countries, including the 15 Member States of the European Union, 630 sites have been added to the world heritage list, 30% of which are in European Union countries (188), and of those 10 are in Portugal.

It is obvious, however, that classifying sites as world heritage sites is not enough.

Every measure must be taken to support their conservation, including financial measures, as we have done with the proposals that we have tabled for the Community budget.

As the rapporteur highlighted, there is an imbalance between European countries and the rest of the world with regard to recognised natural and cultural sites, and therefore third countries must be supported and encouraged, in a wide-ranging approach, to add to the list of natural and cultural heritage, so that they can be afforded protection.

It is also important for Member States to comply with existing directives, and in particular the environmental impact assessment directive on assessing the impact of specific public and private projects on cultural and natural heritage, as the report states.

My vote in support of the de Veyrac report on the application of the Convention Concerning the Protection of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage in the Member States of the European Union is based on the conviction that we must enhance the cultural dimension of the European Union. We must work to ensure we have a cultural policy in the Union which highlights, among the main features of its spiritual richness and that of the Old World, its cultural, linguistic, architectural and artistic diversity and all those elements that make up our common cultural heritage.

This is clear when you travel around the Union and see how the diverse spiritual trends over the centuries have been embodied in our monuments, artistic styles, value systems, religious and spiritual trends, and schools of philosophical and scientific thought.

In short, and in accordance with the Treaties, we must go deeper with our European cultural policy, supporting and protecting our cultural diversity, a factor which in turn defines the European Union. The de Veyrac report is a laudable contribution towards this.

Mr President, I am sure you will listen carefully to my explanation of vote in support of this report.

I am in favour of anything which streamlines or simplifies, provided that the process is not too tiresome for those undergoing the streamlining and is carried out rationally.

I therefore stress that, in this operation of simplifying and streamlining Community legislation on the social security coordination sector - to which this report refers - we must bear in mind that it would be appropriate for workers who work in more than one State of the European Union to receive a single pension from a single pension office rather than part of it from one State, part of it from another State and part of it from yet another.

The more I listen to you the more I realise that I will know your life history before long.

Given that we are opposed to a market economy, we shall not adopt any position on the alleged simplification of the internal market.

We are therefore abstaining from the vote on this report.

However, on the aspects that may affect the majority of the population i.e. the workers, we are in favour of:

simplifying social legislation and social security by bringing them into line with countries that have the most favourable schemes for workers;

simplifying VAT through the universal abolition of both VAT itself and all consumption taxes, which are particularly unfair as they mainly affect lower income classes, and replacing these with a sizeable increase in corporation tax and a steeply graduated tax on all forms of revenue from capital.

Mr President, I voted for the van der Laan report.

Thank you for your kind words just now. In voting for the motion, I would like to draw your attention to the part of the document which refers to assistance to the Palestinian authorities.

I was prompted to do so by the representatives of the Pensioners' Party in Israel - for the Knesset includes representatives of the Pensioners' Party in Israel - one of whom said to me: "I am glad you are helping the Palestinians.

In fact, you should give them more and better assistance and ensure that it genuinely serves to help the Palestinian people, for they truly need it.

Indeed, I am sure that, if the Palestinian citizens were in better health and their economy were improved, there would be less war than I am sorry to say there is at the moment".

I am unable to agree with my group regarding its position on Mr van Dam' s amendment, which I, personally, chose to support.

It is one thing for the issue of the spreading of anti-Semitic propaganda by Palestinian schoolbooks not to be included in the 1997 discharge resolution.

I would say that this is a technical problem.

However, to my mind, it is a misjudged political signal for us to oppose it for this reason alone, i.e. on the grounds of form rather than content.

Since signing the Oslo Agreement, the European Union and its Member States have, to a great extent, subsidised the Palestinian education system.

Therefore, it is up to us to demand that the Commission should monitor more closely to ensure that the material in Palestinian schools does not constitute an incitement to war, violence and racial hatred.

The European Union cannot keep actively supporting reconciliation and peace while continuing to turn a blind eye to the way EU financial support is being misappropriated for ideological ends.

Indeed, I sincerely hope that this issue will very soon be the subject of a genuine debate in Parliament.

We must be firm on this issue.

Our conscience will not allow anything else, nor will our electorate.

I have voted in favour of the report and especially of Amendment No 1 from Mr van Dam.

It is important for the European Parliament to strongly criticise the anti-Semitic statements in teaching resources for Palestinian schools and for Parliament to call upon the Commission to ensure that the aid given to Palestinian education does not, either directly or indirectly, finance racial hatred. Instead, the EU' s contribution to the Palestinian education system should instead promote peace and reconciliation in the Middle East.

EU aid must, as far as possible, be designed to bring about peace and reconciliation in the Middle East.

The EU is, among other things, providing aid to the Palestinian education system.

It is profoundly unfortunate and offensive that Palestinian school books should contain anti-Semitic statements and describe Israel - the only democracy in the Middle East - in terms as abominable as those of Nazism.

. Both the rapporteur and the ELDR Group share the sentiment expressed in Amendment No 1 regarding concern at the possible use made of EU financial support for inciting racial hatred amongst Palestinians against their Jewish neighbours.

The Budgetary Control Committee is strict in the remit of a discharge follow-up report to restrict itself to the contents of the original discharge resolution for the year in question.

This amendment raises a new issue on evidence that has recently come to light.

The rapporteur is therefore recommending that the amendment be rejected but that the matter be dealt with more fully in the context of the ongoing 1999 discharge report.

Mr President, speakers have drawn attention to a number of problems, including cigarette smuggling.

I support their concern as it is generally believed that international criminals are now more interested in cigarette smuggling than drug-trafficking as it is more profitable and less dangerous.

We in the EU must respond to this problem as a matter of urgency.

The profits from cigarette smuggling not only line the pockets of criminals but also deny revenue to the EU, which would otherwise be used in tackling cancer, poverty, the promotion of human rights, etc. In addition, cheaper cigarettes mean greater danger to health because of heavier tobacco consumption, and we must enlist the support of ministers in national and regional governments in any campaign against this.

The Commission should contact in particular the ministers of health and education in the Northern Ireland Assembly, Ms de Brun and Mr Martin McGuinness.

I mention that because we use education and health programmes to combat cancer and the Anderstown News recently revealed the deep involvement of the IRA in illicit cigarette smuggling.

They have links to that organisation.

What better way to discharge the ministerial portfolio than to encourage their friends to stop this activity.

It also underlines a greater need for widespread policing in Northern Ireland.

Mr President, I voted for this report but with great reservations.

Before I left for Strasbourg, I met Mr Rota, a pensioner who is also from Bergamo, in a restaurant.

We talked about the Pensioners' Party and he asked me whether I was content with the European Parliament.

I said: "It is such an enjoyable job!

I am content, I feel at ease and I have some very good friends.

Even the Vice-Presidents, such as Mr Provan, for example, are very diligent and I like them very much."

He continued: "And is everything working alright in Europe?

You don't find yourselves wasting European money every now and again?"

"No", I replied, "everything is working fine."

However, I am sad to say that I then read in this report that the national States have not applied Community legislation on collecting duties owed to the Community budget.

I therefore hope that, in future, the collection of customs duties in Europe will work well too.

We have voted in favour of a report on securities and guarantees for traditional own resources.

The report as a whole makes sense.

There are, however, a few points from which we would disassociate ourselves.

Paragraphs 15 and 16 pave the way for introducing a single corpus juris in the EU and for harmonising criminal law and the administration of justice in the Member States.

First of all, this is unclearly formulated.

Secondly, we are not in favour of harmonising criminal legislation and the administration of justice in the Member States.

What we do support is establishing the necessary instruments for combating fraud involving EU funds more effectively.

We are in favour of supplementing the OLAF regulation by setting up a unit under OLAF to lead investigations and make it easier to follow up criminal cases in the national courts.

The unit must only concern itself with crimes committed by EU employees.

In the longer term, consideration should be given to introducing a European public prosecutor to follow up cases of fraud involving EU funds in the Member States.

We must not, however, have harmonisation for harmonisation' s sake and, in other areas, the Member States' criminal law and administration of justice are national concerns.

Mr President, although I have mislaid my notes, I seem to remember that I voted against the McCartin report, which deals with agriculture and powdered milk.

I am happy to discuss the subject on this occasion because I want to call strongly for genuine help to be given to farmers - for this document does not provide sufficient protection for them - and, in particular, because I want to draw attention to the fact that there is currently a huge crisis in Italy over powdered and other milk.

Not only is there talk of mad cow disease, sadly, but, since yesterday, there has also been talk of "mad milk" in Italy.

People are saying that it might be possible to contract mad cow disease by drinking milk.

This is a truly unforgivable thing to say, and it would be appropriate for the European Union to intervene and make it clear that milk is not mad but quite healthy.

This report is deeply contradictory in its assessment of various aspects of the CAP.

For example, the approach adopted in its reflects exclusively budgetary concerns, for example, when the report expresses satisfaction at the reform reducing institutional prices and surplus produce, and insists on a greater reduction of compensation payments, without even mentioning the consequences this will have for farmers' incomes.

Furthermore, together with the principle of cofinancing, it advocates the renationalisation of CAP costs. This is a principle that we reject.

The report also expresses satisfaction at the Commission' s decision to carry out a thorough assessment of the COM in milk, which closely reflects a Court of Auditors' opinion questioning the system of milk quotas and increases in these laid down in Agenda 2000, forgetting that, despite some unfairness in the allocation of quotas, such as that suffered by Portugal, this system still manages to guarantee a degree of protection as regards prices and incomes.

With regard to the pig sector and animal epidemics, the report concludes by considering and supporting the proposal to establish funds with contributions from the producers themselves or other types of insurance schemes, which is a step backwards in relation to the opinion that has already been expressed in the Garot report, which argued in favour of such Community-cofinanced funds.

Nevertheless, I agree with the rapporteur when he raises a very important issue affecting the system of arable crops, which is the concentration of aid amongst major producers and in the most prosperous regions.

What is needed is an improvement in the situation of small producers, differentiating support according to the size of the farm.

It is hard to understand how the rapporteur proposes to support small farmers through the measures that he is recommending.

Mr Fatuzzo, if you want to remain standing we will just keep going as you are the only speaker left.

Mr President, my leg gets tired easily so I have to sit down every now and again.

With regard to my declaration of vote on the Staes document, which concerns the Committee on Budgetary Control and, in particular, the way in which the aid to Bosnia and Herzegovina has been spent, I have to say that I have had a meeting with the representatives of the pensioners of that region.

They urged me to ask the European Parliament - and I am very happy to do so on this occasion - to ensure that at least part of the aid, by some means or other, reaches the elderly people of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

"But we can't go checking up on what happens to our money", I replied. "But you must, Mr Fatuzzo.

You must insist that the funds are monitored when they reach their destination as well.

We pensioners need to receive some of them!"

Mr President, there is indeed a crisis of succession in farming as Mr Parish with his expertise as a farmer knows well.

If this crisis is particularly acute in Mr Parish's own Member State, it is the direct result of policies pursued by UK governments over the past twenty years, and to overcome it the United Kingdom must review the implications of the Fontainbleau Agreement for its contribution to European Union finances.

This has been disastrous for farming.

Moreover, the rapporteur, a member of the Conservative Party, must work within his own party to secure support for his proposals in the House of Commons.

In countries where less than 10% of the population now lives in rural areas, it is too easy for governments to sideline the needs of these areas, and the message from this debate must be that they do so at the peril of their countries.

. (EL) Barbaric military intervention - ostensibly for the sake of peace -, dirty 'peace-making' agreements signed manu militari, followed by dirty, suspicious financial 'help' for the purpose of 'restoring peace' : such are the EU's achievements in the case of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kosovo and the Balkans in general, which have been commiserating for years now as the result of the huge military and political imperialist interests being played out in this region.

This parliamentary report reveals exactly how the above funding is managed and shows how the EU taxpayers' money is being squandered, with no controls or transparency, in order to consolidate the expansion of the huge interests of the EU in the NATO protectorate of Bosnia, declarations of 'humanitarian and peace-making' motives notwithstanding.

References to mismanagement, delays, late payment, millions of ÅCU being granted for non-subsidisable equipment, waste and irregularities abound both in the Staes report and the opinions.

They describe the prevailing situation in the strongest of terms and reveal the tremendous hypocrisy about support for the civil society and the restoration of democracy.

What could be more damning than the reference in the report to "conflicts of interest" in the office of the High Representative himself?

We are not surprised that those who 'promote' peace with depleted uranium bombs, spreading death and destruction, cannot and will not play the role of peacemaker.

We are not surprised that the golden goose is being squeezed dry by the major economic interests which created, cultivated and fomented the hatred between the peoples of this region and by the employees and servants of those interests, such as the famous Mr Kounser.

But we are surprised by the cynicism and hypocrisy of leaders who continue to talk of efforts to 'clean up' and improve the uptake of funds and restore the rule of law.

The gloomy facts speak for themselves and leave no room for doubt, let alone complacency.

People are not accounts; their consciences cannot be bought off and however much you try to embellish the facts, you still have to contend with the people.

We shall not be voting in favour of the Staes report, despite the fact that it contains numerous accurate findings and proposals, because its general perception is bereft of any notion of resistance to the presence of imperialist forces and its only concern is how to embellish that presence so that it is easier for the people to swallow.

Mr President, I voted for the Dell'Alba report, but I want to stress that underlying this vote for the motion is my position as representative of the Pensioners' Party. I wish to make clear my total opposition to the now established practice of insisting that the Structural Funds and European aid are added to national aid.

So the Structural Funds should be additional aid?

I feel that European funds should have nothing whatsoever to do with national financing or national policies.

European funds must not be tied to national funds.

Europe is a separate entity from its constituent nations.

Mr President, first of all, I should like to congratulate Mr Neil Parish on the fact that he has produced a report which is based on the farmers' reality, the reality in rural areas, and not on the view from Brussels.

This in itself constitutes a valuable contribution to agricultural policy.

But if we now examine the situation, we could ask ourselves whether there are any young people left out there who are mad enough to become farmers in the European Union.

What we need is people who want to take up the challenge of producing an outstanding achievement, five-legged sheep as it were, but not obtained through genetic modification.

They seem to be fighting a losing battle, if we consider the adversities which young farmers face, as well as the achievements they are expected to deliver.

To quote just one example - and I am just considering my own country for a moment - dairy farming is a sector where absolutely everything is being scrutinised, from the blade of grass right up to the moment that the milk hits the supermarkets.

I cannot help drawing a comparison with arable farmers and horticulturalists who have been required to keep tabs on the implications of their actions on the environment and consumer front for a long time, and do so with great enthusiasm.

At the same time, we have to say that in many European countries the requirements for animal welfare are among the world' s most stringent.

So whoever wants to become a farmer in Europe must outstrip their counterparts elsewhere in the world.

They need to give the landscape and cultural conditions due consideration.

They must apply the strictest consumer conditions, supply a wide range of products, both regionally and in terms of quality, make animal welfare a top priority and be responsible for the product, even once it has left the farm.

This is what we call social enterprising as a top-level sport.

It requires entrepreneurship, a love of nature and the environment, social orientation and perseverance.

For this reason alone, it would be desirable if a specific policy were set up for young farmers which is focused on the future.

Some of the focal points could include a premium scheme linked to quality, landscape and environmental protection, but also the introduction of an eco-tax in other economic sectors, not payable by the farmers but by the consumers, to finance those extra requirements which farmers need to fulfil, and to reinforce the market position of farmers and consumers.

What strikes me in the European Union' s competition policy as a whole, is that although it is enjoying a great deal of attention, in the food sector, for example, the consumers, the supermarkets that is, are gradually gaining a monopoly position, and that at the same time sales from farms, the small-scale dimension, are still fragmented.

In that sense, it would be desirable if both Commissioners Monti and Bolkestein were more critical in their assessment of this area in terms of competition.

Mr President, nobody can survive for one day without food; it is life requirement number one.

This means that food does not just stand for market forces, but also for public health, landscape and nature.

In short, if we realise this, then we will know that, in future, young farmers will need to be five-legged sheep, and in that sense, deserve more support, more political support than they are receiving at the moment.

Mr President, the Heaton-Harris report, which I voted in favour of, is a report on the efficiency of the European Monetary Institute and therefore on the situation of the euro.

I have already had occasion to congratulate the European single currency, in other words, the euro, on its gain in strength in recent weeks, but today I would like to call for the establishment of a European bank.

The EIB - European Investment Bank - should be closer to the European citizens as an actual bank, a credit institute as well.

I therefore trust that my recommendation will be acted upon.

The report by Mr Heaton-Harris confuses two issues.

In the name of wage moderation, it condemns granting extraordinary bonuses to some ECB employees, which is unacceptable.

On the other hand, the rapporteur criticises the ECB for preventing OLAF, the European Anti-Fraud Office, from carrying out its work.

We learn therefore that "the European Central Bank has stated that it will not allow the European Anti-Fraud Office, OLAF, to conduct internal investigations" and that "in its first report to Parliament, Council and Commission, the supervisory committee of OLAF called for legal proceedings to be brought against Community bodies that have not implemented Regulation 1073/99, before the end of 1999" and that "the Commission initiated legal proceedings at the European Court of Justice against the decision of 7 October 1999 of the European Central Bank regarding the non-application of Parliament and Council Regulation 1073/99" .

We believe that this whole issue is extremely important and we support the paragraph of the report which "regrets clear incompatibility between the public commitment assumed by the ECB in its 1999 annual report to establish close cooperation with OLAF and the decision by the ECB itself to prevent OLAF from carrying over internal investigations, pending the ruling by the European Court of Justice" .

We will vote in support of the report by Mr Heaton-Harris for this reason.

Mr President, I could not fail to give an explanation of vote on my friend, Mr Bushill-Matthews' report, upon which I have already spoken during the debate.

This time, however, I would like to state that my vote for the motion is also a call for Mr Bushill-Matthews to accept, at a later date, an amendment which I tabled and which, I regret to say, has been rejected this time.

I am calling, that is, for funds to be allocated to small and medium-sized businesses which follow the practice of setting up a company where a young entrepreneur who is full of enthusiasm and the will to work is aided by an older - senior - entrepreneur who knows everything there is to know about the business, is very experienced and can pass on his skills, and, even though he has no real wish to work long hours, would be happy to give the youngsters the benefit of his experience.

The Members of the Communist Party of Greece will be voting against the Bushill-Matthews report because the specific "Measures on financial assistance for innovative and job-creating Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises (SMEs)" proposed in the report form part of the more general policy exercised by the monopolies and the EU against SMEs, to which there are three strands:

· Selective support for a small group of what are - by Greek standards - medium-sized and large enterprises, with a view to consolidating their satellite role around the monopolies and strengthening the processes used to concentrate capital and production.

· Worsening competitive terms for the overwhelming majority of the remaining small and medium-sized enterprises, in a bid to strengthen the same processes by the back door.

· In addition to the aforementioned, it is clear from all the EU programmes on SMEs that big business is keen to 'offload' (on to SMEs) the jobs which it is forced to abolish as it increases its exploitation of the working classes, helped by technological progress.

This aim will be thwarted by the contradictions inherent in the capitalist system and therefore has little chance of success.

It is also important to note that isolated companies, not SMEs as a whole, benefit from European programmes.

Big business knows only too well that a policy which benefits SMEs as a whole would create an adversary to be reckoned with.

Hence, even if grants under European programmes manage to reach small enterprises, they cannot be used to advantage, because each of these enterprises is in an extremely weak position on the capitalist market.

A number of observations on the substance of the specific programmes bears out the general comments made above:

The limits on the enterprises targeted by these measures (250 employees and up to GDR 14 billion in annual turnover) clearly allow what are large companies by Greek standards to benefit.

In fact, 91% of companies in Greece employ up to 4 persons and achieve turnover of up to GDR 60 million.

From this point of view, the concern about small enterprises expressed in the parliamentary report is well-founded.

The total number of SMEs targeted by these measures is negligible compared with the total number of SMEs in the ÅU: 7 387 out of a total of some 15 million SMEs in the ÅU or 0.05% of the total number over a period of two years from application.

The total paid out by the European funds in grants is discouragingly low and does not amount to a real policy for the benefit of SMEs.

A total of EUR 273 million has been paid out (GDR 93.6 billion) or EUR 18 (GDR 6 170) per enterprise.

The results of this policy are even worse: 2 238 new jobs were finally created, compared with several million unemployed in the ÅU, at a cost of EUR 122 000 (GDR 42 million) each.

97% of SMEs which benefited from these measures come under the third strand of the programmes, i.e. the companies received guarantees for funding for which they themselves were wholly responsible.

This begs the question of how a complicated procedure which cost so much and achieved so little can be presented as a successful EU policy.

As far as Greece is concerned, it was nowhere to be found in the programmes; no funding whatsoever came our way.

We shall therefore be voting against the report in question and the relevant Commission proposal.

That concludes the explanations of vote.

(The sitting was suspended at 1 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m.)

The next item is the continuation of the debate on the situation of frontier workers.

Mr President, I want first of all to thank Mrs Oomen-Ruijten for an excellent report.

Many previous attempts have, of course, been made to use frontier workers' problems as a way in to harmonising tax legislation as a whole.

However, Mrs Oomen-Ruijten knows that frontier workers do not even constitute half a per cent of the labour force, that their problems are different from one frontier region to another and that different regional solutions are therefore needed if frontier workers are to have a better time of it.

I can speak from personal experience, having spent 25 years commuting between Denmark and Sweden.

We have now acquired a bridge between Copenhagen and Malmö, and everyone expects a sharp increase in cross-border commuting and for the two cities to become a conurbation It was here that, in 1997 on the initiative of the Danes, the EU-supported principle was introduced of taxing people in the country in which they work.

This means that people can take up residence in Malmö and have access to health care, child care, education and everything else, at the same time as paying all their tax to the Danish State.

That is quite intolerable if we are to have a common Öresund region.

The alternative recommended by Swedish politicians is the OECD model for frontier taxation, which advocates that tax should be levied in the country of residence.

That principle too causes problems, however, because much more than families' social welfare is financed through tax.

For ourselves in the Öresund region, it would in actual fact be best if we were to pay local tax where we live and State tax where we work.

I think that would put an end to tax avoidance and to cheating in frontier regions.

However, a model such as that, too, would require some form of fine tuning in order to create an entirely fair situation, for these are complicated issues.

It is therefore crucial for solutions to be worked out in the affected regions themselves, and on the basic principle that frontier workers must pay tax in the country in which they enjoy their benefits financed through tax.

Only in that way will long-lasting solutions be obtained.

It is essential to adopt a principle of this kind if Öresund is to become a common region.

Mr President, as representative of the Pensioners' Party, I would like to extend my hearty congratulations to the town of Piacenza, which has inserted Articles 25 and 26 of the European Charter of Fundamental Rights of the elderly and persons with disabilities into its own bye-laws. I would also like to comment on Mrs Oomen-Ruijten's report.

I endorse the content of the report, particularly the part which calls for an analysis of the impact of changes to the laws of the Member States on Regulation 1408, relating to people who have worked in more than one State, and especially that part of the regulation which concerns rules for the payment of the pensions of people who have worked in more than one State.

We are discussing the problems of cross-border workers: of course we refer to European Union workers but also, indirectly, to relations between the States which have associated themselves with Regulation 1408, that is with the EEA - the European Economic Area - in other words Italy and Switzerland.

I regret to say that the Italy-Switzerland Convention and the ensuing regulation have been misinterpreted by the Italian Government, which has hitherto paid the pensions of people who have worked in both Italy and Switzerland according to the scale of half of half the amount, that is a quarter of the amount owed, as laid down by Italian magistrates, judges and courts.

I call upon the European Parliament to intervene to stop workers being forced always to institute legal proceedings to obtain their rights.

Mr President, today we are discussing the situation of frontier workers, a nagging problem for the European Union, which has yet to find a satisfactory solution.

Commissioner, Mr President, this situation prevents the people living and working on the borders of the various European Union countries fully experiencing the notion of European integration we champion, even though these are the people who should be the first to benefit from it.

We have a habit in this House of lauding to the skies the issue of free movement of persons and, hence, of workers.

Yet, while there are still obstacles to this, particularly in terms of tax and social security, there are also other matters to be considered.

I believe that this issue is inconsistent with the principles of freedom and liberalism which we are considering, even though we seem able to find perfectly good solutions to problems when it relates to the free movement of capital and of goods.

This represents a major obstacle to the principle of the free movement of persons and the principal of non-discrimination on grounds of nationality.

In my opinion, this report is a real booster shot in relation to previous reports.

We should at least ensure that there is no need to produce many more reports.

We must remind the Member States of their responsibilities and ask them to undertake a thorough evaluation of policies which result in upholding systems which have an adverse affect on the situation of frontier workers.

We agree with the general thrust of the report but the reincorporation of certain amendments waters down the ambitions which we should be adopting.

Bilateral agreements, which, for example, relate to tax or social security, should be perfectly consistent and it is simply not a matter of taking varying provisions into account.

Mr President, I would like to sum up by repeating that an accurate inventory should be proposed, listing situations giving rise to prejudice, or even discrimination but also one which would make it possible to clamp down on the fraud which occurs at present. We await the Council' s guidelines in this area.

Mr President, I should also like to thank Mrs Oomen-Ruijten for her own-initiative report.

I think it only right that we in Parliament make efforts to reduce the problems experienced by frontier workers.

I am familiar with the problems from Southern Jutland, where it is worth noting how few people live on one side of the Danish-German border and work on the other side. I think this illustrates how major the obstacles in practice are.

That is why I think it is a good idea to try to get the Member States to continually assess the effects upon frontier workers whenever they change tax and social security legislation. In my opinion, we cannot, however, require governments to compensate frontier workers financially for changes in legislation.

It is better to heighten awareness not only of the problems there have always been, but also of new problems that might arise.

I should also like to support the view that we should do more to simplify Regulation 1408/71. This is a very far-reaching problem, but one of great importance to many people.

Mr President, Commissioner, I would like to make a few observations following on from this dossier.

First of all, I would like to thank Mrs Oomen-Ruijten for the work she has done.

Secondly, my contribution should of course be considered as an appeal to the Social Council and the Commission, but mainly the Social Council, to do something about this dossier at long last, particularly in the knowledge that this is the start of the necessary deregulation of the movement of workers across Europe.

Frontier work falls under free movement, and will grow, especially once the candidate countries have joined.

Despite this, there are still major problems to contend with. Especially in my own country and a number of neighbouring countries, Belgium and Germany, I notice that different groups wish to apply different principles.

Foundations involved with frontier workers argue in favour of the principle of the country of residence, trade unions support the principle of the country of employment, the government itself believes in the principle of the country of residence, and so it goes on. It is about time we made a decision, and in that sense, we are unwilling to support a number of amendments which Mrs Oomen-Ruijten tabled, and which are partly designed to adopt a mixed approach.

We suggest using the principle of the country of employment as point of departure, and to develop this so-called European social model.

Mr President, I should like above all to thank the rapporteur for this report.

It is good that we should not forget frontier workers and their problems.

The report is further evidence that Regulation 1408/71 requires thorough revision and simplification, proposals for which have been before the Council for two years. We can, therefore, once again regret the lack of success in obtaining more majority voting at the Intergovernmental Conference in Nice.

The Danish Social Democrats broadly agree with most of what the rapporteur says, but I completely and utterly disagree with her when she sees it as a problem that ever more features of national social insurance are financed through public funds.

Regulation 1408/71 concerns the coordination, and not the harmonisation, of social security arrangements, and it is important to make this clear.

I should like to emphasise this, because it is precisely this form of argument which has given an unwarranted boost to those Danish opponents of the EU who maintain that the EU is eroding the Danish welfare system.

It is partly those who organise resistance to the EU who are purposefully working to ensure that nothing at all happens in this area.

They seem to forget that the Council' s incapacity for action does in fact have consequences - consequences for those people and their families who work across national frontiers and who are plagued by uncertainty.

However, one further consequence of the Council' s incapacity to act is, in actual fact, that it is the courts, instead of the politicians responsible, who take the decisions.

The Eurosceptics talk such a lot about democracy, but it can never be democratic to omit to take the necessary decisions and, in that way, to consign people to insecurity and to give the courts a degree of influence which politicians ought to have.

Mr President, I wish to begin by congratulating Mrs Oomen-Ruijten on her excellent report on the situation of frontier workers and, in particular, the social and fiscal problems these workers face.

I should also like to thank Parliament for the support given to the Commission's proposal to extend the scope of Regulation 1408/71 to third-country nationals, the proposal to modernise and simplify that regulation, and for the encouraging support given to the Eures network.

The Commission fully supports your concerns as regards the problems encountered by frontier workers.

I therefore welcome your proposal to forward the resolution to the Council.

Allow me to now set out briefly the Commission's approach to the points raised in the resolution.

First, on social security and the labour market, the report calls on the Commission, before the end of this year, to organise an international conference for the Member States and applicant countries concerning the position of frontier workers.

This is an excellent idea and advantage can be taken of the experience accumulated under the Eures network.

Such a conference could identify best practices and initiatives that could be launched both at Community and national level, and the European Parliament will be involved in its organisation.

On the idea of coordination provisions for supplementary pensions, I would remind you that the Commission has committed itself in its social policy agenda to propose in 2002 a directive on the transferability of supplementary pensions.

This initiative will complement the already existing directive in this field, which was adopted in 1998.

As the proposal will be based on Article 42 of the EC Treaty and rely on the codecision procedure for its adoption, Parliament will be fully involved.

Furthermore I can confirm that a study covering the extent and nature of frontier work is already planned to be carried out under the Eures auspices in 2001.

On the initiatives taken by social security agencies for closer cross-border cooperation in order to facilitate access to health-care benefits, I am very much in favour of such initiatives and can confirm that it is the intention of the Commission to encourage such initiatives and to promote exchanges of experience and best practices.

In fact the Commission is already giving support to such a project involving the inhabitants of the Euregio Meuse-Rhine, which covers part of Belgium, Germany and the Netherlands.

With regard to the follow-up of the Decker and Kohl judgments, there are important legal questions currently being debated in new cases before the Court.

These questions concern hospital care and the Dutch health system.

The Commission will await the outcome of these judgments before taking a position.

On obstacles to the mobility of stagiaires, students, volunteers and researchers, the Commission has already taken the initiative and presented a proposal for a recommendation of the European Parliament and the Council on mobility within the Community for students, persons undergoing training, young volunteers, teachers and trainers.

On 9 November 2000 the Education Council adopted its common position on this proposal.

I wish to thank Parliament for its support on this matter and I hope that the final discussions will enable Parliament and the Council to adopt the recommendations shortly.

On the idea of a proposal for a directive on the introduction of frontier effect reports, whereby Member States would be required to test their legislation as to the effects for frontier workers, I should make it clear that it is already the Commission's task to ensure that all provisions of national legislation are compatible with the Treaty and the secondary legislation of Community law.

The Commission will certainly continue to use the powers laid down in Article 226 of the Treaty and to launch infringement proceedings against Member States when they violate Community law.

However, I understand that the suggested proposal for a directive aims to provide for a more general socio-economic impact assessment of the consequences of national legislation, that is in itself compatible with Community law but might cause further difficulties to frontier workers.

The Commission is not sure that it would be appropriate to propose such a legislative instrument.

It seems to the Commission more appropriate to stimulate cross-border cooperation of the partners involved in the different regions and at Community level in order to prevent any negative consequences of national legislation on frontier workers.

Unlike social security, there is no Community legislation at all on personal taxation.

Indeed Member States are extremely protective of their sovereignty in this area.

That is particularly true of their competence to enter into bilateral tax treaties.

Therefore, there is little chance of the Commission being able to secure successfully the adoption of measures by Member States, as requested in the report.

Unfortunately this will not change following the Treaty of Nice.

As you are aware, contrary to our common wishes, the requirement of unanimity in Council was retained for tax matters.

Opinions are, moreover, likely to be divided about the merits of the recommendations made in the report concerning taxation in the State of employment.

In fact, the prevailing view in tax administrations is that the State of residence rather than the State of employment is best placed to take account of the overall situation of taxpayers.

In conclusion, I wish to thank Mrs Oomen-Ruijten again for her stimulating report and to underline the Commission's determination to maintain its efforts to overcome the problems faced by frontier workers.

The debate will take place tomorrow at 12 noon.

The next item is the oral question (B5-0556/2000) by the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy to the Commission, on the poor implementation of certain environmental directives (PCB/PCT, habitats, nitrates).

Mr President, Parliament's Committee on the Environment is increasingly concerned that we are adopting European environmental legislation and then neglecting to implement it properly.

Putting it bluntly, we believe that the Council of Ministers, the Commission and the European Parliament are complicit in a deception of the public.

Opinion polls show that the majority of people support the idea that environmental issues are important and should be dealt with at European level.

We are adopting legislation that appears to fill this need.

In fact, in all too many cases, environmental laws are ignored, targets are not met, reports are not sent in to the Commission on time and those countries which break the law go unpunished.

The purpose of this debate is to highlight what is going wrong and to try and do something about it.

The Committee on the Environment has put together three reports, we call them 'insight reports' , basing ourselves on the model of the US Congress.

We have found that the habitats directive is locked in controversy and law suits.

The PCBs directive is characterised by the failure of Member States to supply the all-important inventories of the stocks they hold.

The nitrates directive was probably flawed from the beginning and all but two countries, Denmark and Sweden of course, are now before the European Court of Justice because of their failure to implement it.

It is highly likely that these shortcomings are repeated throughout the canon of EU environmental law.

What can be done about this?

We hope firstly that in the environmental action programme, which the world is eagerly awaiting, the Commission will key in adequate resources for following up what has happened to legislation.

It would be interesting to hear from the Commissioner roughly how many people in her Directorate are responsible for this as compared to those overseeing the introduction of new legislation.

There needs to be a much more honest debate secondly - nationally and at the European level - about the real possibility of achieving the environmental objectives set out in draft legislation.

Too often, we suspect, Member States sign up to green laws because it looks good to do so, and opposing or moderating them is seen as politically insensitive.

If, in fact, they cannot comply with what they have agreed to, such countries are doing Green causes harm.

If the Germans and others, for example, now have trouble with the habitats directive, why did we not hear more about it when that directive was going through this Parliament?

And did the German Government, in fact, vote against that directive originally?

Certainly the cost of clean-up laws must be taken into account when a law is adopted.

A good example of the failure to do this is the urban waste water directive which the government of Brussels cannot afford to comply with.

We suspect that the same thing will happen with the national emissions ceiling directive.

Thirdly, we want Member States to develop the infrastructures which will allow them, all of them, to carry out the monitoring work that must accompany the proper implementation of many of the EU directives we adopt here.

My colleagues and I were desperately disappointed that the Council felt it could not agree to our proposal to transform the environmental inspections recommendation into a directive.

We were not demanding an EU inspectorate but simply that Member States should agree to bring their national inspectorates up to a common high standard.

We will continue to pursue this idea in two years time when the issue should return to us.

Fourthly, we want much quicker action by the Commission to take Member States to court when they break EU law.

Last week the Greek Government, which can ill afford to do so, paid the second instalment of a fine, now totalling over EUR 2 million for failure to comply with a judgment of the Court of Justice over the dumping of waste in Crete.

This was thirteen years after the Commission received the first complaint about the dumping of that waste and no less than nineteen years after the directive concerned came into force.

It is absurd that a poor country should get itself into a situation of paying back money to Brussels, but equally absurd that the case should have taken so long.

Finally, let me say that we in Parliament are not daunted or diverted by the idea that the European Parliament should only be concerned with the adoption of legislation and not with its follow-up.

Apparently the Environment Council was somewhat surprised and even disapproving that we had intruded into their territory and that our intention was to take the environmental inspections recommendation very seriously.

MEPs, as we will all know, are on the receiving end of public criticism of poor implementation.

The public tends to complain to us, not to the Environment Council.

In the interests of the people of Europe and their environment, we will pursue this issue and we will not let go.

Mr President, first of all I thank Mrs Jackson for her important question.

I would remind all the Members of the European Parliament that implementation of European Community law covers both the transposition of directives into national law and their application to individual decisions.

It also includes fulfilment of other obligations such as adopting programmes, making designations and monitoring.

The difficulties encountered by the Committee on the Environment in these three reports are indeed not limited to the three directives chosen but extend to all EC environmental directives.

The Commission, and not least the Environment DG are aware of these difficulties and have for some time devoted efforts to improve their performance in this field and I can assure you that next week when the Commission discusses the Sixth Environmental Action Programme the whole implementation issue will be a very important point in that programme.

We have a number of tools at our disposal to improve implementation.

We can, for example, disseminate information to give a more up-to-date picture of the state of play and I know that we have also forwarded some of these reports and annual surveys to Parliament and that we can do much more to ensure some media attention as well.

We can develop tools to aid in the analysis and evaluation of progress in implementation.

We can take legal measures to follow up implementation.

Since 1997 specific initiatives have been pursued on a number of fronts including environmental liability, which of course will put pressure on the Member States to follow the existing rules and regulations; complaints and investigations procedures at national level where we have been involved in playing a consultancy role; access to justice, magistrates' training courses - also very important because this is also about education - and the publication of this annual survey on the implementation of environmental law.

We have also worked to create a clear link between implementation of the directives and Community cofunding which has proven to be very effective as well as ensuring a close relationship with the LIFE financial instrument, because when they see that the money is threatened if they do not comply with the regulations this will definitely put pressure on the Member States.

In May last year we had a first name and shame exercise, as we call it, on bathing water quality.

A second exercise will take place in March this year and I will continue to follow this up so as to give us a scoreboard of how Member States are implementing Community legislation.

Just last week the European Parliament and the Council, as Mrs Jackson said, reached an agreement on a recommendation which will establish minimum criteria for environmental inspections in the Member States.

All these initiatives are intended to increase the level of knowledge of and compliance with European Community and environmental law.

Of course, I acknowledge that there is still much to be done.

We have to look for new ways to encourage the proper transposition and application of environmental legislation.

For example, we need to work to improve the involvement of people at the local and regional level.

Greater public awareness at these levels would lead to closer scrutiny and to public demand for effective implementation of environmental legislation.

We must remain vigilant and active to ensure that the situation improves and I would like to confirm to the European Parliament my personal commitment and that of my services to ensuring the highest possible level of compliance with European Community environmental law.

To this end I will apply all means available, including the formal infringement procedures set out in Articles 226 and 228 of the European Community Treaty and 141 and 143 of the Euratom Treaty, which may lead to imposing economic penalties on non-complying Member States.

I would be more than happy to receive more resources and personnel from the European Parliament to work on this.

Today we have about 45 to 50 staff working full or part-time on implementation, and, of course, we would need more than that.

But I also think that it is for every civil servant here to actually look at the implementation part of introducing new legislation.

I have been very clear from the beginning that I will put more emphasis on implementation.

That needs the three I' s: information, integration and implementation, which should be the guidelines for the future.

I hope that you will agree with me that we are starting to make progress on improving implementation and if both the Commission and the European Parliament continue their efforts to highlight the problem and act on it, further progress will surely be made during this parliamentary term.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, in the field of the environment and public health, the main problem with the European legislative process is not its inability to produce appropriate legislation.

The problem lies, on the one hand, in the slowness with which directives are transposed into national law and, on the other, in shortcomings in their implementation.

The environmental directives that we are now debating, on PCBs, nitrates and habitats, are examples of this very problem.

There is little point in our having approved the directive on habitats and the creation of the "Nature 2000" network in order to protect sites of Community importance, when the Commission has been waiting since 1995 for all the Member States to present a definitive list of these sites, as well as their plans, rules and management mechanisms.

The same problem applies to the directive on PCBs.

And there is little point in our having stipulated the ban on PCBs and the decontamination of all equipment containing PCBs and PCTs with a view to protecting public health, if five years on, the overwhelming majority of Member States have not only failed to implement the directive, but have also failed to take the most simple action, which was to catalogue PCBs and to produce plans for decontamination.

We therefore have widespread non-compliance and for that reason, these directives have not produced the environmental results hoped for.

We also have a situation, however, in which a degree of impunity reigns.

The slowness of the Community's legal processes and the rare use of financial penalties against those Member States that are slow to comply have sent out two negative political messages.

Those States that do comply feel that there is no incentive to continue and those that do not comply do not feel any pressure to change their ways.

It is therefore crucial for the Commission, as Guardian of the Treaties, to monitor the whole process of transposing and implementing Community law, publicising the commitment of all the Member States and guaranteeing that those States that do not comply will be penalised as an example.

Mr President, as Mrs Jackson has so clearly illustrated, the picture which emerges from the analysis of the implementation of the three directives in question gives genuine cause for concern.

Despite the fact that the measures differ quite widely, it appears that the majority of Member States have fallen a long way behind schedule in implementing them practically.

And, quite apart from the technical considerations specific to each of the three directives, this is a serious situation which must lead us to reflect on the reasons behind it.

I would like to highlight two aspects of the issue: on the one hand, in our countries, protection of the environment is hardly ever considered at the planning stage of the various sectorial policies but continues to be viewed as a series of actions to be carried out a posteriori in order to repair damage. On the other hand, precisely because of this retrospective approach, it is often felt that the directives are too costly to implement and that it would not serve any real purpose to do so.

The error lies precisely in, when all is said and done, considering environmental investments to be an obligation which has been imposed, an additional cost which serves no purpose.

But the environment is our future and we cannot rely solely on volunteers or fear of a sentence from the Court of Justice to protect it.

I, too, am of the opinion that, since the Fifth Environmental Action Programme adopted a principally sectorial approach to environmental policy, it may be that, when discussing the sixth, we ought to place greater emphasis on the involvement of social and economic players such as local authorities in the achievement of the objectives, so that the safeguarding of our environment increasingly becomes an element to be integrated into the overall planning stage.

In this context, it will be important, as we state in our motion for a resolution, to ensure extensive circulation of the best and worst results achieved by the Member States in the implementation of the environment directives. This could even take place via the Internet and would underline the difference in the commitment of each of the States in this matter and expose their behaviour to public opinion, which is almost always more effective than judgments of the Court of Justice.

In order to facilitate the monitoring operation, but also comparison between the different situations, I feel that it is also even more important to continue to develop research on common indicators in the field of the environment.

The protection of the environment crosses national borders and is a field of Community action par excellence.

It is also for this reason, and even more so in the light of the now imminent enlargement to countries of Central and Eastern Europe, that we must not accept that the decisions adopted by ourselves and the 15 governments should then be disregarded.

The natural world is a common legacy, and our commitment to pursuing goals must serve as an example to the candidate countries, who are in the throes of remedying often extremely serious incidents of deterioration.

If this situation is to improve, each of us, as a representative of Community, national or local institutions but also simply as a citizen, must do our part.

Mr President, my assistant, Vikki Phillips, has just handed me a note which says that Denmark spends 15 times more than Greece in carrying out environmental inspections and making appropriate assessments.

Well, if that is the case, then something is clearly very wrong, and I suspect it is not wrong with Denmark.

I am very pleased to support most of what the Chairman of the Committee on the Environment has said, although I have some trepidation in doing so being conscious that the next ECJ fine may well be against the UK for its failure to comply with the bathing water directive, despite the fact that a great deal of money has been spent and effort made in recent years to reach such compliance.

I want to make it clear, though, that I do not believe that we should be using the failure of some Member States to achieve compliance with environmental legislation to justify weakening our ambitions or claiming that too much legislation is impractical.

I am all for being realistic and for making sure that new legislation makes sense but the problems we face both throughout the European Union and across the world are too great for us to lower our sights.

And I think some of the progress made by the United Kingdom in implementing the habitats directive over the past year demonstrates very clearly that it is very often not the fault of the legislation but the lack of political will which is to blame for the failure to deliver the goods we all wish to see.

I want strongly to support the idea of a scoreboard which the Commissioner mentioned and of gestures to name and shame those Member States which are failing to meet the expectations of MEPs, of the Commission and of the public.

As a politician, the Commissioner knows very well the importance of making sure that that information is presented in a way which is easily digestible and understood by every journalist across the European Union and perhaps a few politicians as well.

So, let us call it the Commission's little red book, no, let us call it the Commission's big green book, albeit one with a few black spots on its pages.

Let us name and shame at every opportunity and bring the public alongside us in ensuring that this environmental legislation is enforced and that Member States recognise their responsibilities.

Mr President, Mrs Jackson well expressed the concern of the members of the Committee on the Environment, which in my case is heightened since I belong to the European Parliament' s Committee on Petitions.

Forty per cent of the petitions submitted to this committee come from citizens concerned for the preservation of the environment.

And they usually refer to the habitats directive, the environmental impact directive, the wild birds directive and the right to information directive, which together with those discussed here today on nitrates and PCBs are probably the ones most often infringed.

Mr Goodwill's report shows that there are some Member States before the courts, others with proceedings against them, and only two Member States that are above suspicion.

Mr Sjöstedt too, in his report, mentions those Member States that have repeatedly infringed the habitats directive.

The Committee on Petitions and I, myself, know that what often happens is that Member States either do not respond in time or, as we say in Spain, and I do not know if there is a good translation, they "make the partridge dizzy" [try to deceive one].

In addition, with the scant human resources of the Committee members, who are always having to answer the demands not only of the petitioners but also of the governments, it is very difficult to work, Commissioner.

It is essential that we respect the legislation that we ourselves draw up, and the proof that there is a lack of political will is that some Member States obey it and others break it.

This can give companies a competitive edge.

In my opinion, there are three fundamental questions.

First, something that has already been mentioned here: the deterrent use of European Funds; European Funds must not be given to projects that break Community law.

Secondly, suitable penalties must be found; it is very hard (I am from a region that badly needs European subsidies), but even if it is very hard to freeze certain subsidies, if it is not done the Member States will not understand.

Lastly, Mr President, the process must be speeded up.

But I know that this lies in the hands of the courts, this lies in the hands of the governments, this lies in the hands of us all.

Mr President, the aim of these directives is to protect the environment.

This means that not only do the Member States transpose the directives into national legislation, they are also the ones who actually implement this national legislation.

This also means that when monitoring implementation, it should not be the means to an end, but the end itself, which should be looked at.

Unfortunately, experience has shown that Member States often fail to implement European directives correctly.

Consequently, campaigns, such as those designed to monitor compliance involving independent inspectorates, are essential.

As far as the environmental inspections are concerned, the European Parliament has gone to great lengths to ensure that this is regulated effectively.

However, negotiations have not led to the enactment of a binding directive, because the Council and Commission do not want that at this stage.

Given this attitude of the Member States, I fear that in future, problems will arise at the implementation stage of other directives too.

We need only call to mind the many warnings issued by the Commission to the Member States, which in some cases have led to infringement procedures.

This can only get worse after enlargement, because the current Member States are setting the wrong example.

Where there are differences in interpretation, the Commission should put forward amendment proposals for workable rules.

These amendments are not intended for additional or more far-reaching measures, but should help improve the workability of the current rules.

As far as the PCB [polychlorinated biphenol] directive is concerned, we should also turn our attention to the supplies.

If these are to be maintained for much longer, it will be a rather long time before this directive makes itself felt.

Mr President, allow me to start by agreeing with everything Mrs Jackson and many of my fellow Members have said and to focus on a number of points.

As everyone has pointed out, we have the legislation.

The problem lies in incorporating and applying this legislation.

Of course, the political will must be there but it depends mainly on the monitoring carried out by your office, Commissioner.

If, for example, you receive repeated complaints, instead of dealing with them through time-consuming correspondence, you should take a persistent and decisive stand and make sure the legislation really is implemented.

And if we have cause to go to the European Court, then let us do so and, if sanctions need to be imposed, then we shall do that too.

As Mrs Jackson has said, Greece is already paying EUR 20 000 a day and I trust that Greece will come to its senses and fall into line.

I should particularly like to draw your attention to Directive 92/43 on Natura 2000 areas.

We should not allow projects to go ahead in these areas with a light heart, because Article 6 of the directive says that only in the absence of alternative solutions should a project be carried out for imperative reasons of overriding public interest in Natura 2000 areas.

And here again I would remind you that in an area of Greece, in the area of Fthiotida, where everyone is against bridging the Maliako Gulf which, it should be noted the Ministry of the Environment and Public Works itself included in the Natura 2000 areas, your office has received complaints about the Greek Government's intention to build this bridge, which will have a huge environmental impact, even though alternative solutions exist.

I shall be monitoring - and I welcome the undertaking which you took in your intervention and I hope that it is a real undertaking - what happens in all the areas in Europe which are Natura 2000 areas including, of course, the Maliako Gulf, where there are plans to build a bridge which will wipe out an important habitat.

Mr President, first of all I must thank the Commissioner and the Chairman and other colleagues for their words of wisdom.

They are very positive and clear commitments to do something about this very serious problem.

But it is not just words we need, it is actions, it is deeds, and we cannot rely on Member States to do this alone.

Even if representatives of the Council were here, which they do not appear to be, even if they were prepared to make statements, which they do not appear to be, we would not be able to leave them to do it on their own.

We need some kind of watchdog to monitor and ensure the implementation of legislation.

Sadly our own Environment Agency does not appear to be up to the job yet.

So what solutions do we have?

Well, these three reports before Parliament today are a start.

They make proposals for further improvement.

But, they also make a point which we must take on board here in Parliament.

They say essentially that bad legislation should never have been put on the statute book.

And that is a lesson that we have to take to heart.

Perhaps we have to start to think about doing less but better.

We have talked about doing it but seemingly not done so yet.

When we put better legislation on the agenda in future, it has to be respected.

Because of the failure of Member States to put into place legislation, typically the PCBs and PCTs legislation, we now have the extremely serious problem of a long-term contamination of our food chain by a persistent toxic chemical.

That toxic chemical is slowly but surely accumulating in the human food chain, reaching levels which are already beyond World Health Organisation levels in certain fatty substances, typically butter, and in some cases fatty fish, such as salmon.

They are now creeping up the food chain to the point where our children are now starting to ingest amounts of these toxins that are beyond those that are recommended by the World Health Organisation.

If we are not prepared to take serious action promptly in future we will see further problems of this kind affecting future generations.

We owe it to those future generations to pursue this issue.

Mr President, I share the opinion of Mrs Jackson and many other speakers who say that once legislation has been laid down, it should be implemented.

I also agree with Mrs Jackson and her statement regarding the nitrates directive: "that was flawed from the beginning".

How is it possible, if you want to maintain 50 milligrams of nitrate in groundwater, to apply the same stocking density per hectare across the entire European Union, from Finland to Italy?

Needless to say, the growth season in Finland is much shorter than in Italy, and so in Italy, as a general rule, more cattle units per hectare can be kept than in Finland.

As far as I am concerned, every farmer can have as many cows as he chooses, as long as he does not exceed the 50 milligram limit.

Turning now to measurements, how it is possible that the Commission has not issued any clear guidelines on how measurements are to be taken, the depth levels of these measurements, the number of times a year they should be taken, and how seasonal influences can be taken into consideration?

All these factors are still unknown and differ considerably from country to country and season to season.

And if nitrate is measured, how is it determined that it originates from animal manure alone?

A great number of farmers use artificial fertiliser; how is that measured?

What is the impact of sewage leaks, for example?

What is the impact of major rivers discharging into other countries?

Animal manure cannot be the only cause of nitrate pollution, and it is completely unreasonable to tell farmers to restrict its use if we do not know the other causes.

I share the view of all the speakers who say that we must adopt sound environmental policy.

I do not dispute the standard of 50 milligrams of nitrate in groundwater, but I do want clear guidelines on how it should be measured and how these measurements should be carried out.

Mr President, I have written the report on the follow-up to the habitats directive and have, in the meantime, obtained the clear impression that many Member States really did not appreciate what commitments they were taking on when they adopted the directive.

They did not appreciate how far-reaching it really was.

This is one of the most important explanations for why progress has been so slow.

However, the fact that progress has been slow does not mean that nothing is happening.

In actual fact, an incredible amount is happening in this area, albeit not as much as we should like.

When the directive is called into question, it is important to remember that what is happening is important, even if progress is slow.

I also believe that this is an explanation for why insufficient resources have been invested in information and in dialogue with those directly affected by these protected areas, something which also creates partly unnecessary conflicts in many areas.

I believe there is a lot to be learned from this.

Obviously, the Member States have prime responsibility, both financially and legally, but, for the EU' s part, it is important not only to legislate and to collect funds - good though these activities obviously are - but also to publicise the many good examples there are and to use its own financial resources to encourage sound development.

The situation we have is incredibly serious, mainly because of the extremely rapid impoverishment of biodiversity.

Nor can we see a reversal of this trend.

The work must therefore continue and, in the present situation, the directive ought not to be changed or reviewed.

Mr President, I very much welcome the fact that we as Parliament also fulfil our monitoring competences and that we take a look at directives which meet with a great deal of criticism in the Member States.

Not only do they meet with a great deal of criticism in the Member States, they also cause enormous division in the European Parliament.

I would like to comment on two directives today.

These are the habitats directive and the nitrates directive. What do these two directives have in common?

The fact that the Member States have been granted far-reaching powers to designate nature reserves, species to be protected, and certainly as far as the nitrates directive is concerned, the sensitive areas.

There are now an increasing number of complaints from members of the Dutch Lower Chamber of the States General who ask us what in God' s name we have been up to.

However, it is not Europe which prescribed that the whole of the Netherlands should be designated a nitrate-sensitive area.

It is the Netherlands itself which decided to do so.

It is then up to us, with the kind help of a number of MEPs, to see how, by means of derogation requests, we can undo the nitrate legislation, for example, in order to reach the goal, this being a reduction in nitrate levels, in a decent fashion.

The same applies to the habitats directive.

Today' s tragedy, a cross-border industrial site between Aachen and Maastricht, has been brought to a standstill for the umpteenth time because of two European hamsters.

These hamsters were spirited away by a campaign group for the protection and preservation of this species who believed that, if they abducted the hamsters, they could get them to mate.

But forced mating is something which does not work, even in the animal kingdom.

Once again, for the umpteenth time, the Council of State in the Netherlands brought a cross-border industrial site to a standstill.

However, having scrutinised the habitats directive and having correctly interpreted the regulation on areas where preservation is required, we see that this measure was unnecessary.

What should happen now, and that is why I support the report on the habitats directive, and most certainly the nitrates directive, is for the European Commission to make it quite clear - and perhaps lay down in writing in clear Dutch language - what is and is not possible.

We agree on the principles, they are sound, but the way in which the Member States deal with them is disgraceful by any standard.

Mr President, poor compliance with environmental legislation is a huge problem.

As co-legislator, it is important for us to speak our minds, but we should not pass the blame to the Member States too readily.

We must also consider the quality and nature of the legislation we produce.

The Union is growing ever bigger and more diverse.

We must therefore lay down rules which can thrive in the different national cultures.

That is why I think we should prescribe less detail.

We must be very precise in the results we want, but not in the way in which the results must be achieved.

For that reason, I believe we should stand by the result, a maximum of 50 milligrams, in the nitrates directive.

We do accept a certain degree of flexibility with regard to the method by which the result is achieved.

An example of sound legislation is the habitats directive.

The environment is a common legacy; environmental protection a common task.

It makes no sense to protect birds in one country if they are being shot down across the border in another country.

The habitats directive prescribes a clear goal.

The way in which it is to be achieved is quite flexible.

The directive is not detailed, but provides a framework which allows latitude for weighing up local or regional interests, and that is exactly how we need to move forward.

As long as the result - caring for the protected species and their habitats - remains paramount.

Needless to say, there are many conflicts in villages and provinces with regard to the directive' s application.

There are instances of incorrect application.

It would be useful and necessary to provide clear information, but I am taken aback by the large number of MEPs who have requested a review of the bird and habitats directive in order to work out in further detail certain concepts in the habitats directive.

The significant implications of this would then be compensation and major public interest.

The very strength of the habitats directive lies in its flexibility.

The directive stands for a modern way of protecting the environment.

It is not about putting up fences around the environment, but about dealing with the species and natural resources in a conscientious manner.

Accordingly, I regret that some MEPs are adding to the chaos by suggesting in an amendment that the existing infrastructure should disappear, or that major new projects are not viable.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I was delighted to find this topic on the agenda today.

I would like to thank Mrs Jackson for raising the question.

Although you refer to three specific EU directives, I would point out that what we are talking about here is a widespread problem with the transposition of EU legislation in the Member States.

If you start from the principle that directives and regulations are adopted by the Council and Parliament in the EU, then it is quite reasonable to assume that the Council - which does, after all, use these directives - will transpose them in the Member States accordingly.

But what do we see happening?

On one side there is the European Union, which seeks to blame the Member States for shortcomings.

On the other side, there are the Member States, which are more than willing to offload their problems onto the oh-so-distant Europe, forgetting in the process that they are part of Europe themselves, and the Commission is piggy-in-the-middle.

Commissioner, you have gone to great lengths to try and ensure that these laws are transposed in the European Union in a purposeful manner.

But it really is not that simple and, of course, we have criticised your methods sometimes.

I can understand to an extent, why you took the line you did.

There are various reasons as to why countries have trouble transposing this legislation.

In my opinion, one of the reasons in the case of the nitrates directive is the failure to observe scientific findings, because one thing is for sure, it is not possible to reduce nitrate levels as rapidly as we demand.

Nature simply will not allow it.

However, in the case of the habitats directive, Parliament highlighted the shortcomings quite clearly last year, namely that the directive was complicated and unclear in parts and so it cannot be transposed in the Member States.

When we were in Toulouse, we saw how local people are trying to transpose it.

But basically, they do not know what is going on.

They do not know where the boundaries are, or how to apply them properly.

These are shortcomings that must be reviewed as a matter of priority.

But it is also our responsibility to ensure that the directives are less utopian and far more realistic in nature.

Mrs Jackson's question actually contains all the points we need to address and there is nothing more to add to it.

Speedier sanctions and careful drafting of laws will enable us to solve this problem.

However, I would just like to point out that something needs to change in the Member States too, because the Environment Ministers are, no doubt, sometimes too cowardly to promote the initiatives they adopt here, in their own countries, if this could lead to conflict.

Mr President, I should first of all like to thank Mrs Jackson and the rapporteurs for the three reports we are debating today.

Effective implementation of the EU' s environment directives in the Member States is naturally of great significance in two ways: firstly, in terms of environmental protection - which is, of course, the whole purpose of the directives - but also in terms of our not causing confidence to be lost in EU legislative work through the Member States' being able for a long time to get away with not implementing the legislation which they themselves have helped bring about in the Council of Ministers.

That is why I think that the three reports concerning the Member States' failure to implement EU legislation are important.

The Council has, of course, been rather irritated about the fact that Parliament is looking over its shoulders, but I think that the work on the reports has revealed how slack the majority of the Member States are about implementing EU legislation.

They have also revealed how slow the Commission' s and the Court of Justice' s reactions are when it comes to inadequate implementation.

We often, of course, hear fine speeches about grand European visions and the Europe of the future, sometimes from Members of this Parliament.

We also hear this kind of thing from many governments, but it often, of course, disguises the fact that narrow national interests are being cultivated instead of the common interests we have worked for in the course of the legislative work.

It is also interesting to note that those countries which are often regarded as rather reluctant and critical in relation to certain aspects of EU cooperation are in reality those countries which comply best with EU decisions.

In all modesty, I am thinking, for example, of the Nordic countries.

I was pleased to hear Mrs Wallström' s remarks on the reports.

I am sure that Mrs Wallström has the will to ensure that the legislation is of a sufficiently high quality to be implemented and to ensure that it is effectively followed up.

I think, at any rate, that Parliament ought to provide as much support as possible for this work.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, Mrs Jackson's question illustrates the fact that the best laws in the world are no use whatsoever unless they are applied correctly and, more importantly, properly controlled.

For example, the Member States have not transposed the habitats directive into national legislation.

The same applies to a great deal of other legislation.

And this is legislation which we need for the future.

The Commission is responsible for transposition and for checking what sort of on-site controls have been carried out.

In doing so it, in turn, must rely on information supplied to it by the Member States.

I get the impression that monitoring is no easy task and if the Commission is to perform this task it needs information and data and reports to be sent in.

The complaint was often voiced in the past that the Commission did not have enough staff and resources to evaluate the data sent in for control purposes.

I should therefore like to ask the Commission if it now has sufficient resources.

Mind you, Parliament cannot talk, because we are constantly calling for reports.

I know that the Commission is very busy receiving and processing reports and that this sometimes ties up Commission capacities and resources unnecessarily.

In other words, we all have to think where we can make improvements.

I think the Commission should react more quickly, both towards the Member States and in instituting the necessary proceedings before the ECJ and setting fines.

At the same time, I call on the Member States to honour their obligations to transpose and control legislation and report to the Commission properly.

I am the person responsible in our group for the water framework directive and the rapporteur for the groundwater action programme, which is still pending, and the nitrates directive is therefore a matter of particular concern to me.

On Tuesday, i.e. tomorrow, we shall be voting on the Goodwill report, to which I have proposed a number of amendments.

I should like to ask the House to accept these proposed amendments, because what we are trying to do here is to give the Member States more responsibility.

I should therefore be grateful for your support.

Finally, I should like to mention one more point, namely the candidate countries.

We require candidate countries to adopt European legislation.

But when the Member States themselves fail to abide by it and the European Commission is unable to take decisive action, then everything starts to go pear-shaped.

For this reason alone and, most importantly, in order to protect human health and the environment, all those responsible need to radically rethink the matter post-haste and these reports make that clear.

Mr President, what a relief that no speaker so far has called for the environmental directives to be watered down.

Mr Sjöstedt, it is nothing to with the poor Member States not knowing what they were letting themselves in for.

And right now they know full well that they are simply and deliberately contravening European legislation.

They are stalling for time and they know perfectly well that nothing will happen to them, because it takes so long for the Court to do anything.

What we have here is the deliberate flouting of European legislation and neither Parliament nor the Council should stand for it.

Some members are saying that we should name and shame.

I can name and shame myself because Austria is one of the countries which has failed to comply with the habitats directive, but I must also protest, Commissioner, because Austria has not been at all remiss as far as the PCB directive is concerned.

We did everything here which needed to be done even before there was a European directive.

We passed a Waste Law back in 1990 and an ordinance banning halogenated substances in 1993.

We are being accused unfairly here.

As far as the nitrates directive is concerned, Austria has now rectified its shortcomings, but we know only too well that the Member States had terrible trouble transposing the nitrates directive.

The main problem here was that, because of the extremely high density of livestock in many parts of the Union, keeping to within the limit of 170 kg of nitrogen per hectare of farmland caused immense difficulties with the production of farm manure in several countries.

Perhaps such a high density of livestock will be less of a problem in the future, because cows, those pained and tormented creatures, are fighting back.

The form of BSE which currently confronts us may well be a sort of revenge on the part of these tormented animals.

We should take a lesson from nature and conduct ourselves properly and comply with the laws which we ourselves have passed.

Mr President, the drinking-water directive, waste-management directive, major accident hazards, sewage sludge, asbestos, wild birds, waste shipment, not to mention the habitats directive, the nitrates directive and the PCB directive. The list is long, the list of the failure of my own country to transpose EU environmental law.

Despite warning letters, reasoned opinions, threats of legal action to the European Court of Justice, so it embarrassingly continues.

We are second worst in terms of transposition and designation of sites under the habitats directive.

Sometimes, but rarely, there can be genuine reasons for delayed transposition of a directive and the nitrates directive has come in for particular mention in this regard here today.

But to fail to provide information requested by the Commission under Article 10 of the Treaty in a timely and proper manner is inexcusable.

That is the first step: reply to the letters of the Commission.

No government should be forgiven bad manners and inappropriate behaviour.

That is one of Ireland's and, I suspect, many countries' cardinal sins in relation to the area we are discussing.

Article 10 requires Member States to actively cooperate with the Commission in dealing with complaints, to clarify facts and to state official positions.

Only last weekend I read in the Irish media that the head of the Commission's Environment DG, Mr Curry, complained to Ireland's EU Ambassador, Mr Denis O'Leary, last autumn that the Irish authorities were not cooperating adequately with Brussels on environmental issues.

Commissioner Wallström wrote last March to the Irish Minister of the Environment, Mr Dempsey, suggesting that the large number of Irish environmental complaints currently being dealt with by the EU officials be dealt with in his department or by the Irish Ombudsman.

No joy, no progress, perhaps even no response - I do not know.

With 1% of the Community's population, to our shame we in Ireland have been generating 10% of the Commission's environmental complaints.

Mr Curry had strong words for not only our Department of the Environment but also our Department of Finances policies, our Environmental Protection Agency, our Heritage Protection Agency and, indeed, our local authorities.

Sensitive and sensible implementation must be encouraged to ensure political and public cooperation and understanding of what we have to achieve.

I often give the example - as I did at a committee meeting this morning - of the survival of the only cotton-weed colony in Ireland in the south-east corner of Wexford.

This is on a local pilgrimage path.

In its over-zealousness to protect the cotton-weed, the local council decided to ban the pilgrimage from the immediate area.

It very quickly became apparent that the trampling of the pilgrims' feet and not divine intervention had, in fact, been essential to protect that particular ecosystem.

Stronger and more vigorous species, better known colloquially as 'weeds' - even though they are all wild flowers - gained a foothold in the colony and began to choke off the cotton-weed once human intervention was gone.

Changing the essential balance between human activity and our environment led to the loss of this precious ecosystem.

Finally, it must not be a case of the last person off the island turning the lights off.

We have to live and earn a living in these places.

Equally we cannot continue to mortgage our children's health and heritage.

Mr President, I should like again to thank all the Members of the European Parliament for their statements.

I could not agree more with most of what you have said, except for any accusation of complacency.

May I remind you that, as of today, 45% of all the complaints are on environmental issues and cases - 700 complaints, 30% of the infringements - about 400 - are on environmental cases.

So there is a heavy burden on us and we are trying to do our best but also look to the future.

That is why I am saying that we also have to look out for new instruments and ways to do more.

Mr Sacconi's point was that we need the good examples of what economic gains can be made from complying with environmental legislation.

We could do more on that.

We could do more with the use of indicators because we have to measure.

We have to be better at assessing the results of compliance with environmental legislation.

We are most effective when we have a good and effective interplay between the institutions, while not denying the fact that Member States are responsible.

They have to give us answers and provide us with information.

We do not have the means to send people to all the Member States to check.

We cannot do that unless you give me another 500 people.

What we have to do is modernise legislation.

It has been said that we need less but better legislative proposals.

The easiest way is the limit-value approach, to say 50 mgs of nitrates for example in drinking water.

But this cannot apply in other far-reaching directives of a broader scope, such as the habitats directive.

It is no coincidence that the habitats and nitrates directives are chosen as examples of bad compliance because they are very far-reaching.

They are ambitious directives and in some cases it means the Member States need to review fully their agricultural practices.

We know this from some of the Member States.

This should not be taken as an excuse, but an explanation of why these directives are cited for lack of implementation.

I totally agree with Mr Sjöstedt that it is not because these directives are not good or ambitious enough.

They are far-reaching and there are consequences for the Member States which they perhaps did not realise when the decisions were taken.

We must not give in now, we have to carry on because we will finally start to see results.

What we have done, which is very effective, is to establish the link between European funding and compliance with environment legislation.

We have to draw on that.

We can do more on education and information.

We have started activities like this.

We use our experts to go to Member States or to carry out seminars to teach the Member States how to best implement it.

We try to use all these available instruments to improve implementation.

In an enlarged and more diverse Union, clear and legally binding targets, as well as education and methods for measuring, monitoring and calculating results, become more and more important.

I hope for the European Parliament's support and backing in our further attempts to improve the implementation of our European Community environmental legislation.

I have received a motion for a resolution in accordance with Rule 42(5) of the Rules of Procedure.

The vote will take place tomorrow, Wednesday, at 12 noon.

The next item is the report (A5-0357/2000) tabled by Mr Parish, on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development, on the situation and perspectives of young farmers in the European Union [2000/2011(INI)].

Mr President, Commissioner Fischler, ladies and gentlemen, I am delighted to be able to present to you today the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development' s own-initiative report on the situation and perspectives of young farmers in the European Union.

Twenty years ago, I, myself, was a member of my local young farmers' organisation in the county of Somerset in England.

Even in those days it was not easy for young farmers to carry on the family farm or get started in the industry.

Today the situation has become even more difficult, and we are witnessing a big drop in the number of young farmers coming into the industry.

We have reached a point where it has become vital to take action in order to stop this decline.

Not only for the sake of agriculture itself, but also to safeguard existing structures in our countryside.

The last thing that we want to see is a depopulated countryside where the green and pleasant landscape which we take for granted will not be looked after properly any longer.

I would like to take this opportunity to thank the European organisation CEJA for its help and cooperation in enabling me to produce this report.

I was given the opportunity to visit young farmers in five Member States which gave me a better and wider understanding of the practical ways in which young farmers could be helped in the industry.

I would further like to thank Commissioner Fischler for his backing and I would also welcome the draft opinion on the report produced by the Committee of the Regions because it is going to do a report on young farmers.

Last but not least, I would like to express my thanks to Ross Gordon Consultants who produced an excellent study on the situation of young farmers in the European Union last year and whose publication has been of great help in producing today's report.

The report puts forward a series of ideas and ways of assisting young farmers starting up or carrying on in their businesses.

I have, however, tried not to reinvent the wheel.

Basically I would like to see the introduction of a guaranteed standard level of assistance for young farmers throughout the European Union.

I am fully aware that it is not an easy task to come up with one solution covering all the different conditions facing young farmers in their respective countries in a Community of 15 Member States.

To name just two examples: land values can vary from EUR 12 000 per hectare to EUR 15 000 per hectare.

Levels of taxation vary greatly with some Member States imposing considerable inheritance tax which renders the survival of young farmers very difficult, especially where land values are very high.

I do not have the time to go through all the recommendations made in the report, but I will list some of the measures which should be given priority: the continuation of start-up grants of up to EUR 40 000, in combination with subsidised interest rates for start-up capital of up to EUR 120 000 for eight years.

Two of the major difficulties encountered by young farmers are the raising of start-up capital and subsequently the danger of overstretching their financial abilities by providing regular interest payments.

We are living in a computer age.

Access to education and training needs to be further encouraged in order to allow young farmers to take full advantage of the potential advantages offered by modern communication technology and business operation techniques.

The changing face of agriculture, increasingly determined by global WTO agreements, means that agriculture will continue to change.

It is in our best interests that young farmers are well prepared to anticipate and to manage these future challenges.

Food safety measures and production methods are being thoroughly analysed these days.

There is greater emphasis on organic production throughout Europe.

Here again, young farmers must be placed in a position which will allow them to embrace a new upcoming culture and to be aware of the benefits attached to maintaining consumer confidence and support for agricultural products.

There is tremendous scope for innovative and creative local high-quality production.

The European agricultural industry is going through a difficult economic period with a great deal of restructuring going on at the same time.

There is a great need to assist some of the older farmers to retire in dignity.

In this context, I would very much like see a retirement package for existing farmers linked to bringing in young farmers to carry on the industry.

I would like to ask Commissioner Fischler to recommend to Member States that they introduce such a policy throughout the EU.

We are seeing the average age of the farming Community increase with falling numbers of young farmers.

Young farmers need greater access to production rights.

It is not easy to balance the delivery of additional production rights to young farmers if they have to be taken away from existing farmers who themselves are already facing financial difficulties.

When, in future, production rights are changed, I would like to ask the Commission to take into greater account the need to increase the amount of extra production which is given to young farmers.

With the emphasis in the CAP on giving increasing importance to rural development schemes, it is crucial to recognise the young farmers as the key players and main executives responsible for the implementation of such new rural redevelopment policies.

With the forthcoming enlargement of the European Union, I would strongly advise the applicant Member States to start creating supportive measures for their young farmers already at present, especially in view of the introduction of production controls required by the Commission.

In many parts of the world, share farming is a common practice.

I would like to ask the Commission to investigate the possibilities for developing share farming within the common agricultural policy.

As I have already mentioned, this report is an own initiative report of the Committee on Agriculture, and I hope all parties will be able to sign up for this report and make sure positive practical help is given young farmers in the future.

I would also like to thank Commissioner Fischler once more for his support and also ask him to introduce an audit to be carried out every two years on the availability and success of measures put in place to support young farmers.

It is very important that we do not just pay great lip service to helping young farmers, but actually deliver policies within the common agricultural policy that increase the number of young farmers coming into the industry.

Mr President, Commissioner Fischler, I wish, first of all, to congratulate the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development and, in particular its rapporteur, Mr Parish, on the timely initiative to bring the debate on this issue to the European institutions.

It is 32 years since Sicco Mansholt, the Commissioner responsible for agriculture from the time the Commission was formed until 1972, presented his draft reform of the common agricultural policy, the Mansholt Plan.

It is my view that the European institutions have not paid sufficient tribute to this great figure in European politics.

I still read this classic work today and I still find that it contains many of the answers we need to the problems faced by young farmers, which are accurately described in Mr Parish' s report.

We have created a major common policy based on support payments per hectare, per animal or even according to production achieved; we have limited production rights and established quotas; we have imposed complex mechanisms for standardising production and we have created intricate systems intervening in international markets.

The results have been varied, with some positive aspects but with many other negative aspects.

Amongst the latter, I would highlight the effect this policy has had in creating major problems for young people wishing to establish themselves in farming.

The bold study drawn up on this issue by Parliament confirms that land is still the major investment for European farmers.

The study also shows difficulty of access to land to be the main problem facing young farmers.

According to this study, for each percentage point increase in subsidies for wheat crops, the price of land goes up by 0.4%.

This effect is significantly magnified by quota systems and by production-limiting schemes.

We cannot, therefore, contemplate the need to protect and support the modernisation and reinvigoration of agriculture unless we consider changes that could be made to the current CAP.

The alternative to this model of agricultural policy will necessarily require a policy focused on farmers and their incomes and not on the produce, the land or the livestock by means of which the income is obtained.

It will require an agricultural policy that is defined in regional rather than sectoral terms and will require priority for the environment, rural development, vocational training and early retirement.

To conclude, I should like to suggest to Mr Parish and to the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development that this report should not be seen as a finishing line but rather as a point of departure for a thorough study into overhauling agriculture and reforming the common agricultural policy with the specific participation of young farmers' associations.

Revisiting the Mansholt Plan would be a good place to start.

Mr President, Commissioner, on behalf of the European Liberal Democrats I would like to extend my sincere thanks to the rapporteur for his excellent work.

Many thanks indeed go to him, then.

In this short speech I would like to focus attention on a couple of points.

The report takes excellent account of the problems of young farmers. Social problems are dealt with particularly well.

This is to be welcomed, because it is young men who are mostly keener to continue farming than young women are.

The problem that has come about is what is referred to as the hundred-hectare solitude factor.

In agriculture we need sustainability, especially with regard to change-of-generation factors.

The average age of European farmers is worryingly high.

It must be financially feasible to sustain the change-of-generation system.

Young people must be induced to start farming.

There are not enough young starters, however.

It would be very important if we could get young people to continue in a profession that is important to us all.

Young farmers are very skilled and are not prejudiced about using modern technology in their work in the fields and in rearing cattle.

Similarly, they can make use of the latest information technology in their planning.

We are on the threshold of great change, which the rapporteur brought to our attention here, and it is the young, if anyone, who are best equipped to lead us through this revolution, which we will inevitably have to face within a few years.

The conclusions and measures proposed in the report are largely matters that have to be decided upon nationally, and this is good for flexibility.

The EU can and must promote policies that work as incentives for the young.

Bureaucracy must not become a barrier to improving the position of young farmers.

Mr President, Commissioner, first of all I should like to give Mr Parish my thanks, congratulations and support for his report.

In these times when the younger generation can see that the quality of life is no longer closely linked to industrialisation and cities and large commercial centres, we have the obligation in the Union to encourage and help the younger generation to take over from the older so that the cycle of life and people in agriculture may be completed by means of new Community initiatives that have the young farmer as their priority objective.

We must put into practice the principles and actions proposed in this own-initiative report so as to make rural life more attractive to young people, thus preventing depopulation of the countryside.

This social group is the future basis of the Common Agricultural Policy; we have to increase installation aids and supplementary investment grants for this group, particularly in those structurally less-favoured areas where abandoned holdings and deserted villages are common, where young people can revive the rural economy.

All this will be thanks to the development of new products of regional interest, such as agro-tourism and rural tourism, or through repopulating these natural spaces with animal and plant species, contributing to the sustainable and lasting development of the area.

Mr President, the first part of the motion for a resolution in the report repeats the now familiar findings on the poor situation and prospects of young farmers in the European Union.

However, no mention is made of why this should be so, given that the previous two Community support schemes promoted two programmes for the benefit of young farmers, which the European Union vaunted as a panacea which would solve all the problems faced by young farmers and reverse the negative trend.

This conscious omission runs throughout the resolution, which fails to mention three basic factors which, unless they are dealt with, will render the third Community programme for young farmers equally ineffectual.

These factors are, first, that the CAP, especially in its post-1992 form and following Agenda 2000, does not safeguard a viable income for most small or medium-sized farming households, or a survival income for the heads of these households, which is why no one wants to invest anything at all in the farming sector, however many grants there may be - not that there are that many - because not only is it unprofitable, it does not even afford a basic income.

Secondly, there is usually nobody to apply the incentives to; in other words, because of the quotas, young farmers have no reason to work, given that the quotas have been used up for all the products and they must wait for a national stock to be created and distributed to young farmers or buy quotas, in which case, good luck to them.

Thirdly, however high the incentives, the terms and conditions are such that they are more suited to large farmers and exclude small and medium-sized farmers.

The requirement for very large cultivated areas, even in island regions, is a typical example. This requirement becomes prohibitive when combined with quotas.

In other words, the Community requires young farmers to have a large farm and large-scale production, but nigh prevents them from producing anything with the quota system.

This incongruous situation is not, in my view, an inadvertent, random choice by the European Union.

It is deliberate policy, the purpose being to ruin poor, medium-sized farmers and support large farms or rather large companies in the agricultural sector.

That is why we cannot vote in favour of this report; it is because it conceals the real reasons.

Even these grants, when they are given to poor, medium-sized farmers, are meted out in drips and drabs and Greece is a typical example here.

I do not know, for example, if Mr Fischler is aware of the fact that our grants for young farmers have still not been received, despite the fact that the government used this type of argument to saturation point in order to win votes last April.

Mr President, I want to commence by complimenting the rapporteur on his very well-researched and objective report which I and my group have no difficulty in supporting.

In the context of Agenda 2000, very credible efforts were made to deal with the serious problem of succession in European agriculture.

A re-vamped farm retirement scheme, installation aid and other measures may not, however, achieve our desired objective and in my view the problem must be revisited as a matter of urgency, otherwise the continuity of family farming will be put at serious risk.

Apart from the seriously upsetting and devastating consequences of BSE, which I believe will be overcome, the real problem for young people who in normal circumstances would take up farming as a career is the availability, welcome though it is, of alternative and certainly more financially rewarding employment.

Farmers and non-farmers must face this reality and do so before it is too late.

Farming as a profession has the onerous responsibility of guaranteeing our citizens food security and quality, and we must act to safeguard the productive base of European agriculture by ensuring that young people with the ethos of farming in their blood are appropriately encouraged and compensated.

I realise that many small farms do not have the capacity to generate sufficient income for their owners because of scale and enterprise.

I believe we must do more to assist those interested in a restructuring programme - and the rapporteur made reference to it in his report - through the pooling of land and human resources, which would lead to greater efficiency and improved competitiveness.

Likewise, the opportunity of rural development and new technology in terms of creating farm and part-time employment for both women and men must, in every case, be vigorously pursued.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, when we realise that 55% of European farmers are over 55 years old and only 23% are less than 44 years old, we must inevitably conclude that the future of farming in the European Union is under threat.

The situation is even more serious in my own country, where these figures are 66% and 15% respectively.

In the mid-1980s, the CAP began changing in order to improve measures for direct control of production with the aim of preventing surpluses and guaranteeing the stability of prices and incomes.

However, the other side of the coin as regards opting for stability in this way has been less flexibility in access to farming, which particularly penalises young farmers, first of all because of the difficulty in gaining access to quotas, production or premium rights. Secondly, young farmers are penalised as a result of increases in land prices due to the increase in value created by the quota systems.

Furthermore, it is well known that many Member States have not implemented measures that in any way address the concerns of young farmers.

I shall give the example of my own country where, after an initial phase of enthusiasm when we joined the EU, in recent years we have become more sceptical and the activities of the organisations most representative of young farmers have even been penalised.

For this reason we must, as a matter of urgency, adopt certain fundamental measures which are, in fact, in line with the rapporteur' s proposals. These are, specifically, to create special reserves for quotas and production rights solely for young farmers, to increase support for setting up a first farm and investment in farm properties, to establish a special scheme for low-interest loans to supplement other investment aid, to establish conditions for the proper functioning of an early retirement scheme for older farmers, which will speed up the process of renewal and, of course, to adopt training and information measures.

The Commission must now urgently table proposals for measures for action and the Council must adopt them.

Unless this happens, we will be taking an irresponsible attitude that will put the continuity of farming in Europe, with all that this means for our culture, at risk.

To conclude, I wish to thank Neil Parish for his outstanding work on this report.

Mr President, the report deals with a most difficult subject: the prospects for young people in the farming industry, as the rapporteur has indicated, are probably worse than at any time since the creation of the CAP and their prospects cannot be separated from those of the industry as a whole or from the prosperity of the rural communities.

One measure of the complexity of the situation can be found in the courses which are now offered at agricultural colleges.

At the two colleges in my region the number of courses relating to farming has now fallen to 40% in one case, and the remaining 60% of the courses relate to horses and small animals.

Significantly, 70% of the students, however, come from farming families, so there is still that link.

The report spells out that there is a strong case for measures to encourage new entrants to the industry and for achieving a much greater degree of standardisation across the European Union, and the issue, as the rapporteur mentioned, was well dealt with in the excellent STOA report at the beginning of last year.

There are many good examples in that document of the valuable background material which we were able to use during discussions in committee.

Now that the rural development programme is in place it is important to examine how this programme can be used to strengthen training and re-training facilities in our agricultural colleges.

I would emphasise the need for training in farm diversification, including low-volume products for niche markets, and cooperative marketing techniques where, by coming together, individual farms can seek to match the commercial bargaining strength of the supermarket chains.

I would also wish to see such courses paying special attention to the needs of the smaller farm where new entrants are most likely to be found.

I hope that the Commission and the national governments will take note of the many excellent suggestions in this report and thus give a boost to the future prosperity of farming in the rural areas.

Mr President, Commissioner, I should like to congratulate my fellow MEP, Mr Parish, on an extremely good report.

I want to focus upon the small number of young people going into farming in recent years and, at the same time, the unduly large number of people who are also leaving it, because, if young people do not come into the industry, there will come a time when agriculture no longer exists.

I think that the image of farming - due to the many outbreaks of disease, dioxin scandals etc - is, at the moment, one of the really major problems. It puts the whole industry in a negative light and seems unfair to the many farming families who would, of course, get top marks for the way they look after their farms.

It is undoubtedly very important that there should be transparency and that people should be made more aware of production methods and of the modern stalls and cowsheds that now exist, as well as being given information about the common agricultural policy and about the ways in which fields and animals are looked after.

Efforts must be concentrated on providing support - moral, educational and financial.

No one has in recent years questioned the many millions of euros we pump into training lawyers, engineers and doctors.

There is a clear parallel with young farmers who, of course, are responsible for the land and the animals we have and, especially, the food we eat.

Mr President, I also commend Mr Parish for his hard work and the excellent report.

In the brief time I have I wish to stress that one of the greatest difficulties facing young farmers entering the business today is capital and cash-flow problems in the first year of operation.

I am backing this proposal because young people must be given the opportunity to come into the industry on a sound financial footing.

After all, young farmers hold the key to the future of all our rural communities.

The lack of young people entering the agricultural industry in the UK is a very worrying problem.

Statistics show that in Ireland 14.8% of farm owners are under 35, in France the figure is 13.2%, but in the UK it is a mere 6.8%.

I stress that farms are also important employers in our rural communities.

Employment protects our countryside, it keeps our post offices, schools and services open there.

Farming and the viability of farming is the life blood of the future of our rural communities as we know them.

If all small businesses - which includes farmers - were to employ just one more person each, then the whole unemployment situation throughout the European Union would be solved overnight.

Of all the European Union countries, only the UK and the Netherlands do not operate a specific aid scheme for young farmers.

European rural development regulations allow a grant of EUR 16 500 to be made available for people under 40 years of age to establish themselves in a viable farm holding.

Yet the Labour government in the UK has not taken advantage of this excellent scheme.

I therefore fully support making installation aids mandatory across the European Union.

The farming industry needs young blood in order to inject a new vibrancy into an industry which at present is aged and disillusioned.

Young farmers are the future of the farming industry and vital components in urban communities.

I thank Mr Parish for his report and wish his report all the best to ensure that we can follow up these important decisions taken by him in a specific and constructive manner.

Mr President, there has been endless discussion of the role of young people in agriculture, but even today their situation gives little cause for optimism.

It is no coincidence that, after the launching of Agenda 2000, in the current phase of WTO renegotiations and with the now imminent prospect of enlargement, we are still here today debating the future of young farmers, of those young people who, in so many countries in Europe, are placing bets on whether they will be able to remain within the agricultural sector for good.

One of the best solutions can only be to revoke the measures laid down by the CAP.

It is time to evaluate carefully how the distribution of contributions - as, by definition, income support - reaches undertakings able to compete on the global market.

This would make it possible to direct the finances towards a vision which is more targeted towards lowering general costs, encouraging the formation of consortia.

We could also work on the joint farming of lands; after all, this is the change which will mark the evolution of farming.

From this point of view, it is then essential to stipulate that incentives should be provided in the form of reductions in the relevant interest rates for investments made by young farmers.

In this way, we would be implementing the provisions of Regulation 1257 of 1999, which encourages the combining of several actions when they are aimed at bringing about greater use of the resources provided by development plans for rural areas.

I feel that, if this debate were to send out these sorts of signals, we would be able genuinely to start building the framework for a new European agriculture structure based on young people which, most importantly, would certainly not mean abandoning and forgetting those who are seeking possible alternatives in the new environmental and multifunctionality opportunities.

I would like to thank Mr Parish for his excellent work.

Mr President, the Parish report provides a rigorous analysis of an essential issue for the European Community and for those who wish to join the Union.

Young farmers do indeed need urgent attention.

First, because we must support our young people in all areas of activity, and secondly because it is in our interests to keep the rural population, most of whom are connected with agricultural activities, in the countryside.

In approaching this issue, we have to appraise elements that lie at the roots of our social structure, our territorial organisation, our economy, our culture and our civilisation itself.

Many of the problems that affect these farmers are substantially concerned with one of the bases of the dominant economic model in Europe; private land ownership and the forms of land transfer.

This report contains an appeal for institutional action benefiting a specific group and also for the implementation of concrete measures to give rural land ownership a meaningful social function.

In this context, the opinion of the Committee on Culture, Youth, Education, the Media and Sport seems to me highly appropriate when it states that young farmers are not a very homogeneous group.

A distinction must be drawn between students at agricultural schools and colleges, young people who wish to set up in rural areas as an alternative to the urban environment, and the children of farmers.

Even within this last group I would distinguish between those who are the children of farmers who work on the land and those who are descendants of farmers who, from the size of their holdings, are really agricultural businessmen.

While accepting that measures should be taken to reduce charges on inheriting property, I would highlight other actions also mentioned in the Parish report to help make holdings viable, which are based on socio-economic formulas.

I should like to stress another aspect of the report: we must try to ensure that when our future co-Members of the Union incorporate the acquis communautaire they do not bring in hidden habits that hinder the development of the rural environment in their countries.

The change from collectivised farming economies to situations that can be merged with the Community situation may trigger off speculative processes that will artificially raise market prices for land and thus increase young farmers' difficulties in setting up or keeping themselves in the countryside.

This report, Mr President, will certainly be important in so far as we can also disseminate it in our own countries, in the candidate countries, and in particular in the sector it specifically addresses.

Mr President, there is indeed a crisis of succession in farming as Mr Parish with his expertise as a farmer knows well.

If this crisis is particularly acute in Mr Parish's own Member State, it is the direct result of policies pursued by UK governments over the past twenty years, and to overcome it the United Kingdom must review the implications of the Fontainbleau Agreement for its contribution to European Union finances.

This has been disastrous for farming.

Moreover, the rapporteur, a member of the Conservative Party, must work within his own party to secure support for his proposals in the House of Commons.

In countries where less than 10% of the population now lives in rural areas, it is too easy for governments to sideline the needs of these areas, and the message from this debate must be that they do so at the peril of their countries.

Mr President, first of all, I should like to congratulate Mr Neil Parish on the fact that he has produced a report which is based on the farmers' reality, the reality in rural areas, and not on the view from Brussels.

This in itself constitutes a valuable contribution to agricultural policy.

But if we now examine the situation, we could ask ourselves whether there are any young people left out there who are mad enough to become farmers in the European Union.

What we need is people who want to take up the challenge of producing an outstanding achievement, five-legged sheep as it were, but not obtained through genetic modification.

They seem to be fighting a losing battle, if we consider the adversities which young farmers face, as well as the achievements they are expected to deliver.

To quote just one example - and I am just considering my own country for a moment - dairy farming is a sector where absolutely everything is being scrutinised, from the blade of grass right up to the moment that the milk hits the supermarkets.

I cannot help drawing a comparison with arable farmers and horticulturalists who have been required to keep tabs on the implications of their actions on the environment and consumer front for a long time, and do so with great enthusiasm.

At the same time, we have to say that in many European countries the requirements for animal welfare are among the world' s most stringent.

So whoever wants to become a farmer in Europe must outstrip their counterparts elsewhere in the world.

They need to give the landscape and cultural conditions due consideration.

They must apply the strictest consumer conditions, supply a wide range of products, both regionally and in terms of quality, make animal welfare a top priority and be responsible for the product, even once it has left the farm.

This is what we call social enterprising as a top-level sport.

It requires entrepreneurship, a love of nature and the environment, social orientation and perseverance.

For this reason alone, it would be desirable if a specific policy were set up for young farmers which is focused on the future.

Some of the focal points could include a premium scheme linked to quality, landscape and environmental protection, but also the introduction of an eco-tax in other economic sectors, not payable by the farmers but by the consumers, to finance those extra requirements which farmers need to fulfil, and to reinforce the market position of farmers and consumers.

What strikes me in the European Union' s competition policy as a whole, is that although it is enjoying a great deal of attention, in the food sector, for example, the consumers, the supermarkets that is, are gradually gaining a monopoly position, and that at the same time sales from farms, the small-scale dimension, are still fragmented.

In that sense, it would be desirable if both Commissioners Monti and Bolkestein were more critical in their assessment of this area in terms of competition.

Mr President, nobody can survive for one day without food; it is life requirement number one.

This means that food does not just stand for market forces, but also for public health, landscape and nature.

In short, if we realise this, then we will know that, in future, young farmers will need to be five-legged sheep, and in that sense, deserve more support, more political support than they are receiving at the moment.

Mr President, Commissioner, honourable Members, I should like to start by thanking Mr Parish for his serious analysis of the situation of young farmers in Europe.

I ask you, what shall we do when there is no one to take over our farms?

Structural change is important and it is right, but that should not result in a mass exodus from the farming profession.

If we want farming to have a future in Europe, then we must secure its succession.

We are in favour of a multi-functional farming model, i.e. a model whereby farmers are not just responsible for producing food and a large part of their work benefits society as a whole, a society which can take pleasure in seeing nature unspoiled and enjoy rural areas which are worth living in.

The agricultural policy and the policy for the countryside as a whole lives for and from its inhabitants.

We therefore need to create framework conditions which ensure that young people look on the countryside as somewhere worth living in and are willing to continue the farming tradition.

Setting-up aid and investment grants are essential for young farmers, but modern technology has an equally important part to play.

Young farmers need to be as familiar with computers and the Internet as they are with seed and the animals in their stalls.

This means that training and further training for young farmers are becoming more and more important and I, for one, support lifelong learning in farming and among farmers.

Allow me to say a few brief words on the social aspects. Time and again I hear farmers using various arguments to put off leaving their farms to their children or successors.

Letting go is difficult, as I know from personal experience, but it is the only way of ensuring survival.

So I call on the older generations to help the young and to give them and, hence, the whole farming industry the same chance which they had.

Of course, and I say this quite openly as a farmer myself, it is no help when all we hear about is the down side of the profession.

Let us be quite clear about one thing: there is not a single profession which is either all good or all bad.

Finally, I should like to say that it gladdens my heart when I see established and young farmers working together to develop the farm, exchanging experiences and creating and putting innovative ideas into practice.

Their dedication and commitment will be needed in the future even more than ever and we must encourage successive generations to be optimistic and take their future into their own hands.

Mr President, Commissioner, I should like to start by joining in the gratitude expressed to Mr Parish.

I think this is a very constructive own-initiative report.

There is a rather nice saying that the future belongs to the young, but we can turn this around when we talk of European farming and say that, without young farmers, there is no future.

The future of the countryside, and especially the future of young farmers in Europe, does not look good.

The numbers alone should set our alarm bells ringing.

The number of farms in the EU has fallen constantly over recent years.

Of course, we welcome the structural change but, at the same time, the extent of the change does give us cause for concern.

The biggest decrease has been in the number of farmers under the age of 35.

Thank God that young people from farms have the same career prospects as their peer groups and siblings.

The tradition of handing farms down from one generation to the next is disappearing.

The question of what becomes of the older generation left on the farm is often still unanswered.

Unfortunately, farms standing empty have become a familiar sight - even in my country, which I would never have imagined possible.

How many young people want to have to keep making excuses because they are farmers?

Young farmers want fair prices for their products.

It is not because of the subsidies that they choose to be farmers.

The Parish report may help to improve the overall image of young farmers.

The public pays scant attention to the services of farming.

I should like to take this opportunity to thank you, Commissioner Fischler, for repeatedly highlighting the multi-functional task which farming fulfils.

But apparently bad news makes better news.

At the moment, you can read about the current BSE crisis blow by blow.

But no one bothers to mention, for example, that consumer associations in my country have been wantonly campaigning for food at rock bottom prices for years now.

Of course I disapprove of the criminal machinations of the feedingstuffs industry, the lack of controls by the authorities and so forth, but it is all this together which has resulted in the chaos in which more and more members of the profession find themselves.

If you belong to this profession, if you are a farmer, then you will easily understand why young people ask, do I really need this?

With the current BSE situation, it is quite out of order to pillory our farmers and young farmers.

So-called 'good professional practice' has been continually developed by our excellently trained young farmers.

Essential services in the production of foodstuffs and raw materials, the development, further development and preservation of the countryside and the protection of the natural bases for life are all areas in which Europe will need farmers and young farmers in the future.

I should like to close by saying that these young farmers do not just need reliable policies; they also need good wives and strong families.

Only this sort of environment can give them the strength they need to perform their important function in society.

Mr President, I note that the last seven speakers in this debate come from the Group of the European People' s Party, so we have seven people anxious to talk while everybody else has dried up.

It is an indication of the concern of this particular group for the problem we are discussing.

I want to thank Mr Parish for his contribution, the thorough research and the very extensive report he has produced.

I was just thinking of my youth when I was a member of the Young Farmers of Ireland; I started my political career in that organisation.

I remember a plan was produced which was based on two simple things: intensive advice and a little bit of financial incentive.

It was based on the geographic unit of organisation, which was most popular in Ireland, it was a church community called the parish.

So I started off my political life with the parish plan in my hand and today I have another Parish plan.

It is much more comprehensive and, indeed, I have to confess that I do not see as many simple answers to the questions raised in this one as in my Young Farmers' organisation in Ireland 40 years ago.

Something that comes to mind is that we ought not to get carried away with emotion or lead people down the wrong path on this whole subject.

The 1926 census in Ireland found that more than half of the entire population of the country was engaged in agriculture and yet the country did not produce surpluses and there were people short of food.

There are still people harking back to the days when, as an Irish poet said: "every rood of ground maintained its man".

However, we should not imagine that this was an ideal world in which to live.

Over the years, as the number of farms was reduced and farmers became more efficient, food obviously became more available to the poor who could buy it at a lower cost.

The reduced farm numbers have produced a lot of well-being in Europe.

Since Ireland joined the European Union - I only mention Ireland because I am very familiar with what happened obviously, but you can draw lessons for other areas - our many small farms were reduced gradually in number.

If it were not for the common agricultural policy, that would have been very painful.

It was a good thing that the number of farms was reduced and that we had the common agricultural policy to ease that.

We must be concerned about the human problems that arise out of the squeeze-out of excessive labour, but at the same time, we should remember that the cost of food has been reduced.

Emphasis, in the future, must be put on quality, while in my time limitless quantities were needed.

Today we need more quality and we need to consider the environment.

All these are things Mr Parish has underlined.

But we should not offer the prospect of young, energetic people in greater numbers producing the quantity of food that Europe needs today because they will not eat it.

Mr President, could I begin by congratulating Mr Parish on bringing forward a very excellent report.

I know very well that he put a lot of time and effort into it and I am happy it can be debated by Parliament today.

It is a very difficult subject to address and there is no easy solution to the problem of young farmers, as any of us who have any knowledge of the problem and the background would accept.

Of course, everybody likes to say we must help the young farmers.

The problem is when you ask them how to make the help really worthwhile, they are very slow to come forward with answers.

How can you encourage young people onto the land?

You have to address the problem within the situation in which young people find themselves today.

Many young people from rural areas some 20, 30 or 40 years ago, at the time Mr McCartin was speaking about, would naturally have gone on to become young farmers.

Nowadays those young people have many other options open to them.

They look around and they see their friends going into jobs where they may quit working at lunchtime on Friday and not start work again until the Monday morning.

But the young farmer will work seven days a week for very little money.

You only have to look at the financial situation right throughout the European Union at the moment to see that we have a terrible problem here and one that is not going to be easy to address.

The reality is that if you do not get young people into the industry, you will not bring the new ideas in and you will not allow the industry to develop and take on the challenges that it faces in the future, relating not just to the production of food, but to how that food is produced and to ensuring that it is produced in a way the consumer finds acceptable.

It is not enough just to give financial assistance to young farmers because then all you do is put the price of lamb up out of reach.

We in the European Union have brought in milk quotas, we have brought in suckler cow quotas, we have brought in sheep quotas, all now with a financial value that the young farmer could not even begin to contemplate.

So I believe the best way is to make it easier for young farmers to inherit the family farm at an earlier stage, be it through an early retirement scheme or through a bond scheme.

I certainly feel that the European Investment Bank should be encouraged to help young farmers into the industry through the bond scheme.

But, if you are going to bring this scheme in it has to be mandatory and it has to be introduced in every Member State.

It is not enough to introduce it in one Member State alone.

Finally, we are spending a lot of money on rural development and the Commission would do well to look at other ways of spending that money, because, as I see it, we could make better use of it.

We could encourage young farmers, who face so much red tape and bureaucracy now.

Farmers' wives know how to use computers and could use them on the farm.

That is the way forward for the future.

Mr President, I welcome this report.

It certainly highlights the bleak future facing young farmers within the European Union, despite the support provided by the Union and Member States.

The current unfavourable economic climate for farming in general and young farmers in particular, the obvious lack of prospects for young farmers, the decline in the number of full-time farmers and the consequent ageing of those who remain - these are all general trends which underline the problem.

It is clear that we will experience a drastic drop in the number of young farmers over the next couple of decades, unless appropriate and effective measures are put in place now.

Young farmers face enormous problems such as the massive financial burden when they start up and often this can be compounded by difficulties associated with inheritance.

Training is often deficient, and for young people it can be an isolated life in rural areas, with limited social activity in comparison with those of a similar age who work in more urban settings.

All of this begs the question: what can the European Union do?

A European policy aimed at supporting young farmers and linked to the CAP is essential.

Up until now there has been little evaluation of EU assistance measures either by the Member States or the EU Commission.

Greater attention must be given to interest rate subsidies and loans, installation aids and investment grants must be paid more speedily and the implications of enlargement on young farmers need to be considered and integrated into any future policy approach.

Other measures that could be considered are supplementary investment aid for farmers under 40, production rights, assistance with credit terms, better education, training and networking opportunities - one could go on.

But the point I want to make is that we need to do something now.

To take up the point made by Mr Nicholson: why should young people in the Celtic Tiger economy in Ireland remain on the land?

Why should they face an anti-social life?

Why should they be in a career which has economic uncertainty when other occupations offer a much more attractive life, much more security, work from 9 a.m. to 5 p.m., with week-ends off and with long holidays?

That is the problem we have to address and we must address it now.

Mr President, honourable Members, I should like to start by thanking you, Mr Parish, for your earnest report on the situation and perspectives of young farmers in the European Union.

I should also like to thank the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development for its work.

We have endeavoured in Agenda 2000, especially by developing the second pillar, to take account of the concerns of young farmers.

In some organisations of the market, we have at least managed to grant special terms to newly established farmers or young farmers.

I need only mention the sheep premium or the administration of national milk quota reserves or planting rights under the programme to restructure and convert vineyards.

But, without doubt, the real issue here is the future of farming per se, because if young people are no longer prepared to take up farming, then any further debate on agriculture is superfluous.

And, without doubt, the attractiveness of farming also depends a great deal on the political framework conditions which apply to agriculture, not just agricultural policy as a whole, but also the specific terms on which a young person can enter this profession.

Measures to promote rural development are particularly important here.

Agenda 2000 increased the maximum setting-up grant by 66%, meaning that up to EUR 25 000 can now be paid in aid, and loans to finance setting-up costs qualify for interest rate subsidies.

At the same time, the terms governing investments in farming operations include the option of increasing the maximum rate of aid for investments by young farmers within the first five years of starting up.

These aid rates may be as high as 45% and, in disadvantaged areas, as much as 55%.

Apart from this specific aid for young farmers, there are, of course, all the other forms of aid which young farmers can claim just as any other farmer can.

On balance, the rules for promoting the development of the countryside are extremely flexible but, according to the principle of subsidiarity, it is up to the Member States to implement them.

The Member States are responsible for deciding what priority should be given to promoting young farmers.

Finally, I should also like to point out - and several Member States have already gone for this option - that the early retirement scheme, the eligible sums for which have again been raised under Agenda 2000, can be linked to setting-up aid for young farmers.

The Commission, like Parliament, feels that we need adequate statistics if we are to make better policy assessments.

The information which the Commission compiles via the information network of agricultural accounts and structural surveys should, in fact, suffice in order to analyse the situation of young farmers and I do not think that we need, nor does it make sense to set up a new database especially for young farmers.

What we do need is for the assessments in question to be made available.

The Commission services are currently working with the Member States evaluating the arrangements for which provision is made in the earlier 1997 regulation, especially with reference to young farmers.

I am sure that we shall glean some useful facts from this exercise, but I must point out that we shall be unable to submit an initial assessment of the programmes still being examined by next year because we quite simply do not have the necessary data.

The Member States are able to amend plans to develop the countryside, especially in order to take account of the results of interim assessments.

The Commission does not intend to introduce any new Community initiatives now; it prefers to keep to the seven-year term prescribed in the Agenda and the relevant legislation.

But we must not forget that the young and women are priority target groups under the LEADER + Community initiative and that the assessment system which the Member States need to work out in order to select pilot projects needs to take account of this focus in Community policy.

Many of the questions addressed in the report and the motion for a resolution, such as land prices or the availability of farmland or inheritance tax or the tax status of farms, are matters for which the Member States alone are responsible.

However, despite a great deal of criticism, the Commission will examine the conclusions of the Parish report within the limits of its powers and right of initiative in a bid to help improve the conditions of establishment for young farmers and revive the countryside.

Thank you very much, Commissioner Fischler.

The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon.

(The sitting was suspended until Question Time at 5.25 p.m. and resumed at 5.30 p.m.)

The next item is Questions to the Commission (B5-0001/2001).

Subject: Abolition of extradition between Spain and Italy Spain and Italy recently signed a treaty on the prosecution of terrorism-related crime, trafficking in human beings, etc., which abolishes extradition and sets up a common area of freedom, security and justice between two Member States for the first time.

Furthermore, the European Parliament recently agreed that EU institutions should be able to adopt effective measures to combat terrorism, particularly as regards search and capture orders within Europe.

Is the Commission ready to push forward with measures to give effect to what Parliament has agreed with respect to combating terrorism and the issuing of search and capture orders in particular?

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the Commission gave a commitment to respond to the request made at the Tampere European Council to draw up legislative proposals to replace the formal extradition process with a simple procedure for transferring persons who have been convicted and who try to escape justice.

At the last Justice and Home Affairs Council, held on 30 November 2000, I expressed the Commission' s sympathy with Member States who face the problem of terrorism and, in particular, with Spain, and I was delighted to welcome the bilateral agreement concluded between Spain and Italy.

On that occasion, I announced that in the course of 2001, the Commission would submit proposals on three essential points for the Council' s consideration.

Firstly, there will be a proposal on common definitions, incriminations and sanctions for crimes involving terrorism.

Secondly fast-track extradition procedures between Member States will be introduced.

Thirdly, we will submit a proposal on the creation of an instrument known as the European search and capture order.

The Commission has already called a meeting of national experts in these fields, which will be held in the next few days, on the basis of a working paper that is being drawn up to present the proposals that I have just mentioned.

I wish to reiterate the Commission' s commitment, using all its powers under the Treaties, to encourage tougher European action against terrorism, an issue that will be given great prominence in the Commission' s work programme for 2001, which will shortly be discussed in this House.

I must say that I am pleased with the Commission' s reply and positive attitude to seek formulas and implement measures that can effectively control the worst enemy of freedom and democracy: terrorism.

But what is the problem, Commissioner?

The problem is the urgent need to lay down some concrete deadlines for these measures to be implemented as quickly as possible.

As you know, Commissioner, the European Parliament has urged that the European search and capture order should be pushed ahead as an instrument providing the necessary flexibility and speed to facilitate the capture, prosecution and sentencing of those who in European territory are violating the most fundamental right of all; the right to life.

It would be a real aberration if in the new European Union area of freedom, security and justice the law served precisely to support those who committed such a despicable crime.

I wish to begin by saying that I share Mr Mollar' s sense of urgency.

Urgency is indeed crucial in this matter.

I would say that the most urgent need is for all Member States to approve and ratify the 1995 and 1996 conventions on extradition.

That is urgency is most vital.

Secondly, on the European search and capture order, as you will see in the 2001 work programme, we shall have very concrete dates and deadlines for the Commission to present its proposals.

I can guarantee that 2001 will be a turning point in the fight against terrorism, which is a fight shared by all European countries, not as a problem for a single State but as a threat to freedom, security and justice throughout the European Union.

Subject: Women persecuted without asylum or refuge In some countries women suffer cruel persecution and punishment, basic human rights violations which may involve mutilation and may cost them their lives.

In many cases, this is a consequence of the application of fundamentalist laws or the carrying-out of ancestral practices and traditions.

The European Union says that it intends to protect women from such unacceptable persecution and punishment, but it has not yet found a way of translating its declarations into political actions and decisions offering grounds for hope.

Would the Commission be in favour of putting forward proposals whereby such situations afflicting women might be considered grounds for granting asylum and refuge, in political terms, in the European Union?

I wish to say in response to Mrs Izquierdo Rojo' s question that refugee status is governed throughout the world by the 1951 Geneva Convention and the 1967 Protocol relating to the Status of Refugees.

At European level, a non-binding common position of 4 March 1996 adopted under the Maastricht Treaty applies; this relates to uniform application of the term "refugee" under the terms of Article 1 of the 1951 Geneva Convention. However, there is no uniform application of the definition of the term "refugee" throughout Member States.

Neither the 1951 Convention nor the European Union texts make specific reference to issues concerning requests made by women, specifically women whose human rights have been violated, with particular reference to gender-related abuse, such as sexual violence, genital mutilation or fundamental legal discrimination on the grounds of their gender.

With the entry into force of the Treaty of Amsterdam, the Union now has, following Tampere, a mandate to adopt common minimum rules in the field of asylum and refugee protection, with a view, in the medium term, to adopting a common European asylum system.

The Commission intends to table specific proposals in relation to some of these in the course of 2001.

These proposals will take account of the specific circumstances of women who have been victims of abuse and mistreatment.

Indeed, the Commission has already begun to develop actions designed to address the specific circumstances of these women.

An example of this is the proposal for a directive on providing temporary protection in the event of a mass influx of displaced persons, which we presented on 24 May last year.

In this proposal, under the terms of Article 11(4), Member States are obliged to provide appropriate medical assistance or other forms of assistance to women who have been victims of torture, rape or other serious forms of psychological, physical or sexual violence.

By the same token, the Commission' s proposal on minimum standards to apply to the process of granting and withdrawing refugee status, which the Commission adopted on 20 September 2000, contains various provisions addressing the specific needs of women, such as Article 4(4), which lays down that women have the right to present a request for asylum separately from their husband, or Article 3(8), which enshrines the principle of an independent and separate interview for women when presenting a request for asylum. There is also Article 7(8), which gives women the right to have a different interviewer or interpreter if they feel inhibited about explaining the reasons for their request for asylum due to the fact that the interviewer or interpreter is male, particularly in situations of sexual abuse and, finally, Article 14(1)(c), which lays down the obligation on Member States to guarantee that staff interviewing persons in a vulnerable situation are given the necessary basic training to deal with the specific problems of these women.

The Commission also intends to propose measures concerning persons with special needs in its proposal for a directive on reception conditions for asylum seekers, which will be presented in the first quarter of this year.

With regard to the specific issue of gender-related persecution forming the basis of the asylum request, the Commission has already embarked on extensive consultation on this matter and we hope that in the course of this year we will be able to draw the necessary conclusions to present to Parliament and the Council a proposal for subsidiary protection that would also cover this type of situation.

Thank you, Mr Vitorino, because I understand that the Commission intends to submit proposals.

I should like to say that, in the last decade of the century that has just finished, both the Vienna Conference and subsequently the Beijing Conference opened up new horizons so that we can bear in mind the very real situation in which women suffer in numerous countries, but I believe the Commissioner understands the question Mrs Izquierdo has raised and I am grateful that he is to make this kind of proposal.

As they deal with the same subject, Questions Nos 27 and 28 will be taken together.

Subject: European chemical industry The carbohydrates industry employs some 8 500 people.

However, even with the export refund applicable in previous years, the competitive disadvantage to the European chemical industry is demonstrated by the fact that four European production units have already been closed down and six new production units have been set up by European companies in third countries, with the adverse consequences of loss of direct and indirect employment (farmers) and a loss of outlets for European agricultural products.

What will the Commission do to reverse this trend?

Subject: Export refunds in the starch industry The carbohydrates industry uses 1.2 million tons of starch/glucose produced from 2 million tons of cereals grown on an average of 400 000 hectares.

Does the Commission realise that, by withdrawing the export refund entitlement for chemical products derived from agricultural raw materials, it has further seriously impaired the competitiveness of the European chemical industry which is already deprived of the economies of scale enjoyed by the glucose suppliers of its US counterparts as a result of the EU quota system for isoglucose and the lack of an ethanol programme in the EU?

Mr President, honourable Members, the Community chemical industry did indeed stop receiving export refunds at the end of July last year for agricultural raw materials such as starch, glucose and sugar, which are processed for export.

This measure is part of a series of provisions for so-called non-Annex I products which was decided by the Council of agricultural ministers in March last year, since when exports of these products have been subject to budgetary discipline in accordance with the agreement decided within the WTO.

However, these products still receive enough compensation to be able to compete with similar products on the world market.

It is therefore highly unlikely that imports will rise, because the price of agricultural raw materials used by the chemical industry will, de facto, be reduced to world market prices, that is, free-port prices in the Union.

As expressly requested when these measures were discussed, the Commission is closely monitoring the market, including the export market, and the budgetary situation in this sector.

I thank the Commissioner for his answer but would ask the Commission to explain the obvious lack of coherence between its and the Council's politically declared will to promote the biotechnological industry and the measures taken, which endanger the very existence of this industry.

May I point out to the honourable Member that the question at issue here is the terms on which European industry obtains the raw materials which it uses to manufacture specific industrial products.

In theory, our starting point is the competitiveness of European industry, and it is competitive if it can obtain the raw materials which it processes on the same terms as the rest of the world.

I fail to see why any additional aid should be needed.

In any event, we can only support the agricultural aspect of this whole question with our organisations of the agricultural markets.

We are not here to use funds earmarked for agriculture to support the chemical industry.

It is our job, in line with the objectives of the Treaty, to support the agricultural aspect, i.e. to give European farmers the chance to get the products which they produce on to the market.

I do not think that there is a difference of opinion on the question whether we would like to see a chemical industry subsidised on the basis of the agricultural policy.

What is important, however - as transpired last year - is that on the basis of the budget discipline considerations, and other considerations, this option was not available for a while. That is point one.

Point two is that industry has been making distinct noises to the effect that the existing discrepancies are forming an obstacle, and so are costs incurred in processing. These aspects very much form part of the European agricultural policy.

Alongside this, it cannot be denied that producers of vegetable products in the European Union are going through a rough time at the moment.

In that sense, every kilogram of extra sale to the chemical industry is a welcome bonus, especially when producers can prove that they are having to produce against a higher cost price after all.

I would still like to ask the Commissioner, based on a real cost-price analysis for companies in Europe and elsewhere, also taking into consideration the genetically modified aspect, to again cast a critical eye over whether these regulations outside the scope of active improvement could not, in fact, be applied more forcefully.

Yes, of course we can check if there is any other sales potential, but I must stress that certain limits must be kept to, even in the area of agricultural aid because, in the final analysis, all the products being addressed here, sugar and starch alike, are subject to quotas and aid is granted within the framework of those quotas.

We cannot subsidise more huge quantities now because we do not have the funds.

Aid to agriculture must be granted within the framework of the maximum quotas agreed in the organisations of the market.

We cannot simply extend the quotas.

Subject: Coordinated approach to the financial repercussions of the BSE crisis According to Commissioner Franz Fischler, the European ban on meat-and-bone meal will cost approximately EUR 4.5 billion.

There is still great uncertainty surrounding compensation for the losses incurred.

This means that the financial measures due to expire may create distortions of competition between the 15 EU Member States.

Does the Commission support a coordinated European approach to the financial repercussions of the BSE crisis, given that the financial measures taken by the national and regional authorities that are now due to expire are leading to the distortion of competition between the 15 EU Member States?

If not, why is the Commission against a coordinated approach?

Mr President, honourable Members, we need to differentiate in our assessment of the financial repercussions of the BSE crisis between veterinary measures, Community measures taken within the context of the common organisation of the market in beef and national measures.

As far as Community action in this area is concerned, may I draw the honourable Member's attention to the series of measures recently introduced to support the beef market.

Both aid for private storage and public intervention have been introduced and are being funded 100% by the Community.

A special culling regulation for animals over thirty months old has also been introduced.

Seventy per cent of the value of the animal is paid for by the Community, while Member States are required to pay the other 30%, together with the culling costs.

Any Member State which intends to take national measures must, of course, report them to the Commission and the Commission constantly checks what is going on in order to discourage distortions of competition.

Any Member State wishing to grant aid in order to mitigate the consequences of the BSE crisis must notify the Commission of the aid arrangements in accordance with Article 88, paragraph 3, of the Treaty - as I have already mentioned - so that they can be checked to ensure that they comply with Community framework arrangements.

Commissioner, all of this is, of course, music to my ears.

Naturally, I would like to thank you for your response and the clarification as well as the distinction you have drawn between national measures on the one hand and Community measures on the other.

In practice, however, I have noticed that all hell has broken loose, not just in my own country but - I assume - in other countries too.

Our own regional Minister for Agriculture in the Flanders Region, Mrs Dua, has mentioned levies on meat.

Others have mooted the idea of an increase in VAT, others still would like to pass the buck to Europe.

All I can see is a great deal of chaos and insecurity in my country.

Despite the fact that, apparently, the Commission will have to be notified of such measures, there is a great deal of concern among farmers, and also amongst those in the meat-processing industry, and certainly among our local butcher shops, who, at the end of the day, will have to take the first blow.

Would it indeed not be preferable to harmonise the compensation or the way in which the costs will be met, at the time that all tests need to be carried out, in advance rather than afterwards, thus ruling out any distortion of competition?

Your response in this matter is somewhat disappointing, in my opinion.

Mr President, the honourable Member may well be disappointed with my reply but if what he says is correct, i.e. that statements by local politicians have caused confusion in his region, in Flanders, then it is up to the same local politicians to clarify the matter.

They cannot expect the European Commission to do it for them.

I have one more comment to make on a point that was raised.

Where, as the honourable Member mentioned, a Member State introduces fiscal or parafiscal measures, such as value added tax surcharges, then any such measures must, of course, be taken within the framework of existing legislation, i.e. they must be compatible with European tax directives, and any measures taken must be checked by the Commission accordingly.

But it is also the job and the responsibility of the individual Member States to announce regional measures.

In other words, Member States must not only announce measures taken at national level; they must make known and report all measures taken.

Subject: Export of mining waste During the 1980s, the Swedish mining company Boliden exported a large quantity of toxic waste to Arica in Chile for treatment and recycling.

The waste was subsequently left in an open landfill site with the result that heavy metals seeped into the surrounding environment, causing the local population serious health problems.

In Chile, demands have been made for the waste to be shipped back to Sweden.

Does the Commission consider that this particular export complied with the existing rules in this area?

Does the Commission consider that Boliden now bears any responsibility for resolving the situation?

Shipments of waste, including shipments to and from the Community, are governed by Regulation 259/93.

This regulation replaced Directive 84/631 on the transfrontier shipment of hazardous waste.

This revision incorporated the provisions of the 1989 Basle Convention on movements of hazardous wastes into Community legislation.

As from 1 January 1998, the Community has therefore banned all shipments of hazardous wastes to be used for material recycling or to be deposited in countries outside the OECD.

The Community therefore complies with the 1995 amendment to the Basle Convention which has not yet come into force internationally.

This legislation is not, however, applicable to exports of waste from the Swedish mining company, Boliden to Chile during the 1980s because Sweden was not an EU Member at that time.

Furthermore, the provisions of the Basle Convention did not apply in the 1980s.

In this specific case, the Commission believes that there is no Community legislation which can now make the company liable for possible environmental damage due to these waste products.

The issue of Boliden' s liability in this case therefore remains a national issue which must be resolved through national environmental legislation.

I naturally appreciate that this is how matters stand, that is to say that there is not at present any legislation which may be used in this context.

Nonetheless, what we have here is an example of an unusually cynical trade in which hazardous waste that causes serious illnesses, especially among children in the area, is exported to a country which is unable to deal with it.

My question is: if something similar were to happen today, that is to say if an attempt were made to export waste in this way, would the rules mean that exports of this kind were totally banned?

The answer to that question is yes.

There is currently a ban on exporting hazardous waste, including to third countries, that is to say non-EU countries.

Subject: Spanish national hydrological plan: citizens call for the Commission to intervene More than 80 000 objections to the draft national hydrological plan have already been lodged during the consultation stage for those affected.

Objections have been submitted by ecological organisations, who complain that many of the works planned under the scheme will affect areas declared as sites of Community interest by the Spanish Government, seriously threatening protected species, by trade unions and farmers' associations, who stress the negative aspects of the plan and propose a thorough revision, and by many local authorities, who have drawn attention to the inconsiderate planning of some of the diversions and their social and economic consequences for people living in the areas concerned. All these social agents have expressed the wish that the Commission should take up a position on the plan and should contact the Spanish Government urging it to correct its negative aspects.

Can the Commission specify its position on the matter and say what conclusions it draws from any contacts it has had with the Spanish Government to date in relation to the plan?

Mr President, at the initiative of the Spanish Minister, Mr Matas, we held a meeting where he presented the main elements of the Spanish draft plan hidrológico nacional.

The plan is, at this stage, a draft which is likely to be subject to modifications following the wide consultation under way involving a wide range of stakeholders.

The Spanish Minister for the Environment has confirmed his commitment to this consultation.

At the meeting, I brought to the attention of the Spanish authorities the need to ensure full respect for all relevant EC environmental legislation and policy including the water framework directive.

This applies both to the formal adoption procedure of the final plan as well as the implementation phase.

The plan remains a draft document and at the request of the Spanish Environment Minister my services are currently examining the draft plan.

Yes, Commissioner, it is a draft document, and you know that it will soon be going through the Spanish Parliament.

Considering that this draft, as presented, infringes specific European directives, both the habitats directive and the wild birds directive, and also the objectives of the water framework directive, my question is this: if the final law still infringes these directives, if it is harmful to the environment, will it receive the announced EUR 1 300 billion in resources from Community funds?

Of course the whole process that we have now started of consultation and dialogue with the Spanish Government on this particular case means that we intend to get all the information necessary for us to be well informed about this process and to make sure that the Spanish Government complies with the legislation.

You have already identified some of the directives affected by this.

If there were a breach of the environmental legislation, we could actually withhold project money.

It is very important that today we have this possibility and, of course, we should not hand out money for a Member State to breach environmental legislation.

We plan to stay in touch with the Spanish Government to make sure that their plans are in line with the existing directives.

I believe that the Spanish hydrological plan - at this stage there cannot be the slightest doubt of this - is an essential project for our country.

This has, until now, been the opinion shared by almost all Spanish political groups over the years.

In fact, in 1993, the Socialist government was already aware of this need and drew up a proposal which at the time it either could not or did not know how to carry forward.

True, that proposal contained an appreciably larger number of infrastructures than the current project.

Of course, the years have passed and the current project has to be coherent, involving much more social cohesion than those that have gone before, being much more environmentally sensitive, and undoubtedly inviting more participation.

So, as it is such an important project for the joint development of the Spanish regions, I am sure that the comment, promise or statement that the Minister for the Environment has made on several occasions that this is an open document, that this is a draft, a proposal, and that the need for a consensus on it among all the regions affected is absolutely beyond doubt, my question, Commissioner, is as follows: in the framework of the closest cooperation between the Commission and the Spanish Government, and within the situations laid down in the framework directive, precisely what support can the Commission provide so that this project can progress as it should?

Mr President, at this stage, of course, what we are doing is having an exchange of information.

We make sure that we are well informed about what is happening in Spain.

I can only repeat that the Spanish Minister of Environment has confirmed his commitment to this consultation process and I know that this is what is going on at the moment and that there is a debate - as I understand, a heated debate - on this issue.

So far, since the plan is not finalised we have been asked for some advice and guidance, and this is what we can deliver at the moment: to stay in a genuine dialogue with the Spanish Government and to make sure that the consultation process is carried out as it should be.

Subject: Action being taken by the Commission to increase coordination of fire protection in EU Member States The EU's strategies for fire safety are inadequate.

In particular, recent disasters such as the tunnel fire in Austria as well as earlier fires in restaurants, hotels and ships, etc. highlight the importance of better coordination of fire safety policy in the EU.

Increased integration between the Member States means that common strategies need to be identified in these areas of fire safety as well.

At the Commission, there is to my knowledge no coordination between Directorates and no Commissioner seems to have overall responsibility for these issues.

Fire safety touches on many policy areas such as tourism, environmental and consumer issues, transport networks, etc. People must be able to feel safe wherever they are in the EU.

What action is the Commission taking to increase the coordination of fire protection strategies in EU Member States?

I really must thank you for your answer.

Obviously, a good deal of progress has nonetheless been made in this area.

I have no intention whatsoever of removing responsibility for these fire safety issues from national or local authorities. The principle of subsidiarity must, of course, apply in this area, just as in other areas.

I ask this question partly against the background of the numerous discussions I have had with firemen and their trade unions, who are quite worried.

Just like the public, they are, in fact, affected more and more by cross-border factors.

Firemen have to work with ever more vessels, vehicles and products from countries with which they are unfamiliar and whose levels of fire protection they are not used to.

People travel more and more and naturally want to be able to feel safe irrespective of what country they are in when they take a ferry, travel through a tunnel or go to a discotheque.

Against this background, I believe it is especially important not only for each Directorate to deal with these fire safety issues but also for there to be real coordination where this strategic common responsibility is concerned.

I interpret the Commissioner' s statement here to the effect that there is now just such a coordinating working party as a step in that direction and, that being the case, I should just like to thank her for her answer.

It is, of course, easy for me to agree with Mr Färm about these viewpoints. There ought to be a way in to these issues in the Commission too.

However, it is not entirely easy because we are also dealing with states of affairs which differ considerably from one country to another and in which systems are often devolved to the greatest possible degree to local level.

Consequently, it can be difficult to issue recommendations and still more difficult to issue a directive which would, as it were, be applicable everywhere and clarify all these various aspects.

As I said in my first speech, we are nonetheless attempting to coordinate matters as far as we can.

We are also trying to see if we can obtain similar standards in all Member States and ensure that we coordinate our own efforts.

A lot can be improved now that we have a civil protection division, specifically with overall responsibility of this kind.

We must continue with the somewhat laborious process of reviewing special provisions relating to buildings under construction, discotheques, boats and what have you, with a view to ensuring that we become better and more effective at coordinating our fire prevention efforts.

May I draw the Commissioner's attention, as on other occasions I have drawn Parliament's attention to the fact that, in cases of disasters such as fire, flood or earthquake, what is needed is fast State intervention to tackle the problem and, more importantly, save lives.

Local authorities can never manage on their own.

What we need is a collaboration plan between all the local rescue units so that, if one country suffers an earthquake, flood or fire, the forces from all the countries which are not affected can rush to the scene and at least save lives.

Have you considered this as an idea which could be promoted with good results?

Subject: Control of the primrose willow The primrose willow, a plant native to South America, is proliferating alarmingly in all parts of France.

Every wet place is affected, including, as far as Loire-Atlantique is concerned, the Brière, Brivet, Goulaine, and Redon marshes, the Grand Lieu lake, the Mazerolles plains, and so forth.

The primrose willow is now spreading extremely rapidly and, despite the efforts of numerous volunteers, can no longer be contained by uprooting.

The resulting situation is posing a serious ecological problem and greatly inconveniencing those entitled to use the land.

What technical and financial measures will the Commission take to halt this nuisance?

Mr President, this question concerns the primrose willow.

This particular plant, as the honourable Member has mentioned, is a particular problem in wetlands and the management of wetlands, is of course the responsibility of the Member States.

However the Commission can help in two ways.

Firstly, within the limits of its remit, it can encourage an exchange of information between local players who have the same problem.

You may for example be aware of the initiatives taken by the Mediterranean Environment Agency or by the Landes general council, Acquitaine region, which recently organised a meeting on how to manage the primrose willow.

Secondly, Community funds, in particular the Structural Funds, and the LIFE instrument could be used to aid the management of the primrose willow in respect of Natura 2000 sites.

It would, of course, be up to applicants to propose actions in accordance with the normal rules of eligibility.

I listened closely and I would like to thank you for your answer.

I would also have liked to know if it would be possible to grant this plant 'harmful' or 'of no market value' status because the problem with the primrose willow is that it is sold widely for use in aquaria and when people get rid of their tanks it escapes into the environment, causing these problems.

If we could, therefore, ban it from sale, I believe that this would help to stop it spreading.

It is still within the competence of the Member States and, of course, they have to decide what to do or what kind of action to take.

It would be very radical to try to ban a certain plant.

Any action and any plans have to start at local level.

What we can do is to provide some advice and links to others who have the same problem.

Mr President, we are always so surprised when the balance of nature is upset.

What I should like to ask is whether we could investigate why the balance has been upset under European research programmes?

I wish I could answer that question.

I can say that the right way to deal with this problem of the Ludwigia grandiflora, which is its Latin name, is to discuss this during the technical days which are being organised on 23 and 24 January.

It is a conference for those who are concerned about these things.

Perhaps you will be able to get some more information about this primrose willow and the way it has spread in an unnatural way.

That is the only advice I can give today.

We will continue to gather information and hopefully be able to link all those concerned with this issue.

Subject: Assessment of the interim report by the UK Nuclear Installations Inspectorate on BNFL Has the Commission assessed the interim report prepared by the UK Nuclear Installations Inspectorate on progress made by BNFL in implementing the improvements NII required in safety and management structures at Sellafield, in so far as the operations at Sellafield adversely affect other Member States?

In February 2000 the Nuclear Installations Inspectorate, the British regulatory body, published a report on aspects relating to the activities of British Nuclear Fuels Limited at the Sellafield Plant.

This British regulatory body recently published a revised interim report on the progress made by BNFL.

Following the February recommendations, the Commission' s services are also studying this second interim report.

In addition, the Commission knows that, since the revised report was published in November the British regulatory body has been satisfied with the way in which BNFL has dealt, for example, with the 15 recommendations in the report specific to the demonstration plant, and that these recommendations have been closed, as they say in the nuclear industry, which means they are considered to have been complied with.

The Commission observes that the British regulatory body appreciates the effort and commitment displayed by BNFL with respect to its concerns and also that significant progress has been made (I am quoting directly) regarding its other recommendations in the February report.

Much still remains to be done, however, since in November 2000 only 3 of the inspection team' s 28 recommendations had been formally closed.

Nevertheless, the British regulatory body has recognised that many of the measures already introduced by the company will still need time to take effect fully.

In the words of the Nuclear Installations Inspectorate, British Nuclear Fuels Limited has made a good start, but it must keep up the spirit of change while it continues to operate its plants safely.

Mrs Ahern, ladies and gentlemen, the Commission appreciates the progress made and shares the inspectors' desire to see a steady drive towards an improved safety culture at all levels of management, and, of course, within my competences, or rather in this field, my non-competences, I shall keep a watching brief on what is happening at Sellafield.

I wish to thank Mrs de Palacio for studying the situation and for saying that she was keeping a watching brief.

However, I cannot agree that compliance with 3 out of 20 recommendations is progress.

In the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy, the chief inspector of the UK Nuclear Installations Inspectorate said quite clearly that he would shut the reprocessing facility if the recommendations were not complied with in full.

Clearly they have not been complied with in full.

We can argue about progress being swift or slow, but we have to see compliance in full.

I hope Mrs de Palacio that you will state here today that you wish to see compliance in full with the recommendations and swiftly, because that is what I want to hear.

I also referred to the adverse affects on other Member States, namely the Republic of Ireland, and would like to draw the Commissioner's attention to a report published by the Radiological Protection Institute of Ireland in December 2000, which is critical of emissions from Sellafield and their adverse effect on the Republic of Ireland.

I would ask you to study that in full also, Mrs de Palacio.

Of course I shall ask straight away for this document that you have mentioned to be analysed too, if it is not being examined already, and if we do not have it, which would be strange, may I ask you to provide us with a copy.

In any case, we would, of course, like to see compliance as soon as possible with all the recommendations - not just 3, but all 28 - on the part of British Nuclear Fuels in its operations and activities at Sellafield, and it is obvious that if it does not carry out all these recommendations, as the British Government has already said, they will have to take decisions in that respect.

I must remind you that what I can undertake to do, as I have already said, is to keep a very close watch, but competences in this field are still national, and I know that the British authorities are taking a very firm stand on this whole question.

I tabled a question to the Commission in October on the environmental hazards posed by DU, depleted uranium 238, shells in the Balkans and suggested that some of the emergency aid package to Serbia should be dedicated to investigating and, if proven, making good the toxic and radioactive damage possibly posed to the people of Kosovo.

Commissioner Patten rather surprisingly replied that this was not a priority.

In view of the recent EU-wide publicity and concerns expressed about DU shells and the hazards posed by the dust in particular if inhaled by soldiers and civilians, particularly children playing in the vicinity of where there has been bomb damage, have the Commissioner's views changed since then?

The question on British Nuclear Fuels Limited is not relevant and not supplementary and therefore lapses.

Subject: Modal shift from road transport to rail transport and climate change Transport is of enormous relevance to the debate on climate change, as it is the source of 26% of the current CO2 emissions where road transport accounts for 84% of all transport.

Recent forecasts suggest that transport is likely to represent the source with the highest increase rate in CO2 emissions in the next few years.

Liberalisation of rail freight transport and increased interoperability of the rail system are important but insufficient steps towards the promotion of rail transport, the most important alternative transport mode to road.

How is the Commission planning to support investment in rail transport, mainly within the framework of the forthcoming White Paper on Transport Policy, Guidelines for the TENS, and the Green Paper on Urban Transport?

Is the Commission planning to review current priority or non-priority road projects within the TENs framework so as to give preference to more sustainable transport modes?

Can the Commission indicate the share of investment per mode of transport in the framework of the Structural Funds' Programming Period 2000-2006?

At the beginning of next month the Commission expects to approve a White Paper on the common transport policy, which will be accompanied by a review of guidelines on the trans-European transport network and possibly other initiatives to promote less polluting and more efficient transport systems.

These initiatives are intended to combat growing congestion, negative environmental effects, our over-dependence on oil and the high number of road accidents.

The Commission is drawing up a set of economic measures regulating infrastructures to favour greater use of those transport modes that still have available capacity and are less harmful to the environment.

The intended aim is to give a boost to new technologies and to encourage greater cooperation between transport modes.

To this end, the review of trans-European networks will be carried out in two stages.

The first stage will focus on a few priority topics, emphasising the encouragement of rail freight transport.

In the second stage, which is expected to begin before 2004, a more profound review of the guidelines will be conducted, looking especially at the enlargement of the Union and the environment, and the principal multi-mode transport routes will be determined.

The Commission' s guidelines concerning the Structural Fund programmes for 2000-2006 recommend that priority should be given to intermodal transport.

The Commission will present a communication to show how these guidelines have been taken into account.

I wanted to ask a supplementary question but I am afraid that I am going to have to return to the two parts of my question which have not been addressed.

I asked if the Commission was planning to review current priority or non-priority road projects within the trans-European networks framework so as to give preference to more sustainable transport modes.

That part of my question has not been answered.

Secondly, I wanted the Commission to indicate the share of investment per mode of transport in the framework of the Structural Funds programme period 2000 to 2006.

You may say that it is not possible, but I think you could at least give a rough estimate.

Mrs McKenna, I must tell you that with regard to trans-European networks right now priority is being given de facto to rail projects, if that is what you are concerned about.

The major part - the investments - corresponds to large rail projects.

Secondly, what is intended in this White Paper - in which we shall have the opportunity to discuss all these issues in great depth, and in which problems of charging and the competitiveness of the various modes of transport, etc., will also appear - is precisely to make progress in sorting out bottlenecks, which does not mean that in some cases we shall not have to think about enhancing certain road infrastructures.

What is also intended is a greater use of transport modes such as river or coastal transport, and what is intended, above all, is to facilitate the integration of the transport system, because in the end, sooner or later, roads always seem to come into it to guarantee the 'door to door' factor, which is a decisive element.

This means intermodality, interconnection platforms, and also interoperability in freight systems too.

As for the sums for the 2000-2006 period, I frankly cannot give you the exact figures.

What I can tell you is that at the moment more than 50% is already being earmarked for projects that have to do with the rail sector.

Subject: Supply of energy and nuclear energy The Commission has just adopted a Green Paper on the security of energy supply.

This document gives fresh encouragement to the nuclear industry, while at the same time the Commission' s estimates suggest a progressive reduction of the proportion of energy consumption supplied by nuclear power, down from the current 15% to 6% by 2030.

Civil society is rejecting the promotion of nuclear power as an alternative to fossil fuels.

Is the Commission considering increasing the proportion of energy consumption supplied by nuclear power?

If so, up to what level?

How does it think it will be able to finance the development of renewable energy?

How does it plan to use nuclear industry profits as an additional source of funding for renewable energy?

Does it not consider it advisable, and indeed necessary, to redirect the financial resources now allocated to the promotion of nuclear research, including research into nuclear fusion, into the promotion of renewable energy?

To Mrs Isler Béguin' s question on renewable and nuclear energies, I should like to answer first of all that, at the moment, the priority is to encourage an increase in the use of renewable energies.

In no document, or anywhere else, have I shown that I favour the use of nuclear energy.

In the Green Paper - which you can get hold of - what emerges quite clearly is the increase in support, incentives and all kinds of backing for the use of renewable energies.

A result of this is the discussion on the directive on the use of green electricity - electricity from renewable sources - or our collaboration with the Directorate-General for Competition on the question of the processing of aid to these kinds of sectors.

Secondly, the Green Paper also puts forward the possibility of using some kinds of compensation or crossed subsidies from the usual or traditional energy sources - coal, oil, gas, nuclear energy, or all of them together - to provide support for renewable energies.

Lastly, in any case, in addition to this aid for renewable energies, which I believe is essential and is put forward not just as a statement but as an objective - and remember that for the first time concrete objectives tailored to each individual Member State are being proposed, and this is being done in the green electricity directive - I consider it vital to maintain support for research in the nuclear sector, especially into matters of safety, storage and waste treatment (because burying it is not a solution), or into alternative issues such as the fusion system.

Commissioner, the reason I ask this question is simply because my fellow Members in the European Parliament have been working for 15 years for renewable energy to be taken into account.

The Commission is beginning to incorporate it, but renewable energy is apparently continuing to be viewed as a back-up supply rather than as the energy of the future.

The facts are clear, and the view is expressed that funding is not sufficient, especially compared with levels of investment made in the past for other forms of energy.

On the other hand, nuclear energy and nuclear-based electricity, which does not produce any greenhouse gas, were widely promoted as part of the fight against the greenhouse effect, and it was basically asserted that nuclear energy could be seen as an alternative to combat the greenhouse effect.

Therefore, this is why we asked the question, to see if the Commission is still on the same wavelength, in wishing to continue to develop renewable energy in both the European Union, and elsewhere in the world, and not just as a backup energy source.

Mrs Isler Béguin, I should love to be able to say that we could supply all our energy requirements from renewable energies, but, unfortunately, at the current stage of technological development this is not true.

Our potential for renewable energies in the European Union is limited, both for physical reasons - because, apart from solar power, where we could have a greater margin, the others have clear limitations - and for economic reasons, because it is true that we have to grant aid to the renewable energies - and I have already said that I have taken concrete, positive initiatives in this respect - but even so, we have to maintain some level of competitiveness and balance.

Obtaining 12% of our basic energy from renewable sources seems to me to be a very ambitious target, and I am prepared to make every effort to reach this target by 2010.

Having said that, I cannot deny the evidence, and the evidence is that, apart from other very serious problems such as waste, nuclear energy does not involve pollution from any emissions.

Finally, I must say that the nuclear problem is a very serious problem, but it is under control.

At the moment, unfortunately, the problem of climate change is absolutely out of control.

It is a problem that is out of control now, and what is more, I am afraid it will not be controllable unless we take major steps.

Not only the Green Paper on energy but also the White Paper on transport - because transport has a lot to do with this subject - take a clear line of trying to minimise the effects from a climate change point of view and from an environmental point of view, while maintaining development, growth and the quality of life.

In your response you relied heavily on the economic argument, but we have to say that both nuclear energy and coal are, in fact, heavily subsidised.

As Mrs Isler Béguin said, can we see the same level of subsidies - look at the money spent on research in fusion - in renewable energies?

To date we do not have level of funding either from the EU or from the Member States.

Firstly, do you consider waste incineration a renewable energy, because we need clarification on that?

Secondly, where we get industrial profits as an additional source of funding for renewable energy, will we see a level playing field across the board?

I would refer you also to the fact - I have said this in other fora - that Director-General Lamoureux has made statements on nuclear energy which vastly exceed the brief of the Commission.

It is for the Member States to decide whether they will build or not build nuclear power plants.

Will the Commissioner disassociate herself from those comments?

The Green Paper clearly states that renewable energies need aid and support at the moment, as was the case some time ago with coal or nuclear energies, for instance.

At the moment, renewable energies need backing and to be given a similar level of support, at least - and I think they need even more.

In other words, I fully agree with you, and I say so plainly in the Green Paper.

Secondly, waste as such is not renewable energy.

Waste incineration by itself cannot be a renewable energy.

But in the case of the appropriate incineration of waste from renewable organic components, then yes, we are in the field of renewable energy.

You know that this was the subject of a debate in this Parliament and also that, in the end, a compromise was reached by which we agreed to accept a particular type of waste in certain respects and under certain conditions.

But if you just say waste and that is all, then I will say no.

Only waste considered in a particular way and, of course, specified and selected.

With regard to Mr Lamoureux' s statements, he says what the Treaty states, and, of course, the decision to set up a nuclear power plant or not or to opt out is up to the Member States; it is not up to the Commission and neither is it a Community decision.

It is the Member States that take their own decisions according to their own options, within the general framework, of course, which does not mean that I do not believe we should think carefully about it, because I believe Europe needs a common energy policy.

As the time allotted to questions to Commissioner de Palacio has elapsed, Questions Nos 37, 38 and 39 will be replied to in writing.

Mr President, on a point of order.

I want an answer to my question.

You passed over my Question 39.

I am here to take the question.

I must request the answer to that question.

Furthermore, may I point out that in Question 36 there were three questions in one, which took up over 20 minutes.

There are three questions in one in Question 40, which will take another 20 minutes or so.

My Question 39 is one simple sentence and all I require is one simple answer.

I therefore expect you, Mr President, to accord me the respect of the House and the answer to my question.

I have been here for the last 16 years and I am at least entitled to the respect of the House.

Mr Fitzsimons, the House has every respect for you, but the primary duty of a Member - especially those of us who have been here for many years - is to read the Rules of Procedure.

There is an order of questions.

You will understand that I have been conducting Question Time now for a year and a half, and out of duty I have had to read this part of the Rules.

Each Commissioner answers for 20 minutes.

Nos 37 and 38 did not receive an answer either in accordance with the Rules, and their authors were also present.

There is not going to be debate on this now, I assure you, because it would prevent Members from being able to ask their questions.

So in accordance with the Rules, Annex II, "Answers to questions" , paragraph 11: "Questions that remain unanswered for lack of time shall be answered in writing."

That is what I have done, and I am applying the same rule to you as to everybody else.

In other words, you are being accorded total and absolute respect.

If you have anything else to add, please do so in writing.

Mr Tannock, who is requesting a point of order, asked a question that was not relevant, because it was not supplementary.

This is the view of the presidency of this sitting and I do not intend to discuss it further.

Subject: NGOs and reform of development services and policy The Commission has embarked on the process of reform in the field of development policy, in the context of which the role of NGOs will need to be defined.

The European Parliament argues that NGOs are one of the pillars on which Community cooperation rests and is concerned at the treatment of NGOs in the new guidelines and establishment plan for development policy and services.

Will the Commission establish a permanent structured dialogue with the European NGO Liaison Committee (CLONG) which will guarantee the terms governing the participation of European NGOs in Community cooperation?

Does the Commission believe that it is important to strengthen the role of NGOs with a view to balancing their presence in Community development policy by comparison with multilateral aid organisations, chiefly those belonging to the United Nations family?

Will the Commission take account of the experience with NGOs acquired by staff in the Development DG when it draws up the establishment plan for the new implementing body?

The Commission fully agrees with the honourable Member that NGOs as important actors in civil society are one of the pillars on which EC cooperation rests.

The Cotonou Agreement specifically mentions the increasing role of non-State actors in the development process.

The Commission has elaborated specific programming guidelines on the role of actors such as NGOs in the EU partnership with the ACP countries. The Commission action plan also contains commitments to partnerships with the ACP.

The Commission action plan also contains commitments to partnerships and consultation of civil society and non-State actors.

As far as the European NGO Liaison Committee (CLONG) is concerned, our relationship with it has always been active and fruitful.

In addition to contributions to NGO projects, projects that actually reach people in the developing countries, the CLONG is also financially assisted by the Commission.

In accordance with its financial rules the Commission received the preliminary results of an audit of the CLONG in December 2000, which shows poor financial management within the CLONG.

The Commission will draw the consequences of this audit in order to put its relationship with the CLONG on a sound basis.

However, it should be mentioned that the dialogue between the Commission and the CLONG is not and will not be interrupted.

The dialogue with a number of other NGOs and other NGO umbrella organisations - there is a number of them - also will be deepened over the next year as the new organisational structure decided in May 2000 comes into place.

On this matter it is important to ask you not to make the mistake of thinking that accepting a special lower standard of financial management for the CLONG is an adequate way by which the Commission should demonstrate its positive attitude towards the inclusion of civil society as such.

This is not the problem, the problem we are facing here is simply one of financial management.

The Commission considers that NGOs have a distinct and crucial role, which is different from and not in competition with UN agencies.

ECHO's use of NGOs, the UN and other organisations reflects what is best in the situation.

Situations change and so does the pattern of how we distribute through different partners.

Finally, many of the staff with experience of NGOs in the Development DG have now been transferred to the EuropAid Cooperation Office - our new implementing body.

Therefore they will bring their knowledge to the new office and concentrate on how to handle the relationship better to reduce some of the problems we have had in the past with the not always very smooth dialogue between the different parties.

I am sorry for what has happened, because I heard, or I think I heard the Commissioner say that he will keep up the dialogue and continue to regard NGOs as important, but in this context I should like to ask the following question: clearly, Commissioner, we as Members of Parliament, and specifically the Socialist Group, are not going to uphold or overlook the possible bad management by the NGO Liaison Committee (CLONG), but we do think that the political principle of dialogue with the NGOs is very important, and a large proportion of these NGOs is represented by the CLONG.

Therefore, we understand that the solution that may be presented is not in proportion to the seriousness of the irregularities that the CLONG administration may have committed, and that if a way out of the current situation is not found the NGO Liaison Committee may close.

The question is, therefore: does the Commissioner foresee a way out of the financial situation without precluding the fact that the Commission should then negotiate a restructuring or new way in which the NGOs must work and how they must coordinate themselves?

We will make the kind of response to this problem that we have presented for the CLONG so far.

Let me here make the point that we are not at the final conclusion, we have received the report from the Auditors and we are looking at what kind of conclusions we will draw in the Commission.

But we have indicated - and this reflects what the Auditors are saying - that there is a need to recover something around EUR 1 million.

That recovery normally also leads to a stop in the funding of the recipient in question.

I am faced with a situation where if I do not do this I would be acting in a manner which would in all probability be strongly criticised by the Court of Auditors and by this House.

I still remember the very loud applause I received at my hearing in the Committee on Development and Cooperation a year and a half ago when I said that I and this Commission would take the line of a zero tolerance policy relating to mismanagement and all these problems.

Everybody agrees on that and what I am doing now is following normal procedures, to the extent that we have such a thing in the Commission.

But here I am on clear ground.

I am aware of the problem that Mrs Sauquillo has raised and we are doing everything we can to find a solution which will allow the substance of the cooperation with the NGO world to continue.

But if some sort of reconstruction is necessary, this is a phase they may have to go through.

For the time being I am very careful not to stipulate what the outcome ought to be because it is very much in the hands of the owners of CLONG and the many different NGOs all over Europe.

But we are not turning our backs on them and we expect and hope that future cooperation will be normal and fruitful.

Subject: Aid to Christians driven out of the Molucca Islands Particular attention should be drawn to the persecution, violence and terror perpetrated against the Christian population of the Molucca Islands in Indonesia by Jihad militants, especially on the island of Ambon, which has resulted in the desecration and burning of churches, Christians being forced to flee en masse, and a large number of deaths.

I have personally met the Catholic bishop Mondagi from Ambon together with Protestant church leaders.

The Indonesian Government and army are duty-bound to guarantee their citizens' safety and lives, regardless of which faith they profess.

What initiatives and measures has the Commission taken to provide aid to assist the thousands of Christians driven from their homes in the Molucca Islands, particularly on Ambon, in the very vulnerable situation in which they find themselves?

ECHO mounted the first operations in the Moluccas in March 1999 when an aid package of EUR 1 million made it possible to set up medical health and food distribution programmes for displaced people from the Ambon and Kai islands.

The financial decision for Indonesia was signed in December 1999 and EUR 900 000 were used for the continuation of these two programmes.

Two further emergency operations with a budget of EUR 1.5 million began in March 2000 because the number of displaced persons continued to rise.

These operations covered the distributions of foodstuffs and first aid and the operations also ensured medical aid and a supply of drinking water to the displaced persons from the archipelago.

As the conflict has reached the north of the Molucca islands and particularly the island of Halmahera the two NGOs financed by ECHO in Ambon, Medecins sans frontières, Belgium, and Action contre la faim, France, have extended their action to include displaced persons from this island.

The resumption of violence in May and June last year provoked new displacements all over the archipelago.

Therefore an emergency aid decision for Indonesia was signed in August 2000 for EUR 2 million.

It is funding a new programme of assistance for displaced persons with a budget of EUR 600 000 which involves distribution of food and first aid.

World Mission Germany is carrying out this programme.

Considering that the situation in the Moluccas remains a cause for humanitarian concern, a new humanitarian aid decision of 2 m was signed on 5 December 2000.

The decision includes a project for the improvement of the victims' nutritional and health conditions which will be implemented by Action contre la faim, France.

It also includes a project aiming at ensuring the transport of drinking water which will be carried out by the international committee of the Red Cross.

So, we are giving high priority to assisting the people who are the victims of this very unfortunate conflict.

I should like to thank Commissioner Nielson for his answer and for the efforts being made on behalf of all refugees specifically in the Molucca Islands where the largest group is de facto Christian.

We are concerned here with a total of 300 000 refugees out of a population of 10 million people.

It is as if all the residents of Sweden' s third largest city, Malmö, were to be expelled as refugees.

I also want to highlight the gravity of the situation for the Christian minority in Indonesia.

On Christmas Eve, a large number of coordinated bomb attacks against churches - including the cathedral in the capital, Jakarta - took place at a variety of locations in the Indonesian archipelago.

Indonesia is the world' s fourth largest country in terms of population, as well as being the most heavily populated Muslim country.

I assume you are following developments there very closely.

My specific question is this: are there links with Caritas, the Lutheran World Federation and the World Council of Churches with a view to providing aid to the expelled Christian minority, above all in the Molucca Islands?

I can answer the last question by saying that the organisations concerned are those I referred to as our partners in implementing humanitarian aid.

I would also add that a conflict of this kind could escalate if, as providers of humanitarian aid, we were to choose as partners to help us implement the aid, organisations which could be seen as not being neutral in the conflict.

We are careful to avoid this further problem.

I understand the nature of the conflict very well indeed, as well as the feelings associated with the conflict because of its nature, but I believe that, in carrying out the task before us, what we are doing is right.

This aid is very laudable on the one hand, but, could it not also be letting the Indonesian Government off the hook; and should we really not use the political and economic strength of the European Union to force the Indonesian Government to look after its own citizens, especially this Christian minority?

There are a number of conflicts within Indonesia.

They are not all of the same character.

This one is different from those conflicts that have arisen from the issue of secession, splitting up Indonesia.

In fact, we are cooperating with the Indonesian Government, trying not only to insist but also to urge them in a cooperative spirit to do what a government ought to do in handling a problem of this character.

There is, in my view, a difference between this conflict and the other conflicts in Indonesia and also some difference in the character of the response of the Indonesian Government.

Here there is the basis of relatively good cooperation with the Government of Indonesia.

But the conflict itself is extremely nasty and very problematic for everybody, especially the victims of course.

I am pleased to inform the honourable Member and this House that the Commission has taken and continues to take appropriate measures in relation to the nutrition and repatriation situation of Burundian refugees in Tanzania.

I visited Tanzania in March 2000 and on that occasion I also went to see camps with refugees from Burundi.

The overall number of refugees in Tanzania, including those from Burundi, continues to grow.

By the end of 2000 there were approximately 500 000 refugees in camps in Western Tanzania of whom around 360 000 were Burundians, 110 000 Congolese and the remainder Rwandans, Somalis and other nationalities.

Through ECHO the Commission funds more than one third of the total humanitarian aid available to refugees in Tanzania.

In the year 2000, ECHO's budget for aid to Tanzanian refugees was EUR 26.85 m.

ECHO's level of support is expected to remain substantially the same this year.

The key partners in Tanzania are the International Federation of the Red Cross and Red Crescent, the UNHCR, UNICEF and the World Food Programme.

The main objectives of the humanitarian aid are multi-sector care of refugees, feeding, education, health care for children and finally, public health, water and sanitation in the camps.

As to the standard of nutrition inside the camps, ECHO contributes one third of the total cost of the World Food Programme in Tanzania, which provides a balanced daily ration of 2166 calories per refugee, well over the minimum recommended by the WHO.

The WFP recently alerted the international community to potential problems of supply, which would be due to delays in funding from sources other than the Commission, and daily rations were temporarily reduced to 80%.

However, the rations remained adequate in view of the fact that many refugees have access to additional sources of food.

In 1999, FAO joined the international relief operation by introducing a programme to improve nutrition standards among the most vulnerable households.

In collaboration with UNHCR, FAO provided 15 000 families in six of the camps with seeds and hand tools in order to plant household and community vegetable gardens.

Training was given and FAO estimates that more than 50 000 people have benefited directly from the project.

I have seen this programme and it is in fact so well-organised and so neat that the alternative that we can offer the refugees when they return looks much less organised.

But, of course, this is what we are going to support.

Concerning the possible repatriation of Burundian refugees in Tanzania following the signing of the peace agreement at the Arusha Summit, the Commission is maintaining a state of readiness for this eventuality.

I was myself present at the Burundi donors' conference chaired by Nelson Mandela in Paris in December, which endorsed the peace agreement.

The Commission is pursuing a twin-track approach.

Firstly, the current level of humanitarian assistance to refugees will be maintained while they remain in Tanzania.

Secondly, should the conditions be met for their repatriation - and we are pushing everybody concerned and some who do not think they should be concerned to make this happen - then the funds allocated by ECHO to the Tanzania programme will follow the refugees back home.

An additional sum of EUR 25 million has been allocated by the Development DG under the Lomé Convention's Article 255 to assist UNHCR in a planned and orderly repatriation.

At this stage, the preconditions for an orderly and voluntary repatriation unfortunately are not met.

This was discussed in ECHO's annual strategic programming meeting with UNHCR in December when it was agreed that repatriation may only take place if all parties are convinced that the security situation inside Burundi is stabilised and sustainable.

This is a major operation of ours and we want to follow it through to a successful conclusion.

Commissioner, I think it only fair to thank you for such an exhaustive answer, which to a certain extent reassures me.

To the same extent as you are reassured, I think, because there is no doubt that the problems of these numerous refugees in Tanzania are severe.

We had the World Food Programme report, which said that food reserves would run out by the end of the year.

There is also the need to provide for the training and education of all these refugees, even though they are in an anomalous situation in their lives, precisely so that these years should not be wasted years.

Therefore, not only is it essential to give humanitarian food aid, but education programmes and health programmes are also needed so that these tragic years for this people will not be wasted years but can be the starting point for better times and especially for the permanent reconciliation of the Burundian people.

Subject: Conflict Prevention and Peacekeeping in the Developing World How does the Development DG intend to cooperate with the Swedish Presidency on issues related to conflict prevention and peacekeeping in developing countries?

Peace building and conflict prevention, management and resolution continue to have a high priority in our policies, and the Commission welcomes the importance attached to those issues by the Swedish Presidency.

Peace and democratic stability are indispensable preconditions for economic and social progress.

Conflict prevention is an integral part of the EU's external policy objectives.

The challenge is now to address in concrete terms the root causes of conflicts and to focus on actions and the implementation of policies.

The EU's contribution to conflict prevention is greatest where we can use or adapt our different instruments, especially trade and cooperation agreements, development assistance and social and environmental instruments, to tackle causes of conflict.

The last Development Council, by focusing the objective of development policy on poverty reduction, has laid the basis for addressing one of the major causes of conflict - the widening of disparities in prosperity and poverty.

Let me again repeat that the HIPC initiative alleviating the debt of the poorest countries is also a very real contribution to conflict prevention.

Globally, the low level of development assistance is, in my view, the biggest single issue that needs to be addressed if we are to be serious about conflict prevention.

The Commission has already had numerous discussions with the Swedish Presidency and we share their concerns.

It was, for example, decided to have a policy debate on conflict prevention in the General Affairs Council on 22 January.

We agreed that we needed to incorporate the concept of conflict prevention in existing policy instruments to strengthen cooperation with the United Nations, the OSCE and other regional organisations and to find common approaches to cross-border phenomena of destabilisation such as the trade in narcotics, weapons or diamonds.

We really need better instruments in these fields, of course.

The Commission will present a communication on conflict prevention this spring.

It is fully aware of the crucial role of development cooperation in this context.

We will work closely with the Swedish Presidency to maintain conflict prevention and peacekeeping at the top of our agenda.

Mr President, Commissioner, the answer is, of course, very satisfactory but I wondered if you were aware Commissioner that the strategic policy planning and early warning units in the Commission has 20 staff, 11 of whom are responsible for the Balkans and only one responsible for Africa which is your responsibility.

I wonder if you would look at that issue and try to ensure that we have more staff on the ground in these units.

Also, are you aware that they depend on annual funding which means that they cannot make long-term planning of the kind that you suggested now, so it is important that the Commission looks at these issues.

Secondly, Commissioner, the whole matter of decentralisation to the delegations: will you be ensuring that in the delegations you have members of staff with expertise to deal with conflict prevention and peace building?

The answer is in all honesty "no", and everyone knows that the Commission is not in a position, unfortunately, to give a good answer to this kind of question.

We are in the hands of Members States and this House in our struggle to get enough staff, qualified staff, to do what we are expected and supposed to do.

But, I am not able to say, "yes" we will do this as Mrs Kinnock and I would like.

On the distribution of people geographically as to their responsibilities in the early warning group and the political bodies we have created to do these things better, I do not think it can be measured only in that way.

Definitely with the new structure the more cross-cutting, general handling of relations with the ACP countries for instance, the Development DG will be given more emphasis as the division of labour changes between the Development DG and the new cooperation office.

This is part of our own adjustment to these priorities, and that is definitely the way I will try to improve our efficiency, even on the basis of the given resources.

As the time allotted to questions to Mr Nielson has elapsed, Questions Nos 44 to 65 will be answered in writing.

That concludes Questions to the Commission.

(The sitting was suspended at 7.20 p.m. and resumed at 9 p.m.)

The next item is the joint debate on the following reports:

A5-0365/2000 by Mr Varela Suanzes-Carpegna, on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries, on the common fisheries policy and the challenge of economic globalisation [2000/2027(INI)];

A5-0333/2000 by Mr Gallagher, on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries, on the Commission report to the Council and the European Parliament on the application of the Community system for fisheries and aquaculture in 1996-1998 [COM(2000) 15 - C5-0109/2000 - 2000/2069(COS)];

A5-0332/2000 by Mr Poignant, on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries, on the Commission report on the regional meetings arranged by the Commission in 1998-1999 on the common fisheries policy after 2002 [COM(2000) 14 - C5-0110/2000 - 2000/2070(COS)];

A5-0367/2000 by Mr Cunha, on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries, on the proposal for a Council decision setting the terms for financial support to Guinea-Bissau in the fisheries sector (renewed consultation) [8263/2000 - C5-0361/2000 - 1998/0355(CNS)];

and on the Commission declaration on the fisheries agreement between the European Union and the Kingdom of Morocco.

The Chairman of the Committee on Fisheries, Mr Varela Suanzes-Carpegna, has the floor to raise a point of order.

Mr President, on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries, because yesterday we debated this subject in committee, and especially also on behalf of all the rapporteurs of the reports we are to discuss today, and if the Commissioner, with whom I have spoken, has no objection, and it seems he has not, I should like to ask you if we might first hear the statement from the Commissioner himself and then we the rapporteurs could speak in the order laid down.

That is what I should like to ask you, Mr President.

Mr President, I am not going to speak about anything that we are going to debate now, and I apologise for departing from the agenda.

This very evening I have learnt that ten members of the environmentalist organisation, Greenpeace, ten pacifist environmentalists, have been arrested by the military authorities of the Rock of Gibraltar, because they were trying to get near the submarine Tireless with a placard expressing what I believe everyone thinks: that the sea should not be occupied by nuclear energy.

These environmentalists are still under arrest, and since Parliament has been, let us say, rather insensitive about safeguarding the interests of the citizens of the Campo de Gibraltar and Algeciras Bay, I ask at least that appropriate steps should be taken so that these pacifist environmentalists can sleep in their own homes.

Mr Bautista Ojeda, as for sleeping in their own homes, I am not sure if it is feasible that we could achieve that from here at this time, but we take good note of your intervention, which will appear in the Minutes, since I suppose you would also like that to happen.

Mr Nogueira Román may take the floor.

Mr President, it seems appropriate to me that Commissioner Fischler should come before this Parliament today to deal with the Morocco question.

I think it is entirely appropriate.

What I think is totally inappropriate is to have merged a debate on four resolutions that the Committee on Fisheries considers highly important for the future of the common fisheries policy with a debate on the Morocco question, which will inevitably take over from the other debates planned.

I think these are two entirely distinct debates, which should have taken place at separate times during this Strasbourg part-session, and each one should have been given the importance it deserves.

As that has not happened, we Members above all who have little time will be obliged either not to talk about Morocco or not to talk about the other reports and thus the future of the common fisheries policy, and both options are lamentable.

Mr Nogueira, our working conditions are lamentable in general.

We are trying to improve them so that the debates can be conducted more correctly.

You are aware that there is a working document by the Bureau to discuss this subject.

But on the specific point that you mention, apart from taking note as is my duty, I can tell you that your group voted in favour of this proposal at the Conference of Presidents.

Therefore, I understand your arguments, but I would be grateful if you would also pass them on to the Chairman of your own group.

Mr President, I wish to use this point of order to state that I understand the issue raised by Mr Nogueira Román, but this is a question of timing, as the President said.

This is precisely why I understand and support the issue raised by the Chairman of our Committee on Fisheries, Mr Varela Suanzes­Carpegna.

The truth of the matter is that the Morocco situation is an extremely important issue for many of us and it would be appropriate for the Commissioner to speak right at the beginning of the debate on this issue.

I would say that, given the political importance of the Moroccan question, strict adherence to protocol on the agenda is of secondary importance.

I therefore think that it would make sense to arrange the debate as I have suggested.

I think the best thing to do is to proceed to the debate, and if there is no objection I shall take up the proposal by the Chairman of the Committee on Fisheries.

So, Mr Fischler, the floor is yours.

Mr President, honourable Members, I am, of course, perfectly willing to start by making the requested statement on fisheries relations between the Union and Morocco.

As you probably already know from the media, negotiations on a new form of collaboration in the fisheries sector were started with the Kingdom of Morocco following my visit to Casablanca in October, when the King of Morocco agreed to begin serious negotiations.

As a result, a total of six rounds of technical negotiations took place between 30 October and 22 December.

I then met Prime Minister Youssoufi and Fisheries Minister Chbaatou for talks twice at the beginning of January - once for three days and once for two days.

I took great pains to ensure that both sides understood the main aspects of future fisheries relations, especially with regard to fishing possibilities, the term of the agreement, technical fishing conditions and, most importantly, financial compensation.

Negotiations were held nearly every day between the first and second political meetings this year, more recently at technical level.

We have done a great deal of constructive work and numerous details have been clarified.

The Commission has endeavoured throughout the negotiations to date to be as flexible as it feels it can be on Morocco's main demands, especially as regards the extent of fishing possibilities and compulsory landings in Moroccan ports.

We have stated from the start that we are prepared both to take account of Moroccan interests and to support the development of the Moroccan fisheries sector.

We have also made clear time and again that we want to protect the Community's social and economic interests and are looking for help in preserving resources.

Unfortunately, the Moroccan side suddenly took a very intransigent stance during my second visit on 8 and 9 January, especially on the important questions of fishing possibilities and technical terms, and made excessive demands for financial compensation.

I tried to persuade the Moroccan side to reconsider its position, because an agreement was not on the cards on this basis, and I asked them to resume talks as quickly as possible in a bid to reach a final agreement.

We are prepared to pay a fair price for a balanced agreement, but the price must be in proportion to the fishing possibilities granted by Morocco and I have always clearly given the Moroccan side to understand as much.

If our Moroccan partners are now prepared to return to the negotiating table and show willing to negotiate, then I am sure that, in the end, we shall broker a solution which is acceptable to both sides.

Finally, I should like to point out that the question of cooperation with Morocco in the fisheries sector was one of the main points on the agenda for President Prodi's visit to Morocco, when both sides took the opportunity of reaffirming their wish to conclude an agreement.

It was therefore agreed that we should resume negotiations at a technical level as quickly as possible.

It is now the turn of the rapporteurs, and I should like to remind them that, despite the temptations, they are rapporteurs and they have to present their reports.

Mr President, thank you very much for your understanding.

I wish to thank Mr Fischler for his statement on the fisheries agreement with Morocco, and I also wish to thank him for all the effort he is putting into these difficult negotiations.

We all knew they would be difficult and lengthy.

I should like to remind you here, as he too has said, but I want to stress this, that it is the first time that a President of the European Commission has been personally involved in negotiating a fisheries agreement.

It must be clear both to the citizens of the European Union and to Morocco that all the institutions in the European Union - and at the highest level - want this agreement: the European Council wants it, and it said so at Nice; the President of the Commission, who has been to Rabat, wants it; and the European Parliament in Strasbourg wants it.

So, for the time being, the one that does not want it, and I say for the time being, is Morocco, at least on the terms that the European Union is demanding.

Let us hope that together we can soon manage to persuade them of the mutual benefits of this agreement and thus be able to associate President Prodi with this success.

I just ask, Mr Fischler, that the negotiations be resumed as soon as possible - immediately if they can be - to make the most of the boost that the President of the European Commission himself has given them.

As has also been said here, I do not want Morocco to draw our attention away from the extremely important debate that we have here today.

We have been summoned to debate four major reports to do with the common fisheries policy and its future.

I am going to focus, naturally, on mine, the one for which I am the rapporteur, but first I should like to congratulate Mr Poignant and Mr Gallagher and also Mr Cunha on the magnificent job they have done.

I want to point out in relation to the report for which I am the rapporteur that I think it is the first one that a Community institution has drawn up on globalisation in fisheries, and therefore I think our Committee has hit the nail on the head with the two own-initiative reports it has decided to produce; the other one is still in progress.

In mine, in this report, what I want to stress is this: first of all, Commissioner, the fishing industry in the European Union must start to shake off this almost domestic or almost marginal image that it currently has, perhaps because of the fact that it is confined to peripheral regions or because of the coldness of the Community GDP contribution figures that are always being mentioned.

We have to recognise the global importance that fishing now has.

We are becoming more and more dependent on imported fish; we have our own fleet on all the seas and we have enough technical knowledge of our own not to leave this strategic sector in the hands of third countries.

The 2002 reform, therefore, must not serve just for us to carry on staring at our own navel in the form of our own Community waters, our own problems and our own misfortunes.

What we really need is a fleet of the right size that is competitive at European and world levels.

More competitive does not mean more predatory but simply more efficient at using the resources actually available, and doing this better than everyone else.

The fishing sector is now strategic - and will be more so in the future - as a food reserve: healthy and safe animal proteins for a growing human population.

We must involve fisheries - and this is also shown by the fisheries agreement with Morocco - in the European Union' s foreign policy and commercial policy.

Our Union' s foreign fisheries policy has to earn credibility and an image, which it does not yet have, standing before world public opinion as it really is: the policy of a fishing power as compliant as any other with the United Nations principles, that is, the development of the international law of the sea, the conservation of resources for all, cooperation for development, etc.

Let us therefore make it an active policy, both in fisheries agreements with third countries, adapted to each individual situation, and in the regional fishery organisations, in which we must play a leading role, as we have often said, and let us not resign ourselves to a situation in which the 15 states that today make up the European Union - tomorrow perhaps 20 or 25 - must forever have as much weight as, for instance, Estonia has now.

The Council of Ministers of the European Union or the United Nations Security Council are examples to bear in mind of voting systems weighted by the specific weight of territories and populations, and we should bear this important example in mind.

My report states that the European Union has not yet woken up to the importance of its fishery concerns at an international level.

Admittedly, as I said earlier, its relative importance to the Community GDP is small, but we must not forget that ours is the fourth largest fleet in the world.

If we total up the processing and marketing industry, subsidiary industries, investment in other countries and specialised shipbuilding, EU fisheries-linked economic activity is the most substantial in the world.

Other powers, like the United States and Japan, are aware of this and are investing in this sector.

In the World Trade Organisation we must not be afraid to stand up for our interests, and for our structural aid system too, since not all of it relates directly to fishing: some is aid for conserving and controlling resources, making vessels safer, improving fishery infrastructures and the selective arts of fishing.

In the WTO we must demand the real liberalisation of port services, the freedom to invest and establish in third countries with full legal guarantees and freedom of access to ports.

Let us denounce attempts to extend exclusive economic zones and lead the effective fight against flags of convenience.

All this, ladies and gentlemen, Commissioner, is the real challenge facing the common fisheries policy from economic globalisation.

The European Parliament is today offering this report to which I refer as food for thought for everyone on the eve of an historic reform of the common fisheries policy, so that we can all be clear about where we are and where we have to get to.

Mr President, Commissioner, at the outset I want to acknowledge the assistance which I received from the secretariat of the Committee on Fisheries and indeed from the secretariat of my own group in preparing this report.

I want to thank Mr Poignant for his cooperation while producing my report.

Both myself and Mr Poignant had one major preoccupation - to make sure that our reports were not only complementary, but more importantly that they were not contradictory.

After all they deal with the same subject, and I would like to think that the same spirit will prevail in the House when both reports are voted on tomorrow.

Under the regulation establishing a Community system for fisheries and aquaculture, the Commission is obliged to report at least every three years to Parliament, the Council and the Community bodies representing the sector on the implementation of measures and developments in the common fisheries policy.

This report reviews the years 1996 to 1998.

The timing of the present communication gives it a special significance in that it represents a bridge to the Green Paper to be published on the review of the common fisheries policy.

Not only is this is an historical snapshot of the past, it is an important indication of the direction of Commission thinking about the future and shape of the CFP after 2002.

This, of course, is to be welcomed.

The report covers all aspects of the CFP, including conservation and management of resources, structural policy, external fisheries policy, market policy and monitoring and control.

In the conclusions to its communication the Commission lists among its priorities: better coherence between the various objectives pursued by the CFP, such as conservation of resources, the economic efficiency of the fleet and securing employment in fisheries - dependent areas, taking account of the economic dimension of fisheries management, better integration of environmental and fisheries policy, improvement of management tools such as multi-annual management objectives and strategies, management of fishing effort, and full integration of the Mediterranean into the Community management regime, a more accountable decision-making process and maintaining the external dimension of the common fisheries policy.

Many of these points can be endorsed by us, indeed as the Commission acknowledges, a number of these priorities are those which Parliament itself set and has long demanded.

I would like to underline to you, as I have done in my report, a number of points that I feel strongly about.

I regret the present unsatisfactory state of fish stocks in relation to technical conservation measures.

I believe that more progress can still be made.

In spite of initiatives taken by the Commission to strengthen its dialogue with the industry, I believe that these should be fully reinforced.

I believe that fishermen must be more involved in the work of scientists in order to establish mutual confidence.

I have strong suspicions that multi-annual programmes have operated in a discriminatory fashion without producing any major benefits to the fishing sector as a whole.

I would like to see a uniform inspection regime throughout the Community and the harmonisation of penalties for infringements.

I want a strict enforcement of the Community control system with regard to third country vessels operating within EU waters.

I am strongly in favour of a greater regionalisation of the common fisheries policy through the creation of a comprehensive series of regional management units and regional advisory committees based on the use of ICES areas and sub-areas to define the boundary lines.

In this context, I want to stress that regionalisation of fisheries policy is not in any way the same as renationalisation or fisheries policy.

It does, however, to use the Commission's own words, involve the participation of stakeholders, and I quote "in all the three phases of the management process i.e. consultation, decision-taking and implementation of decisions taken".

I believe that the lack of cohesion in the regional application of the CFP must inevitably lead to a lack of confidence in the policy and in the Community institutions.

I believe that it is necessary to define the application of the CFP in a clear and consistent manner, setting out a coherent system of regionalisation.

I am convinced that this must entail such factors as closer links between fishermen, scientists, the recognition of the socio-economic factors in areas highly dependent on fisheries, flexibility and simplification.

As I have done on so many occasions in the past, I repeat my call that in order to ensure an appropriate policy of decentralisation it is essential to maintain access to the territorial waters of 12 miles as the exclusive sovereign preserve of the coastal States and to extend this preserve to 24 miles, as previously agreed by this House in February 1999.

On a personal note I would point out that these last two issues are fundamental to my own country, Ireland.

I believe that the utmost respect must be paid to the need for social, economic, regional cohesion, and that the highest priority must be given to the defence of the populations of regions highly dependent on fisheries.

I want to see the Commission review the application of relative stability so as to take better account of the need for economic, social and regional cohesion.

There is no doubt in my mind that this must be done without calling into question the fundamental principle itself.

I would like to take the opportunity to congratulate Mr Varela Suanzes-Carpegna on his report.

The fact that there are no amendments tabled is a clear indication that we can all agree on this text.

I am pleased to say that all the ideas contained in my opinion on behalf of the Committee on Industry have been included in the report in one form or another.

Mr Varela Suanzes-Carpegna has outlined to us in detail the importance of the multi-functional role of the EU fisheries.

This is something that must be taken into account in future WTO negotiations to ensure that EU producers are not put at a disadvantage.

The Commission must come up with appropriate negotiation proposals.

Unlike what was done in relation to agriculture, I would invite Mr Fischler to consult this House on the fisheries proposals.

In conclusion, I am pleased that Mr Varela Suanzes-Carpegna has recognised the need to take into account social and economic factors, such as employment in coastal areas.

This must be taken into consideration in the WTO talks and the review of the common fisheries policy, and I welcome the reference to an environmental and health food standard in Mr Varela Suanzes-Carpegna's report.

I also want to congratulate my colleague Mr Cunha on his report.

Mr President, the report I am presenting deals with the regional meetings arranged by the Commission in 1998-1999.

It has been subject to intense and, at times, heated debate in committee, because it is one of the first reports, like those by Mr Gallagher, Mr Varela Suanzes-Carpegna and Mr Cunha, to force us to consider the common fisheries policy for 2002 rather than because it is crucial or likely to lead to decisions being made.

This is a sensitive subject, involving a sector with very specific characteristics and one which affects some quite typical and fairly limited regions in Europe.

The activities of the sector usually generate a great many jobs both up and downstream, making many regions dependent on fisheries, with no easy alternatives to turn to in times of crisis.

Everyone in these regions knows that 31 December 2002 will be crucial, since this is the deadline for the common fisheries policy, as in 1992 and 1982, as if we produced a new one every 10 years.

With a view to forming as rounded an opinion as possible in order to prepare for this deadline, which I believe was a good idea, the Commission organised a systematic consultation process involving everyone associated or involved with this activity, sending out questionnaires and arranging meetings.

Thirty meetings were held, attended by nearly 1 500 people.

With regard to the form of proceedings, the method of the report was discussed.

Some Members would have preferred not to examine the subject in too much depth.

We debated the matter at great length within the parliamentary committee and, in the end, the Committee on Fisheries went along with the opinion of the rapporteur - as, in my view, there really was no other option - with everyone able to argue their own corner on the subject, just as usual.

With regard to the substance, however, national and even regional differences within the Member States were seen to be more intense than the rather traditional political differences, and that is why a number of amendments were tabled.

These amendments show that, although the original positions were sometimes far apart, the political debate allowed groups to be reconciled, leading to an open-minded text which provides a sound starting point, along with the other reports, from which to undertake the reform of the common fisheries policy.

Looking at the amendments and more generally, most of the provisions voted on in committee adopt the rapporteur' s point of view, with some additional specification or clarification.

A Green Paper is due to be issued in the coming months - at the end of March of this year, I believe - followed by the legislative text in the course of 2002.

At the moment, two main schools of thought are discernible.

The first would like to see a thorough re-evaluation of the entire system and all the foundations, past and present, of the common fisheries policy. The second, while avoiding a complete re-examination of the existing foundations, would like to see the system clarified, amended and improved so that the fisheries sector can develop while, of course, preserving fish resources.

Quite obviously, the European fisheries sector has to deal with the problems that most other fishing industries throughout the world are currently experiencing. They do not affect just our continent or our waters.

Overfishing reduces stocks, catch sizes and revenue, and is the main threat as far as the future of resources and the fishing industry proper are concerned.

Increased competition, associated with the globalisation of the market in fishery products, is a further problem.

If the fisheries industry is to become more competitive, it will depend on the sector' s ability to adapt in order to face up to the constraints imposed by both the state of its resources and by commercial demand.

The common fisheries policy is the European Union' s management tool for regenerating the fisheries industry and aquaculture.

This policy was drawn up in order to manage a common resource and to respect the commitments laid down in the first European Treaties.

The report, therefore, expresses views on the four aspects of the common fisheries policy, which are conservation and management of resources, structural policy, market organisation and relations with third countries.

Review of the main areas of the Union' s fisheries policy is called for throughout.

The precautionary principle, the latest thing, so to speak, is clearly included, as is the commitment to developing a responsible fisheries policy.

In particular, I would like to highlight some suggestions, especially maintaining the status quo position on the 6/12-mile zone; maintaining boxes after scientific checks have been carried out along with, inevitably, the issue of access to the North Sea, which will be more difficult in view of our enlargement plans; maintaining the system of TACs and quotas, on condition that they be reviewed; vigilance regarding individual transferable quotas and a thorough review of the Multiannual Guidance Programmes; harmonising inspections and infringements and, of course, committing to fisheries agreements and action programmes specifically designed for the Mediterranean.

I should like to finish by adding, as Mr Gallagher said, that we do not wish to see regionalisation become renationalisation nor do we wish for further social measures to be introduced into the common fisheries policy.

Perhaps Mr Gallagher and I have given the impression that we are repeating ourselves.

Politics involves repeating oneself and contradicting oneself.

We have opted to repeat ourselves.

Mr President, Commissioner, I simply wish to ask for your understanding so that before I embark on the subject of my report, I may take a minute to speak about Morocco. I should like to warmly congratulate Commissioner Fischler for the commitment he has demonstrated in the negotiations to renew the fishing agreement with Morocco, but these thanks should also go to the Commission's entire Directorate-General for Fisheries.

From the start of the negotiations we were faced with intransigence on the part of the Moroccan negotiators, who presented arguments such as "the sustainability of fishing stocks" to reduce access for the European Union' s fishing fleet.

However, we know that these were not the real arguments, since they did not apply the same criteria to other third countries with which they concluded agreements nor to private agreements with various operators, including some from the European Union.

Given the importance of the agreement with Morocco to the European Union' s fishing industry, this issue should have immediately been raised as a matter of great political priority within the European Council itself, in the Foreign Affairs Council and, of course, in the Fisheries Council.

My impression is that Commissioner Fischler and his staff stood practically alone in this struggle, apart from one important but isolated speech by the President of the Commission.

It is incomprehensible, given that the European Union is home to so many millions of Moroccans and that we have provided that country with so many trade concessions to ensure its products access to our market, that they should have reciprocated our openness and cooperation so little.

This meant that the Community authorities at the highest level had major political trump cards to play, with the help of those Member States most closely concerned.

We see now, however, that these cards were not played.

In time we will see why, but in any event, I fervently hope that we can rapidly negotiate a reasonable agreement.

Let us now proceed to the subject of my report, which is Guinea­Bissau.

The protocol governing fishing arrangements between the European Union and the Republic of Guinea­Bissau was signed in June 1997 and came into force in December of that year, remaining valid until June this year.

Following an armed conflict in that country in 1998, the Commission presented to the Council and Parliament a proposal for a decision requesting that this agreement be suspended.

Parliament' s Girão Pereira report, at the beginning of 1999, considered the Commission' s proposal to be justified and legitimate and delivered a favourable opinion. Parliament thereby authorised the suspension of the agreement for the duration of hostilities, after which the suspension would be lifted and the Government of Guinea­Bissau would be given help for ad hoc support actions for the local fishing industry, for infrastructure and for monitoring activities.

As a result of certain procedural and legal problems raised by a previous Commission proposal, the Commission is now tabling a new proposal.

The purpose of this new text, as with the previous one, but using a different legal formula, is to grant the legitimate authorities of Guinea­Bissau a sum equivalent to the unpaid part of the financial compensation laid down in the agreement currently in force, which totals around EUR 6.5 million and which is intended solely for supporting local fishing activities, for improving monitoring measures and for reconstructing fisheries infrastructure damaged in the intervening period.

On the basis of a programme of actions proposed by the Government of Guinea-Bissau, the Commission will pay over 50% of the compensation that has been provided for and will pay the balance when the government of that country has submitted a detailed report on the progress of the actions it has proposed and the results that have been achieved. This report is due to be submitted to the Commission by 31 May 2001.

The date for payment may, however, have to be postponed if major problems are encountered in the organisation of Guinea-Bissau' s administration, that is, its government, following this armed conflict.

Parliament' s Committee on Fisheries has therefore approved the date of 31 May 2003 as the final deadline for the processing of payments instead of the initial proposal of May 2001.

Therefore, given that the Commission' s proposal is basically the same as the one to which we gave our assent in March 1999, given that the amount of money stipulated is exactly the same and given that the proposal has precise objectives, I, as rapporteur, feel that Parliament should deliver a favourable opinion on this proposal.

Mr President, Commissioner, I trust that we have not bitten off more than we can chew this late in the day because this first fisheries debate of 2001 really is a far-reaching debate.

It gives me special pleasure, Commissioner Fischler, to be able to welcome you here today.

For a long time, fisheries debates were held in Strasbourg on Fridays.

This year we have done away with Fridays and brought the debate forward to Tuesday, and while many Members are still not listening to us today, you at least are here and I thank you for that.

The new year is a time of hope and expectation, especially for our fishermen.

I need only mention the reform of the common fisheries policy and the Commission's eagerly awaited Green Paper.

However, I am forced to admit that the worry lines on my fellow Members' brows and - as far as I can see from here, on your brow, too, Mr Fischler - are still as deep as ever.

One reason must surely be the continuing and difficult negotiations on the fisheries agreement with Morocco.

I am afraid that there is still no light at the end of that particular tunnel.

The Commission's cautious and diplomatic approach - if I may express it thus - be it on your part, Mr Fischler, or on the part of Commission President Prodi, has met with little response and hence no real progress on the other side - I am tempted to say the opposing side.

I think that is a crying shame because I want an agreement although, let there be no mistake, I do not want an agreement at any price.

The financial framework is limited and EU payments must be in proportion to the benefits granted in return.

In the final analysis, the Kingdom of Morocco needs to take a realistic and trustworthy approach.

Otherwise, Morocco's obstructionist stance hitherto may well come back to haunt it, because fisheries are not the only link between Morocco and the EU.

The EU should not be the bull in diplomacy's china shop, but nor should it merely be an irritating fly buzzing around.

The next round of financial compensation for Spanish and Portuguese fishermen is coming up.

It really is time we started thinking about and naming alternatives, however drastic they may be, because aid cannot and should not be a permanent solution.

We are looking forward, at last, to taking a closer look at the study on the cost-benefit analysis of the fisheries agreement and drawing the necessary conclusions.

Mr Gallagher addresses this particular point in his report.

We had an initial presentation an awfully long time ago and after that mum was the word.

But we must watch out - it could be the calm before the storm, because there is every sign of a storm brewing.

But first I should like to thank Pat Gallagher for his excellent report.

As one of our most active comrades-in arms in the Committee on Fisheries, he has yet again done a creditable job.

There really is no longer any need to make a point of stressing just how important an analysis of measures and developments is, especially in view of the reform of the entire fisheries policy.

But just what will the Commission's long-awaited Green Paper propose?

The objective - on this we are clear - must be to reconcile the need to improve fish stocks with the social and economic importance of fisheries, in which case it is vital for interest groups to be more involved and, given the considerable shortcomings now coming to light in the agricultural sector alone, for example as the result of BSE, it also means finding a new, attractive way of marketing fish as a healthy, protein-rich food.

As I am sure you are all aware, a huge programme of work awaits us.

I am looking forward to a stimulating and controversial debate in the interest of the future of European fisheries.

In any case, I think we should not slacken in our efforts.

Mr President, I thank Mr Fischler for having come before this House.

He is here because, at the Conference of Presidents, the Group of the Party of European Socialists asked him to come. May I remind you, Commissioner, that in October 1999, a month before the agreement expired, you said here that you "would do everything in your power to find a solution" and that you "would get your feet wet" .

Fourteen months later it is the Community fleet that is getting wet, but the water is up to its neck.

But I am not one to blame you.

I believe you have done what it was within your power to do, which really was very little.

The problem for me is that there has not been a concerted effort by the various Commission services, and there has not been enough political pressure from the Council, and what is worse, in my opinion, is that there has been no clear thinking, skill or hard work in parallel by the government of the country most affected.

Mr Varela, I believe Mr Prodi' s visit - which I think was very positive - rather than reassuring the sector has made it more worried, precisely because of the moment in the process when it took place.

Such are the doubts and vacillations that the sector feels at the moment.

The sector keeps on repeating that it does not want an agreement at just any price, and it is afraid that an agreement will be signed just to save face.

The sector says that what the Moroccans are offering - the technical conditions that they want the Community fleet to submit to - is unacceptable, and there are a number of limitations on freezer trawlers and shrimp vessels that are unacceptable.

I think the Moroccan authorities need a clear message from the Union.

The Union would like to have fair cooperation with its partners, and now we all realise that we would have gained a lot if the Moroccan Government had responded in time to Community appeals.

It is unacceptable that for 14 months the Moroccan Government repeated that it did not want an agreement, and now they are trying to blame you, Mr Fischler, for the failure to conclude one and for the negotiations having broken down.

The result will be that the next Austrians - like yourself - or Swedes who negotiate in Rabat will think that what the Moroccans want is exactly the opposite of what they are thinking or saying.

This whole absurd process, which has been going on now for 14 months, is not having any positive effects for one simple reason: because in certain sectors in the Union it is generating a rejection of the European Union itself.

Here we spend days on end discussing the Union' s democratic deficit and good governance, and then, when we have a subject on our hands that directly affects more than 4 000 fishermen, we pretend not to see what is obvious and not to do what any government would do to stand up for such an important part of its productive fabric.

There are some who say that President Prodi should have blocked not just fisheries cooperation but the whole MEDA II programme.

With regard to the Poignant and Gallagher reports, which bring forward many points for debate on the forthcoming reform of the CFP, I think that if a number of amendments are approved we shall be able to achieve two balanced resolutions and correct some contradictions.

But a balanced agreement - such as the one we should reach on the Green Paper - does not mean that it is a compromise between various extreme positions but rather a coherent report endorsing the future of the whole sector and the viability of fishing as an economic activity throughout the European Union.

The balance that we socialists desire can only be achieved through a fisheries policy based on scientific criteria and adapted to the market, with the suppression of the political discrimination that still persists.

The reform process must be participatory, in the words of Mr Poignant, whom I congratulate on his work, performed under difficult conditions.

His report reveals many of the problems that we are going to have to discuss during the process of reforming the common fisheries policy.

He has supplied many solutions, for instance the socio-economic aspect of fishing, the development of the social aspects of the CFP, and the updating of criteria that define regions as fishery-dependent.

The Gallagher report is also interesting in that it refers to social aspects or regards agreements with third countries as a fundamental part of the CFP.

We are requesting clear legal and scientific opinions on access restrictions.

We believe that the reform of the CFP should not contain any discriminatory element whether political or based on nationality.

Our amendments support keeping the current 6/12 mile zone.

Lastly, I should like to congratulate Mr Varela - and also Mr Cunha - for the excellent report on the challenge of globalisation and the dangers that certain aspects of it pose for the Community fisheries sector.

The international side of the CFP, our ever more necessary participation in multilateral organisations, is a challenge that still awaits us.

This question is going to return and be debated many more times in this House.

I congratulate Mr Varela on his political foresight, which could almost be called poetic.

Mr President, Commissioner, I would like to congratulate all the rapporteurs on the excellent work that they have done.

I speak specifically of the issue of regional management of the common fisheries policy.

In fact the term zonal management better expresses the kind of development that we would like to see implemented.

This would involve much fuller participation in decision making by all those with a direct interest in each of the ICES divisions, whether engaged in fishing, fish processing, science or conservation.

If such a system were already in place we would not be facing the difficulties we face at present over the Commission's proposals for a cod recovery plan for the North Sea.

It is the clear view of those most directly involved that, as initially announced, the plan would have both a disastrous effect on the industries concerned and an adverse effect on cod stocks, and this view is supported by conservationists.

The Scottish MEPs are most grateful to the Commissioner for meeting us and for his assurances that these proposals are not yet firm ones.

A great deal of work has been done locally, both in Scotland and around the North Sea, on conservation measures in general and on cod recovery in particular.

I hope that the Commission will take the results of this work very seriously indeed.

In particular, I would ask it to abandon the idea of requiring 140 mm mesh size and also to recognise the extent to which the Scottish fleet depends on a mixed fishery.

Accordingly, instead of imposing blanket restrictions on some 15 000 square miles of the North Sea, I trust that it will opt for seasonal closures in areas where the cod concentration is high.

Mr President, Commissioner, it was inevitable that the Gallagher and Poignant reports would not only comment on the past but would focus in detail on the CFP review, and I consider it entirely appropriate that the MEPs should seek to influence the review process in advance of any formal consultation with Parliament.

I contend that the principal objective of the CFP, namely the conservation of fish stocks, has not been realised and as a result we have had to face dramatic year-on-year fluctuations in quotas, as exemplified by the current cod crisis.

In addition, we must re-examine the process by which, and the level at which, decisions are made.

Various amendments tabled with my name attached seek to establish certain important principles for the CFP review, including that relative stability should remain since the good reasons for its inclusion as a founding principle remain valid.

That in the light of experience with areas like the Shetland Box, specially protected areas based on scientific advice should continue in the future.

And a system of zonal management should be established based on the ICES areas and with representation from fishing, science and conservation interests able to participate meaningfully, not to renationalise the CFP, not to take away power from the Council or the Commission but to allow each Member State with quotas in a particular zone to assist in devising and recommending controls which are relevant, appropriate to these areas and, therefore, more likely to succeed.

Recent events have led to even greater lack of faith within Scotland in the decision-making processes and in the structure of the CFP itself.

How can, for example, the Commission justify continuing levels of industrial fishery and even increases in white fish by-catch while on the other hand reducing quotas of fish for human consumption?

Let us use the opportunities arising from the review of the CFP to achieve a solution which works.

I challenge the Commission and the Council to look seriously at zonal management within a framework of Community-wide objectives, of course, but so that interested parties can participate more fully and so that the new CFP, once agreed, can actually achieve its purpose, namely the long-term sustainability of European fisheries.

Mr President, the excellent work done by Mr Poignant and Mr Gallagher deserves recognition, but I sincerely believe that their zeal - and they are people with vast experience and knowledge of the sector - has in some respects led them to go beyond the subject of their reports.

The problem is that the amendments emphasised this view, and generally in some respects they have even come to approve contradictory points.

I hope that in tomorrow' s votes these issues may be calmly corrected, because my group would like to vote for both these reports.

As for the matter of fisheries and globalisation, it must be recognised that the low level of Community self-sufficiency in fisheries products has encouraged the liberalisation of trade sooner and more fully than in other sectors. While the nature of fishing itself, the growing nationalisation of fisheries or other circumstances may have their own particular features, they also have effects similar to those of globalisation and can have an especially hard social impact, with sometimes serious effects on working conditions or the displacement of fishery-related activities.

I think the excellent Varela report points out corrective measures for these negative effects.

I should also like to congratulate Mr Cunha.

Finally, on the subject of Morocco I want to point out two things: first, the negative effects that the lack of agreement is having and will have in disadvantaged areas of the Community both on the fishermen themselves and on fishery-related dependent activities.

Because they are disadvantaged areas, restructuring activities stand very little chance of success.

The second point is that the attitude of the Moroccan negotiators hardly squares with that of a state linked with us through an association agreement.

In this situation it is to be hoped that the Commission will be able to make the Moroccan authorities understand that the association can only be based on reciprocity, and that, if necessary, it will be able to adopt suitable measures.

What the media is saying is that if there is agreement, it may even be highly detrimental to the interests of the European Union.

I should like there to be an agreement, and I hope the Commission will be able to assert its right to reciprocity.

Mr President, Commissioner, I wish to draw your attention to a point that I believe constitutes an omission in the common fisheries policy.

It is important that this should be considered in the reform to be initiated in 2002, since it concerns the situation of fishing in the outermost regions.

It is also important that the common fisheries policy should take account of the amendment made in the Treaty of Amsterdam and highlight the potential that flows from their situation. This applies particularly to Portugal, with its outermost regions, the Azores and Madeira, but also to the French and Spanish outermost regions.

The European Union has an opportunity to draw up an exclusive economic zone in these particularly less-favoured regions, and this strategic value in this field must be emphasised for the future.

With regard to Morocco, we are grateful for the information that the Commissioner has just given us, although for the Portuguese this is scant consolation.

The situation in Portugal is that 40 boats have remained inactive since December 1999 and if the agreement is concluded one day, many of these businesses may by then have become unviable.

I therefore support the remarks made by Arlindo Cunha and Rosa Miguélez Ramos to the effect that both the Council and the Commission must attempt to adopt a more dynamic approach in their dialogue with the Moroccan Government.

In general terms, we have maintained an attitude of prudent optimism towards the revision of the common fisheries policy in 2002.

It is widely known that the view from Portugal is highly critical, because whereas fishing should be a source of employment, the Portuguese experience is that the common fisheries policy has been a source of unemployment.

We hope that maintaining the quotas, which was decided on this year, is a first positive sign for the future.

We are particularly interested in the fact that attention has been paid to the feeling of discrimination that has emerged from consultations held in recent years, and the fact that the problem of planning and development has been given due consideration.

Lastly, as Mr Gallagher has pointed out, we would like to see an exclusion zone of 24 miles for coastal fishing.

Mr President, I still have my doubts as to the methods used, especially in Mr Poignant' s report, and I still believe that the opinions of the fisheries sector expressed at the regional meetings deserve a more thorough examination.

In addition, Mr Gallagher and Mr Poignant have presented views in many cases contrary to the measures that the CFP should contain.

We cannot fail to recognise the effort that has been made a posteriori to try to unify viewpoints, but the European People' s Party believes that in some fundamental areas there are still some clear contradictions.

We have therefore tabled a series of amendments above all to try to eliminate the impression that Parliament does not have a definite attitude towards the future of the CFP, because that is not the case.

It may be that we do not agree on specific measures, but if something comes out of these reports it is that Parliament is in total agreement with the fisheries sector in that the CFP requires some fundamental changes.

I therefore ask for our amendments to be approved, because far from entering yet again into sterile discussions they reflect this desire for change and the need for careful thinking about the fisheries policy, with our sights set on the future and not the past.

If there were no clear need for this, the Council of Ministers last month would have given some indication that this were the case.

Things cannot go on like this.

The fundamental flaws that have encumbered the CFP since the beginning have to be paid for by the industry at the end of every year with a series of increasingly brutal cuts to its operations.

When you come to the extremes that have been reached this year, you have to wonder what economic sector could survive with these rules of play.

If resource levels are getting worse and worse, it is because a sequence of failures in the policy that governs fishing not only allows it to happen but actually causes it.

A sector constrained by a series of outdated, contradictory and often incomprehensible rules can only have very limited responsibility in this state of things, and yet it alone has to pay the price.

The CFP is in need of very far-reaching changes that will provide solutions for a fishing industry which, unlike the rules which govern it and even despite them, has managed to survive and has done everything it can to evolve and continue to provide coastal regions with wealth and jobs.

That is why I must again stress that, when there is evident dissatisfaction with the resources policy, the brilliant results of which we have just seen yet again at December' s Council meeting, with a TAC system that encourages discards, when issues such as relative stability and freedom of access have yet to be resolved, not to mention the matter of bringing the only Community policy that still discriminates on grounds of nationality into line with the Treaties, the Commission cannot seriously propose a draft Green Paper like the one it has drawn up.

If the Commission really believes that the future of European fisheries depends not on the simple modification of a regulation, but on the proposal of measures already contained in current regulations, if the Commission' s great proposal and great discovery for the future CFP is to be multiannual TACs and the encouragement of aquaculture, perhaps the moment has come, Mr President, to ask in all seriousness for it to make room for other people who can bring in new ideas and the tiniest sense of responsibility.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I should like, very briefly and concisely, to make three observations on the planned revision of the common fisheries policy.

My first point concerns access to waters and to internal resources.

Maintaining the traditional activities of every fishing community should be one of the European Union' s main concerns.

I therefore feel that it is crucial to at least preserve exclusive access to so-called "territorial waters" , particularly given that activities involving small-scale fishing have a considerable effect on the coastal resources of every Member State.

My second point relates to the principle of relative stability and the full use of fishing rights obtained outside Community waters.

The principle of relative stability is a fundamental pillar of the common fisheries policy.

However, the application of this principle to fishing quotas obtained by the European Union through financial compensation, either in agreements with third countries or in waters governed by regional fishing organisations, may lead to perverse situations.

For example, the Community is not taking full advantage of the quotas that it obtained with such difficulty in the waters of some third countries, even though there are Member States keen to use them.

Therefore, although the so-called agreements "with southern countries" lay down that once Member States have made use of their respective fishing rights, the unused part should be made available to all interested Member States, this mechanism is not implemented under the so-called agreements "with northern countries" .

The European Union is not making full use of the fishing quotas for the open sea that it has obtained through regional fishing organisations, even though there are Member States that are keen to take over the quantities that are not caught by the "highest bidders" , as they are called. They are thus exposing themselves to the risk that their share will be reduced once a review of quotas allocated to the parties involved takes place.

My third point relates to the role of the European Union on the international stage.

Since the Union as a whole is a world-class fishing power and one of the largest markets for fish produce, it must claim and adopt a role that matches its importance in international organisations and specifically in regional fishing organisations.

I am very grateful for the Commissioner' s speech and I urge him to use the power of all 15 Member States in negotiations with Morocco and not simply to argue the case for Portugal and Spain.

Mr President, the common fisheries policy, as many have pointed out, has failed to conserve fish stocks at adequate levels to support a viable industry.

This is due, at least in part, to the conflicting nature of some of the objectives of the CFP as laid down in Regulation 3760/92.

It is impossible to simultaneously satisfy both the market and industry while conserving resources.

When the CFP is revised next year it is essential that the conservation of fish stocks and the protection of the marine habitat be made its primary and overriding objective, and the only way to do this is to implement a rigorous and comprehensive precautionary approach to fisheries management.

The precautionary approach should mean that before any stock can be fished on a commercial basis there must be, at the very least, a scientific assessment of the stock and a conservatively-based total allowable catch.

In other words, the current pillage of certain types, certain deep-water stocks by some EU countries would not be allowed to happen.

It means that any new fishing gear or any significant modification of existing gear must be evaluated for its potential impact on the target stock as well as any species caught as by-catch or any impact on the marine habitat.

It means being conservative when one decides the level at which one wants to maintain a fish stock.

The use of maximum sustainable yield or any of a number of other reference points is quite simply wrong, for they lead to over-fishing and stock collapse.

Targets and limited reference points must be established which will maintain the fish stock at a high enough level that the risk of stock depletion or collapse is insignificant.

The best definition to date of the precautionary approach is the one contained in the UN fish stocks agreement, and many of these and other principles are defined there.

The EU has accepted these ideas for some stocks and I think it is high time that it implemented them for its own stocks.

A number of things have been said already about Morocco and I just want to say that we would insist that it is entirely up to Morocco, as a coastal state with sovereignty over its fish and its exclusive economic zone, to decide what it wishes to do with these resources.

We are therefore opposed to any kind of political or economic pressure being brought to bear on Morocco in order to encourage it or to coerce it to sign an agreement with the European Union.

Secondly, we are adamant that no potential agreement with Morocco should involve any access to waters of Western Sahara.

We do not recognise Moroccan sovereignty there and so Morocco has no right whatsoever to discuss access to EU vessels there, nor for that matter has the EU any right to enter into such negotiations with Morocco or to allow EU flag vessels to go there as has happened in the past.

Mr President, the socio-economic importance of the fishing industry is well known, not only for the jobs that it creates directly and indirectly, but also for the economic development of many fishing regions and communities, including the small coastal fishing sector that ensures the European Union' s supply of fresh fish and the preservation of its traditions and cultures.

Nevertheless, as has been confirmed at regional conferences, there is profound criticism of the common fisheries policy, both with regard to the TAC system and quotas and with regard to the system of Multiannual Guidance Programmes, which have led to discrimination and have not brought any major benefits to the industry. This makes it essential that Member States which have achieved their objectives should not be penalised through further reductions of their fishing effort whilst other countries have not achieved the objectives laid down in previous MAGPs.

It has also become clear that most of those working in the fishing industry harbour doubts about scientific opinions on the management and conservation of fish products, although they do not question the need to conserve species.

What is needed, therefore, is a thorough review of the common fisheries policy, involving fishermen and other interested parties in the decision-making process, to ensure that their experience and knowledge can contribute to the creation of a more workable and realistic system.

We need appropriate structural measures to guarantee the survival of communities dependent on fishing and socio-economic measures that improve the standard of living of fishermen, who must not suffer as a result of possible measures to protect species, as has happened to the sardine fishermen in the north of Portugal.

We must also take account of the specific nature of the outermost regions and it is particularly important, as the Gallagher report states, that we move towards extending the exclusion zone to 24 miles, which is, in fact, something on which Parliament has already taken a decision.

With regard to current negotiations in the World Trade Organisation, it must be emphasised, as it is in the Varela Suanzes­Carpegna report, that Community fishing activity cannot be analysed from a purely economic angle based on trade in goods.

Fishing in the European Union is multifunctional in nature; it contributes towards the integration of the social and economic fabric of coastal areas, representing a way of life and a factor for cohesion in large areas along our coastline, while at the same time guaranteeing food supply.

I also wish, Mr President, to mention international fishing agreements, which have a fundamental role in supplying the European market by means of the European fishing fleet.

What is of particular concern, however, is the information that we have received not only on the delay in the fishing agreements with Angola, but also on the difficulties in renewing the fishing agreement with Morocco.

We need more than just a rehashed explanation. What we need is the adoption of measures that will guarantee the protection of fishermen and the rights of shipowners who are caught up in this situation, as is currently happening in Portugal.

Mr President, 2001 is the year in which the Commission is to draft a new common fisheries policy.

In my view, it is of utmost importance that the Commission should actively involve the fisheries industry itself in the preparatory activities leading up to its decisions.

When translating research results into catch restrictions, the Commission should not only take the advice of scientists, but also the fishermen. If not, imposing total allowed catches and quotas will meet with unnecessary resistance from them.

Fishermen, especially in the Netherlands, recognise the benefit of catch restrictions, provided there is a good reason for them.

A bad example is the recent catch restriction imposed on Dutch fishermen for plaice and sole, which will set them back EUR 35 million.

This is a restriction which, according to the European Fisheries Council, is required in order to protect cod, whilst biologists claim that such recommendations were never made and that this was a political decision.

European fishermen are active in very different waters.

This requires a regional approach which is entirely in compliance with the European Union' s principle of subsidiarity.

That means that in the case of the Netherlands, it will develop the policy for the North Sea in conjunction with other North Sea countries.

These countries will decide whether the fragile system of the North Sea can accommodate ships from other regions.

If the Union insists on other ships having access to the North Sea, the quoting of as yet unquoted fish species would be a real way of keeping additional catches of quoted fish within limits.

Finally, I would echo rapporteur Gallagher in his request for a cost-benefit analysis of fisheries agreements which the Commission concludes with third countries. Do all Member States benefit proportionately from spending Community funding in this way?

Mr President, when we discuss the excellent reports by my colleagues Mr Varela, Mr Cunha, Mr Poignant and Mr Gallagher, it is against a background of crisis in the EU fisheries sector.

As we contemplate the radical reforms of the CFP, which are clearly necessary and long overdue and which are highlighted in these reports, we do so in the knowledge that fish stocks are in spiral decline.

Too many fishermen are chasing too few fish.

As a result, EU fishing fleets are shrinking and many thousands of jobs are being lost at sea and on shore.

The situation in the North Sea is of particular concern.

Savage cuts in the total allowable catches and quotas were announced in December by the Council.

Now the Commission is seeking to implement emergency interim measures to aid the recovery of cod stocks, which have fallen to unsustainable levels in that sector.

I am extremely grateful, like my colleagues, the other Scottish MEPs, to Commissioner Fischler for agreeing to meet us earlier this evening to discuss these dramatic emergency measures.

We welcome Mr Fischler's generous offer to meet with leaders of the industry to discuss alternatives to the draconian proposals which have been widely publicised by the Fisheries DG in the last few days.

A sensible, multiannual cod recovery plan embracing realistic technical conservation measures, the closure of cod spawning grounds and the decommissioning of the larger new fishing vessels will surely be more sensible than the pursuit of a plan which would allow industrial fishing to continue in vast restricted zones and which would potentially lead to the bankruptcy of half the Scottish fleet.

The Poignant and Gallagher reports have attracted some amendments, which seek to do away with the 6/12 mile limits and break open the Shetland Box and gain free access to the North Sea.

Clearly there are some Member States that still regard the resources of the North Sea as a rich prize.

I hope that this debate may bring them to their senses.

Mr President, how should and how will the European Union's common fisheries policy look after 2002?

This question has stirred the emotions of everyone involved in fisheries for some time now.

The Poignant and Gallagher reports are important milestones in the preliminary debate.

The actual debate on reform will, however, not start until the Commission's Green Paper has been submitted within the next few months although, quite understandably, representatives of highly disparate fisheries interests in the European Union are already trying to influence the preparatory process within the Commission.

A great many demands have been made on the Commission.

I think it is still too early for the European Parliament to commit itself one way or another.

We should confine ourselves, within the framework of these two reports, to addressing the problems and discussing various possible solutions.

Both rapporteurs have done a great deal of work and have highlighted the basic problems of the common fisheries policy and I am grateful to them for that.

I should like to single out just three of these basic problems.

First, the problem of access to waters, which should at least be re-examined as part of the reform.

Protection zones must be defined on the basis of scientific studies and the relevant conclusions must be drawn from their results.

Secondly: regionalisation is another catchword which repeatedly gives rise to controversial debate.

But regionalisation does not mean some form of renationalisation.

We have a common fisheries policy in the EU and that is how it is going to stay.

Thirdly: I should like to finish by again highlighting how important it is for the whole fisheries sector - fishermen, science, industry and so on - to be involved in the forthcoming reform process.

This is the only way we shall be able to ensure that the new common fisheries policy is well accepted by those whom it affects.

Mr President, European Union fisheries policy is a vast subject.

I would like to tackle it from the point of view of globalisation and in relation to the specific problem of Guinea-Bissau.

As far as the Group of the Greens is concerned, I would remind you that we are in favour of a fisheries policy that respects the natural balance, in favour of developing offshore and inshore fishing, which creates jobs, and in favour of selective fishing, which takes account of available stocks.

This is a question of achieving economic growth to satisfy businesses as well as protecting social aspects.

We are against granting subsidies that encourage excessive industrial fishing, which catches everything indiscriminately, to the point of wiping out species and harming food safety and biodiversity, a fisheries policy which allows fleets to grow out of all proportion, and so forth. Because of this, we consider that untrammelled market forces represent one of the factors leading to such over-investment and that these issues should be taken into consideration in the next round of WTO trade negotiations on liberalisation.

We therefore request that the Commission present appropriate proposals, both on the issue of the future direction of the subsidised sectors and on social aspects to the other members of the WTO.

Furthermore, we are, generally, not particularly in favour of the bilateral fishing agreements between the European Union and third countries, often small countries, whose entire budgets are occasionally no larger than the subsidies granted them.

It is essential that we remain as integrated as possible.

However, we accept that a reserve of EUR 6.5 million was allocated to Guinea-Bissau, given that it is assigned to an action programme which will support the local fishing industry, infrastructure and controls and that a detailed report on how these funds are being used will be submitted to Parliament.

Mr President, Commissioner, I would like to start by congratulating Mr Varela on his far-sighted report, which was accepted by the entire committee, and Mr Cunha, who has also done an excellent job.

However, it cannot be denied that, as has already been mentioned, the points and issues we are discussing today are the same as those dealt with by the Gallagher and Poignant reports.

I will not go back over the technical reasons why these issues are sensitive: the 6/12 mile limits, protected areas, maintaining the principle of relative stability, regionalisation which can somehow be interpreted as renationalisation.

I, too, see the nature of these issues as very specific and share the view stressed by my fellow Members that they are sensitive.

With regard to this, I repeat that, for the very reason that we are going through a period of reform - and if we are carrying out reforms then it is because our current strategy is not working or the possibility of reform would not arise - we must be very aware that we cannot leave everything as it is, nor, moreover, can we continue to be inconsistent in our recommendations.

In this regard, the Group of the European People' s Party has tabled amendments aimed precisely at achieving greater coherence between the positions.

I would, however, make one entreaty to the Commissioner and to all of us: it is important that a balance is found, for a major political reason apart from anything else.

At the last part-session in December, we all - Commission and Parliament - criticised Nice because the countries' desire to protect their own national interests took root once again and we condemned that Council for placing the Community method in crisis.

Now we must work to ensure that a common policy is genuinely achieved in this typical sector, but in order to do so we must respond to those who are complaining - namely the operators - that there is insufficient participation or backing for the choices made, therefore that there is no cooperation in the decision-making process.

If we do this, we will be able to prove - and I am convinced that we are capable of doing so - that it is possible to achieve a sound common policy, valuing differences rather than penalising them and involving the operators of all the Member States, particularly the fisheries operators in all their diversity.

Mr President, it is always comforting to see the same few faces at every fishing debate and I would like to reassure the Commissioner and colleagues and friends that we may be small in numbers but we all have an active interest in fishing and no matter how late the debate is, rest assured we will be there.

