Mr President, I will endeavour to comply with Mrs Peijs' wishes and keep my speech short. I will simply say that I voted for this report in the hope that, on 31 December 2001, all the pensioners will be presented with a calculator which will convert their own currency into euro.

Mr President, I am one of those MEPs who has tabled Amendment 7 with the request that the Commission's euro information campaign be restricted to those countries that are part of the area in which the currency is at present being used.

This means that Sweden, Denmark and the United Kingdom should remain outside the campaign while the krona and the pound are still the currencies of those countries.

It is a reasonable request that the EU not carry out tax-funded campaigns in Member States on sensitive internal political issues.

In the end, it is a question of tolerance for one another and of respect for each nation's democratic process.

- (DA) The Danish Social Democrats have today voted in favour of Mr Karas' s communication strategy for implementing EMU.

Introduction of the new common notes and coins will have considerable practical significance for individuals and companies, not only because the coins and notes are new but also because the 'new prices' have to be got used to once the present ones have been converted into the common currency.

Money is something in which it is necessary to have confidence.

It is therefore important that the necessary information should be made available, and more information should of course be made available than we receive whenever countries at present introduce new designs on notes and coins.

In our vote, we attached importance to information being provided in the individual countries by the Member States and to special agreements being entered into with the Member States concerning this issue.

We agree that it is right for the Danish Government not to have entered into such an agreement.

We look forward to a situation in which Denmark too can enter into such an agreement once the Danish people have hopefully said yes to the common currency in the referendum on 28 September 2000.

- (NL) My party, the Socialist Party in the Netherlands, has never been in favour of rushing through a common currency within the EU.

The euro is preventing us from regulating the economy by adjusting interest rates and exchange rates.

Furthermore, the so-called stability of the euro is financed by large cuts in unemployment benefits and in provisions for education, health care, housing and public transport.

I am therefore of the opinion that the euro is only convenient for businesspeople, lavish holidaymakers and MEPs, but not for the majority of people.

Insofar as there was ever faith in the euro, this faith has been eroded extensively since the euro has dropped in value compared to the Danish Kroner, the Swedish Kronor, the British Pound and the currency of many countries outside the European Union.

I can therefore imagine that those pro-euro now feel the need for a propaganda campaign.

The Karas report mainly intends to instil more confidence in the euro among the public at large by, inter alia, involving sports associations and education.

In addition, it intends to denounce the practices of swindlers and those increasing prices who are cashing in on the introduction of the euro.

I wholeheartedly endorse this part of the report, but I was unable to assent to the proposal as a whole.

I reject the Karas report in its entirety.

While the aim of familiarising Europeans with their future currency is a perfectly legitimate one, given that the decision to give up national currencies has already been taken (in conditions which I deplore), I am adamant in rejecting the propaganda this text puts forward in support of what Mr Karas terms "an essential, identity-building factor in the process of European integration" .

This text at least has the merit of exposing the outrageous untruth to which the supporters of a federal Europe resorted when they asked the French to ratify the Maastricht Treaty in 1992. At that time, the single currency was presented as a purely technical instrument to improve the operation of the economy in relation to the dollar and the yen, and as an operation that was perfectly neutral in terms of national sovereignty.

How far we were then from seeing it as the key element in the process of integration!

This text will be an essential weapon, let us have no doubt, for all the people in Great Britain, Sweden and Denmark fighting to safeguard their national democracies. The euro, even though its supporters in these countries deny it today, is in fact the instrument of warfare of a federal Europe rejected by the overwhelming majority of its peoples.

So when the honourable Members reject the amendment tabled by William Abitbol, simply asking that this integrationist objective be clearly stated in the Commission' s communication programmes, they are contributing to a propaganda operation which their voters will most certainly punish them for.

The resolution of the Karas report claims that women for some reason do not share the general enthusiasm which should have greeted the implementation of the euro.

This smacks of the unpleasant tones of revolutionary propagandists of every age, seeing reactionary plots between the cloth and the women in every household rejecting the bright revolutionary future.

It seems not to have occurred to anyone that it is perhaps because of their day-to-day experience of economics that women are more than reluctant about the transition to the euro.

This is a despicable attitude, which reveals the dictatorship of the orthodox thinking which involves branding the men or women that oppose the euro, or who merely show some reluctance, as ignorant, illiterate or uneducated.

This is where blind federalism takes us!

(FR) The annual reports from the Ombudsman and the Committee on Petitions belong to the traditions of this House.

Parliament in turn responds to the reports from both these bodies with two reports of its own that do not vary greatly from year to year.

There is a new feature, however, this year. The Thors report, supported in particular by the work of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs and Mr Söderman' s request, is attempting to give the Ombudsman a general right of access to all the documents that need to be consulted when investigating the case for a complaint.

We are opposed to this proposal, not because we reject supervision of the administration, but because such powers exceed the jurisdiction of an Ombudsman and approximate to those of a judge.

It is obvious, and we will certainly not deny it, that the frenzied Community administration and the ravages it causes cannot but add to the dissatisfaction of our fellow citizens and, hence, give rise to ever more appeals.

The proliferation of competencies, the diversification of spheres of intervention and the legislative bulimia of the Commission and the European Parliament will no doubt do nothing to make this phenomenon any better.

The Ombudsman and his colleagues are not, however, the right people to meet these challenges.

It is our political responsibility to cut such disputes off at source by giving our work precedence over issuing activist texts to justify our existence, with proper respect for the principle of subsidiarity which will prevent the European Union ruling on subjects that are none of its concern, and by ourselves, if necessary, making use of the authority we have in terms of supervising Community bodies.

Too often we have seen this House hiding behind expert committees because it refused to accept its own political responsibilities.

If we have to allow the Ombudsman to monitor administrative problems, we must, for our part, learn how, before and after the fact, to control the insane Community machinery which is running amok.

The excesses we must fight are often the product of the very nature of the current construction of Europe, something we must tackle at the very root.

Mr President, do not tell Mrs Peijs that I am not doing my best to comply with her wishes.

I voted for the Atkins report because it is extremely important for pensioners, who do not have much time left, to arrive at their destination on time when they travel by air as they are always short of time.

This part-session has produced a rich crop of reports on transport.

I must, unfortunately, observe, however, that this sector is examined only from the Liberal point of view.

Mr Atkins' s report on the European Commission proposal on the single European sky goes along with this rationale of liberalisation at any price. This was the cause of the French air traffic controllers' strike last week.

This was how they expressed their concerns about a purely commercial view of their profession. I understand their action, and I can certainly not say as much for Mr Atkins, whose report urges the Commission to encourage Member State governments that currently tolerate a situation where national labour disputes disrupt air traffic to tackle the problem as a matter of urgency" .

No one can deny that the air traffic situation has deteriorated.

Air traffic corridors and airports are at saturation point, delays are common, with one in three aircraft behind schedule, and the whole business is accompanied by a trail of environmental and noise pollution.

I wish therefore to pay tribute to the determination of Mrs de Palacio, the Commissioner responsible for transport, in tackling the problem head-on in order to achieve the creation of a single European sky as soon as possible.

I disagree entirely, however, with the means she puts forward and with the report' s proposals.

The report proposes to introduce competition among air traffic control centres, taking away the link between regulatory authorities and operators.

The supervisory function would be carried out within separate companies whose capital would be open to air companies or private partners.

Such liberalisation would serve to jeopardise air transport safety, and this, of course, is unacceptable and contradictory to the EC Treaty, according to which improvement of transport safety is one of the chief objectives of common transport policy.

France would certainly seem to be the odd man out in Europe, where, in most countries, air traffic control is administered by agencies, under state supervision but open to private capital.

France wishes to keep these activities in the public sector.

The principle of subsidiarity must be applied here, and each Member State must retain control of the organisation of air traffic control.

This is essential, especially as the problem with delays is not caused by air traffic control, which is responsible for less than 25% of all delays!

In conclusion, I support the proposals to strengthen the role of Eurocontrol, the pan-European agency responsible for the management of the airspace of European states, be they members of the European Union or not, in its capacity as regulatory authority.

The report is wrong to underestimate this agency' s potential, but I have voted against a report which is completely unacceptable.

(FR) I voted against Mr Atkins' report because it is totally at odds with the real world and is in keeping with an a priori ideological vision rather than with any concern to meet the real needs of our fellow-citizens and air transport users.

We cannot, of course, deny that there is a need to improve the situation of regulation and air traffic control in Europe in the spirit of the single European sky.

It is perfectly obvious that the aircraft in our airspace should not be on the receiving end of inconsistent, uncoordinated and complicated handling of their flight plans.

And it is true that, although some progress has been made with Eurocontrol, the time has already come to move on to the next phase and to improve the system, bearing in mind one absolute imperative: safety. Regulation and air traffic control must not be subject to the law of competition, but rather to the concept of a general interest service.

Moreover, the United States have never liberalised their own air traffic control, as this is managed by a single state agency.

The Atkins report, however, is entirely concerned with the goal of opening the service up to competition, even though it is hard to see exactly how it could be a source of private profit or how the profits made could possibly reflect its performance!

The pretext for driving forward this liberalisation, furthermore, is delays in flights.

This is certainly a situation that must be remedied, but, in order to be effective, we should really analyse the actual reasons for delays and the real solutions.

We should first of all note that there have been positive developments this year as delays have substantially reduced in France.

This indicates in the first place that we should make a distinction between temporary disruption (use of airspace by the military for Kosovo, the change in the control system, etc.) and structural problems.

We must also measure the problems due to the air companies or the limited European civil airspace with regard to the number of overflights.

Air traffic control does not play a very significant part in causing delays, in the final analysis, and, in any case, improvement of the system involves improving the organisation of the coordination of the various Member State control systems, supporting Eurocontrol in this role.

This should be the priority and the guidelines on the single European sky.

Unfortunately, the Commission does not appear to be on this track, and the Atkins report is even further off the mark.

- (NL) The aviation sector has traditionally been organised in a particularly liberal manner.

The reason for this is that governments compete with each other by building ever more and ever larger airports, and that apart from these airports, there is no need for creating infrastructure comparable to railways or motorways.

As such, since time immemorial it has been common practice in this sector for different companies to compete with each other for the same route.

Airfares bear out this freedom too.

There is no link whatsoever between the distance to be covered and the fare.

Where passengers are wanted, prices are low; where it is believed that there are more than enough passengers, prices are high.

There is little left to be liberalised in this sector.

Despite this, there are people who expect further liberalisation to be a panacea.

It is supposed to lead to cheaper flights, a wider range of flights and no more delays.

According to the Confederal Group of the European United Left/Nordic Green Left, this consideration is very one-sided and only serves two interests: that of airline companies and that of the consumer, whose only focus is more and ever cheaper flights.

In our opinion, a number of other aspects take priority over this, such as passenger safety, livelihoods and the working environment of the employees, environmental protection and the protection of the railway industry from price dumping and other forms of unfair competition.

There is little point in blaming the workers for everything that could cause irritation among passengers. These workers are sometimes obliged to strike out of self-preservation.

Neither is this the fault of Eurocontrol, which has taken over a number of cross-border state responsibilities.

Safety should not come second to the pursuit of profit by companies which aim to take over Eurocontrol' s market.

The problem has far more to do with the excessive growth in aviation and price competition at the expense of long-distance rail transport.

The current proposals do not address this problem.

From this critical stance, we tabled 11 amendments.

Since it has transpired that a majority within Parliament does not support our stance on this, we were unable to assent to the final version of the Atkins report.

(PT) Although this report deals with certain real situations, such as the increase in air traffic or the delays experienced on various routes, and although it is based on certain correct premises, specifically the need to guarantee and strengthen air transport safety, it nevertheless glosses over the underlying causes of these situations, which are inextricably linked with successive actions to liberalise air transport and with the unbridled competition that has resulted from this. In particular, it draws hasty and mistaken conclusions, which lean markedly towards the liberalisation of airspace and towards the future control of this airspace by the main air transport companies.

Since it is true that effective cooperation is required and since technical and disciplinary measures are essential in this area, we do not support these guidelines, which are even more radically in favour of liberalisation than those suggested by the Commission.

If these guidelines were followed, they would exacerbate safety problems and would lead to greater social problems, in addition to raising questions about the sovereignty of each state over its air space. These questions are all the more relevant because this air space is shared by their respective military air forces.

(FR) On 26 June 2000, French air traffic controllers went on strike to protest against the plans of the European Union to liberalise air traffic control. I should like to show my solidarity with this strike and with the demands of the air traffic controllers' unions.

The responses to the saturation of European airspace are pushing us into a headlong rush, with airports and airstrips proliferating, the working conditions of employees in the sector deteriorating and pollution on the increase.

We, on the other hand, are in favour of the harmonised development of transport on a European level, prioritising the fulfilment of real social needs, and opting for railways as the best solution for most needs, particularly for distances of less than 500 kilometres.

Liberalising air traffic control will not solve the problem of delays, since only 20 to 30% of delays can be attributable to air traffic control.

It is known that today the military have seized, in France for example, 80% of the available airspace.

Why has this never been challenged?

The Commission is using the delays as an excuse to move towards a split between a European regulatory office and the establishment of a privatised internal market for the provision of air traffic services.

Such measures, undertaken under pressure from lobbying by air companies, can be implemented only to the detriment of safety, especially given that the companies themselves will be able to put themselves forward to provide such services.

It is for all these reasons that I voted against this report.

I voted for the Damião report, Mr President, partly because I voted for the amendment which stipulated that women on maternity leave should receive a full allowance.

This morning, the Italian newspapers contained the news that medical treatment for dogs and cats will be tax deductible.

If there is enough money to spend on dogs and cats, there ought to be enough for women on maternity leave, who are not ill but people who have the right to a full allowance.

Mr President, this report on the introduction of measures to encourage improvements in the health and safety at work of pregnant workers and workers who have recently given birth or are breastfeeding is very valid and is a step in the right direction.

Point 11 in particular contains many positive proposals.

At the same time, I would like to warn against a development whereby we in the European Parliament end up devoting ourselves to social policies and social legislation, something which I think is, on all accounts, the duty of the Member States.

It is a very important part of the cultural and social identity which every nation and every country creates.

This is one of the most important questions of all in every election campaign in Sweden and in other countries.

Let this remain a national issue!

Mr President, the pregnant mother and her unborn child, mothers who have recently given birth and breastfeeding mothers need as much support as possible during this very important period, which is important not only to the individual mother and child but also to society, remembering the low birth rate and ageing population in Europe today.

Certainly companies have social responsibilities. But surely governments should set an example, especially in those countries like my own where the role of mother and the family is protected in the constitution.

Unfortunately this does not appear to be the case in Ireland regarding paid maternity leave, facilities for breastfeeding and exemption from night shifts.

I give these examples to highlight the fact that just because a directive has been agreed it does not mean it has been implemented.

It is high time we stopped paying lip service to working mothers, their children and their families in our European Community.

(FR) In this report, we voted in favour of the paragraphs which contributed towards protecting the working women, both in terms of their health and wages and in terms of children' s health.

It is, however, to be deplored that the report does not even propose to bring the advantages and rights into line with the countries where these are most favourable to pregnant women in work.

Moreover, we should not like our vote in favour of the specific protection of women night-workers during pregnancy to be interpreted as legitimising women' s working night shifts.

Quite the contrary, we wish to restate our opposition to night work, if it is not socially useful, not just for women, but also for men.

The prohibition of night work for women is a right acquired by the working movement in France.

To revoke this would be a retrograde step in social terms.

To speak of equality between men and women is hypocrisy.

This hypocrisy is intended to conceal the fact that the legislator is more concerned to reassure employers that their factories may be operated profitably than to guarantee the health and safety of employees.

I abstained on Amendment No 2 submitted in the name of Mr Bushill-Matthews which called for the special needs of SMEs to be recognised when implementing Health and Safety legislation.

I have every sympathy with this desire but the amendment is superfluous as Article 137(2) of the Treaty clearly states that "directives in the social field including Health and Safety shall avoid imposing administrative, financial and legal constraints in a way which would hold back the creation and development of SMEs."

I believe therefore that the sentiments expressed in the amendment are already covered and it is unnecessary to repeat this in the report.

(EL) Here we stand once again under a shower of good intentions which, even if translated into a set of positive proposals, are doomed to remain dead letter because they get nowhere near the nub of the problem and do not touch on the main trend causing the problem.

The European Parliament's proposal contains numerous positive proposals which are negated by its very inability to set out the problem of negative developments in labour and labour relations as a whole.

Because no attention is given to the main trend towards restructuring labour relations and reducing and abolishing the fundamental rights acquired by workers or framework labour conditions such as minimal working times and conditions, temporary and part-time employment and cuts in social security and protection, the resultant framework is completely negative and non-conducive to the application of any policy to protect working women during and after pregnancy.

We wish to point out and highlight the risks inherent in a strict prohibition on dismissal, especially under the present, extended regime of generalised atypical employment contracts and the indirect exclusion of pregnant women from jobs, a regime in which we need not just to maintain and consolidate but to increase maternity leave, define the maternity allowance more clearly and apply strict and more substantive controls on night work by pregnant and breastfeeding working women.

Not only must we strengthen the legal framework protecting the health and safety of pregnant women and rectify omissions and clarify ambiguities - the "Trojan horses" used to bypass and infringe legislation -, we also need to deal with the lack of political will on the part of national governments to apply the directive properly, a lack which is sorely in evidence from the sluggish state of control mechanisms in the Member States during the previous period.

A typical example is Greece, where there are no controls on employers' obligation to carry out an integrated written assessment of occupational hazards in the workplace, including a specific assessment of the hazards to pregnant and breastfeeding women.

Experience has demonstrated that reducing employability and "adaptability" to guideline Community priorities on employment issues renders any protection basically non-existent and cancels any individual arrangements in practice.

The problem is: what guidelines are being issued, what sort of employment policy is being applied?

And unfortunately, we have confirmation that the EU wants to make more drastic cuts to allowances and social insurance, to amend and downgrade provisions on dismissal and to reduce and abolish provisions to protect working conditions.

We must not delude ourselves as to the nature of employment policy and the social policy of the EU in general or the interests which it represents, which is why, despite sharing the EU's positive position on the protection of working women, we believe this is nothing more than yet another report of ideas and good intentions.

We therefore call on working women and men to continue their social fight for an overall change of policy and for a policy which centres on man and respect for his needs and dignity.

A fight geared primarily to the implementation of the principle of full and stable employment, with full, consolidated social rights for everyone.

Only such a framework will safeguard the rights of the particularly sensitive category of pregnant women and the rights and respect for life as something other than the raw material of profit, subject to the laws of costs, competition and inexorable market forces.

(FR) We are in favour of all the amendments to the directive seeking to improve the protection of pregnant employees before, during and after their maternity leave.

The resolution proposes to remedy some of the omissions in the present directive and to harmonise European legislative systems to align them with those that guarantee the most rights.

We endorse such proposals in the name of guaranteeing employees' rights to health, especially as the proposed amendment of the ILO Maternity Protection Convention (Convention 103) reveals many retrograde steps, such as the exclusion of certain categories of women from entitlement to maternity leave, the minimum duration of maternity leave and the possibility of making a woman redundant during this leave.

A strict European framework must be established to protect pregnant women against any form of discrimination during recruitment, regarding issues of their working conditions, access to maternity leave or its duration: 20 weeks including 8 mandatory weeks after the birth.

Women must be protected against any wrongful dismissal and their former wage must be guaranteed.

Finally, night work must be prohibited for both men and women in sectors where it is not absolutely essential, rather than seeking to modify the conditions for pregnant women.

The next item is the report (A5-0139/2000) by Mr Peijs, on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism, on the Commission communication to the Council, the European Parliament, the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions on the development of short sea shipping in Europe: a dynamic alternative in a sustainable transport chain - Second Two-yearly Progress Report.

The rapporteur, Mrs Peijs, has the floor.

Mr President, in 1995, the Commission submitted the communication on the development of short sea shipping on the basis of the strategy which was formulated in the White Paper on the common transport policy.

The second annual progress report on this draft is now before us.

However, after five years, it has become clear that short shipping is still merely an empty promise which has not been kept, despite the verbal support by the Transport Council of 8 December 1999, which considered short sea shipping as a priority.

We are not trying to boost the popularity of short sea shipping out of idealistic motives.

It is a fact that transport shipping will increase by 70% in the next decade.

It is impossible to meet this growing demand by road transport alone.

Short sea shipping is therefore not a competitor of road transport, the train or transport using inland waterways, it is one of the modes in the transport chain.

It is in everyone' s interest to keep the irritation communities are caused by the constant drone of through freight transport to a minimum.

Transport should also be as clean as possible and in that respect too, short sea shipping meets high requirements.

Speed might not be the main feature of short sea shipping, safety is.

Weekend traffic bans and traffic jams are a curse to road transport.

In many cases, short sea shipping can provide a solution to these problems if it is used in combination with other modes of transport.

At the same time, I do not want to claim here that it is a panacea.

We will take the pressure off quite substantially if we try to make the best use of all modes of transport and combine them in the best way we can.

But in order to do this, a number of conditions do need to be met.

In its communication, the Commission makes a distinct reference to industry itself.

This is fine, but as rapporteur, I would like to add another dimension.

There are some very specific aspects where mainly governments at national, local or regional level can add weight and can give short sea shipping a boost.

In its communication, the European Commission provided a sound overview of the issue as a whole.

Parliament and your rapporteur have looked at the Commission plans with a critical eye and tried, in consultation with all parties involved, as befits a Parliament, to compile this report.

Industry was asked to raise practical issues which could, in their view, obstruct the development of short sea shipping.

We are still awaiting this report.

I would like to underline a few aspects.

Once again, short sea shipping can only take off in Europe if it is considered an integral part of the transport chain.

Connections with the hinterland in the form of rail, internal waterways and road are essential in this respect.

As such, it is important that short shipping is integrated with other modes of transport and this means that infrastructure will need to meet certain requirements.

Short sea shipping is also eminently suited to specialist transport.

Cars are a good example of this.

Innovation in the construction of specialist ships will prove decisive here and this could give our shipbuilding industry a shot in the arm.

The sector' s image is also important and must clearly be cleaned up.

The sector is suffering from excessive red tape.

But increasingly, we can also point to many positive developments within the sector.

Industry should take its responsibility there, for example, in the setting up of regional promotion and marketing agencies, but the market cannot do this on its own.

For example, the road transport monopoly springs to mind, with the impact this has on the levels at which short sea shipping should pitch its prices to tie in with Bilbao' s short sea port.

At every level, excessive bureaucratic procedures and endless red tape accompany the cargo.

This puts short sea shipping at a disadvantage compared to other modes of transport.

Accordingly Parliament calls for this sector to be treated with the necessary flexibility, thus enabling this sector to acquire a better position in terms of affordability.

For example, we have in mind the introduction of exemptions from pilot service in ports where captains can demonstrate they have a high level of experience.

By the way, an irritating error has crept in to the erratum, where the experience of the pilot is referred to.

This should, of course, be the captain, otherwise this is complete nonsense.

The market is still fragmented at present.

This is why in its report, Parliament points to the need for a one-stop-shop approach to offering logistical transport services to end users.

These services should embrace all multi-modal transport services and should, in this way, counteract the fragmentation of the present services.

In my report, I also call for incentives from the Commission, which are needed to promote short shipping.

In view of the European connections, I would also ask for investment projects in mainly the Mediterranean Sea area and the ports along the Adriatic Sea.

You may have wonderful short sea terminals in Rotterdam, but you need to have a destination.

The setting up of these new lines requires critical mass and it could be one or two years before these resources are available.

The European Union will need to help out by providing cheap loans from the European Investment Bank in order to overcome this difficulty.

Furthermore, we are lacking information and statistical data on which industry can base its investments.

No one knows what we transport in what way, where to and in what quantities.

I believe that statistical data on what we transport where is one of the things we need as a matter of urgency in order to pursue a policy for transport, which will grow at an amazing rate in the next couple of years.

Mr President, on behalf of my colleagues Ripoll and Pérez Álvarez, who have worked on this report - but who are not able to be here - I would like to congratulate the rapporteur, Mrs Peijs, on her marvellous report, in particular because it deals with a problem which is important for very real and practical reasons.

Furthermore, I wish to say that there are two things which I am regretting right now: firstly, that I am not able to hear the opinion of our friend Mr Fatuzzo on how short sea shipping affects the interests of European pensioners, and secondly, that so few Members are present because, considering the egotistical interests of this House, it is probable that one day they will regret not having found out about the issue of short sea shipping, because they will perhaps have to use it one day to travel to and from Strasbourg.

Turning to the background to the issue, I must tell Mrs Peijs that we have followed with great interest the developments and actions which in recent years, especially on the basis of the creation of the forum for the maritime industries, have been taking place in the European Union with a view to promoting short sea shipping as an alternative to land transport.

Both the Commission' s report and the rapporteur' s report illustrate the different comparative advantages of each type of transport, of which, in the case of sea transport, I would like to highlight the fact that the infrastructures are less saturated, the fact that they are less expensive, they consume less energy and therefore emit fewer pollutants into the atmosphere and they improve communications with the outermost regions of the European Union.

We consider - and I think we all agree on this - that the transfer of charges from land to sea transport should be taken as a priority objective of the European Union' s transport policy.

I would like to highlight the fact that in the last two years there have been a series of actions which have had positive effects on short sea shipping.

This has made it possible, as the Commission' s report points out, for intra-Community sea transport activity to increase by 23% between 1990 and 1997.

Nevertheless, this is a relatively modest increase - of only 3% cumulatively per year - and this is less comparatively than the increase over the same period in land transport, which has been 26%.

Consequently, rather than bringing the relative positions of sea transport and road transport closer together, the difference between them has continued to increase.

All of this indicates therefore that we not only need more vigorous quantitative measures but that we probably need a different qualitative focus.

Mrs Peijs' s report seems to us to be very balanced, but we would like to draw your attention to one of the key objectives for the promotion of short sea shipping: the simultaneous reduction of the time and direct cost involved in port operations for ships which provide this type of service.

In many cases, the port services - both with regard to the ship and the goods - are faced with no effective competition or with very limited competition and this means that there is often abuse of dominant positions, such as the imposition of obligatory services which are not necessary or are not even used, for example, piloting, towing, mooring and port handling, as well as the payment of very high tariffs.

What is certainly the case is that, apart from very few exceptions, transoceanic services do not have to face competition from roads and, in most cases, air transport does not offer any practical competition to them.

For all these reasons, we believe that, if the intention is to promote short sea shipping in a realistic and effective way, it is essential to reorganise the current provision of port services, by improving their efficiency and reducing their costs.

We should also bear in mind what this means for the economies of the areas in which there is a ship-building industry.

This means a revitalisation of the whole area, as is well known by the people who live in those cities, in those regions, in which the ship-building industry is a very active element in the local economy.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I was asked: why are we so keen on short sea shipping at European level?

The answer is: we have a vision.

We see large quantities of goods transported round our continent on safe, environmentally-friendly ships.

The goods are unloaded at the point where they can reach their destination via the shortest possible overland route.

That takes the burden off overland transport by adding another link to the chain of intermodal transport.

Of course we are still many sea miles away from making this vision come true, although some progress has been made over the past two years, as the report shows.

Mrs Peijs' good report describes the existing obstacles and the strategies for realising our visions.

There was broad agreement in committee.

What can we do internally for short sea shipping?

I just want to mention a few things. In the technical field we can introduce more environmentally-friendly technology for ships' engines and specific terminals for express transhipment.

In the organisational field, and especially for cross-frontier transport, we can introduce uniform shipping documentation, simplified administrative procedures and fewer pilot services in cases where they are not absolutely necessary.

What can we do for short sea shipping as a link in the intermodal chain?

First, we can improve the interfaces with other modes of transport by introducing modern systems of transhipment - especially to inland shipping - standardising containers, promoting transport logistics services for the entire transport chain and by many other means mentioned in the report.

I think we should also consider all these matters with a view to our pre-accession strategies.

Meanwhile we have the activity of the round tables.

The report says that an exchange of best practice would be useful.

That is true, for why have we been calling for some time now for a reference centre for intermodal transport. It would be sensible to engage in more research and above all to set up demonstration projects in the field of intermodal transport.

All in all the report offers a whole package of sensible proposals.

I hope that the next progress report in two years' time will tell us that we have moved a little closer to our vision, our vision of a successful intermodal transport system in Europe.

Mr President, there are three aspects of Mrs Peijs' excellent report that I would like to highlight and illustrate by way of example.

Although these come from my own constituency, I know they are representative of many similar regions.

First, intermodality and the need to optimise infrastructure links to the hinterland.

This week we have voted for environmentally-friendly measures designed to encourage more freight on to rail.

Good rail access into ports is vital in this context.

We have to accept, however, that there are times when it is roads that provide the necessary access into the hinterland.

I cite the placing on the TENs map of the A75 from Gretna to Stranraer, given its importance for sea transport to and from Northern Ireland.

Second, the extent to which outlying regions and islands depend on the sea for contacts with their neighbours.

We often look on the sea as something that separates communities.

We are better viewing it as a highway that connects them.

My group endorses Amendments Nos 1 and 4 accordingly.

I would add, though, that for environmental sustainability we should look upon connections between peninsulas in the same way.

In the west of Scotland the route from Gourock to Dunoon is twenty times as far by road as it is by sea and that from Tarbert to Portavadie is twenty five times as far.

Third, it is essential that we continue to recognise the lifeline nature of many short sea shipping routes.

I am not thinking just in terms of the need to sustain public service obligations in this context.

We also need to find other permissible ways of reducing the costs associated with transport to island and outlying communities.

Their economies are invariably fragile ones and it is just not good enough that the farmers on the Isle of Lewis have to pay twice as much for their hay as farmers living near Inverness.

I hope the Commission will take such points into serious consideration when developing policy in the area.

Mr President, in this group we welcome the Peijs report and we welcome the Commission's stance to which it is responding.

It is indeed true that short sea shipping is environmentally friendly and cost-effective, and it is indeed true that it supports the economic development of maritime regions; but we in Scotland call upon the Commission, therefore, to get its act together in respect of the forthcoming liberalisation of sea transport in the west of Scotland.

As Mrs Attwooll has just pointed out, we not only have island transport there but also important short sea links across what we call sea lochs and the geologists call fjords, where instead of going 150 kilometres up a narrow road over a mountain pass, you can take a boat across a narrow water.

If we were to interpret the regulation on maritime cabotage sensibly, we would say: Of course these peninsulas are functionally equivalent to islands, and public service obligations apply in these cases as well.

In that case it would be quite lawful for the state to support the services there.

In the same way, one could then take a holistic look at the package of routes across the west of Scotland, instead of breaking it up, inviting cherry-picking by private entrepreneurs who come in to take the few paying routes and make it harder to sustain the routes which are not profitable all the year round.

We want a holistic look at that kind of thing throughout Europe, we want an imaginative approach by the Commission.

It is six weeks since I put a question to the Commission asking if it would treat the peninsulas as equivalent to islands.

Earlier it had claimed intimate knowledge of the west of Scotland.

It still have not replied to that. I ask it to reply as a matter of urgency.

Mr President, Mrs Peijs, ladies and gentlemen, the Commission' s communication on the development of short sea shipping in Europe and the very good report on it by Mrs Peijs give a realistic picture of the development of this environmentally-friendly mode of transport in Europe over the past two years.

The development and promotion of short sea shipping are a particularly important step on the way to developing a system of multimodal transport for the European Union and bordering regions.

Efficiency, cost-effectiveness, environmental compatibility and sustainability distinguish this form of transport from road transport and can offer a serious alternative in coastal regions.

However, it is also most important to improve the cooordination between the various modes of transport so as to bring out the specific strengths of each of them most effectively.

That is why the public and private sector must adopt a range of European, national and regional aid measures to adapt and develop the ports, which are the nerve centre of the transport chain, and target these measures at the specific requirements.

Furthermore; it is important to adapt the related technical and organisational aspects, such as administrative formalities and documents, customs and embarkation procedures, to ensure the rapid and smooth change from one mode of transport to another and from one country to another.

Other support measures should include special incentives for the development of innovative technologies, special pre-embarkation terminals for short sea shipping and integrating the ports in the development strategy for the coastal regions.

This is an important means of strengthening economic and social cohesion and the links between the centres and the peripheral areas in the European Union.

The integration of short sea shipping in the logistics chain of door-to-door delivery can be an effective means of sustaining the growing economic cooperation between the EU and its neighbouring states and satisfying the growing need for transport that accompanies it.

Mr President, I would like to say the following on behalf of Mr van Dam.

Sustainable transport policy requires even more, or at least other, choices.

The task which we in this House have is to facilitate the transport of goods and passengers in such a way as to keep adverse side-effects to a minimum.

The mode of transport we are discussing here, short sea shipping, has the reputation of being a mode of transport which can counter the negative effects of the transport sector, especially in terms of the space occupied and environmental pollution, in more than one way.

However, as Mrs Peijs rightly points out, the sector is not taking full advantage of the opportunities at the moment.

I would like to highlight a number of aspects.

We often hear that short sea shipping, and transport by sea in general, is an environmentally friendly mode of transport in terms of emissions per transported unit.

This is certainly true, relatively speaking.

However, progress made in this sphere in other sectors, especially road transport, is undermining this position.

If ports refuse to turn a ship, swift action is most definitely required.

Given the developments in the road transport sector as a result of new European emission standards for fuels, I am of the opinion that in order to boost the environmental performance of short sea shipping, we need to lay down a European directive concerning maximum permitted emission levels generated by ships' engines.

Furthermore, unlike certain fellow delegates, I am of the opinion that short sea shipping should not only supplement existing modes of transport, it should also operate as an alternative to intra-Community transport.

Given the problems surrounding distribution or with regard to reducing ECO points in Austria, we very much welcome an alternative route from North to South and vice versa.

Short sea shipping can take care of at least part of this.

A third aspect concerns the situation at ports.

If we want short sea shipping to become more competitive in terms of speed, we will need measures to simplify customs and (dis)embarkation procedures.

The rapporteur is right to point this out.

If the sector then operates more efficiently and according to more up-to-date standards, it is vital to broadcast its potential.

In a number of countries, including the Netherlands, promotion offices have been set up successfully with this goal in mind.

It is therefore advisable for national or regional authorities to do their bit in order to develop this sector.

In short, Mrs Peijs' report is comprehensive and I would like to congratulate her on this.

If those involved take up their responsibilities, we are bound to conclude in a number of years what the Netherlands already knows: "Transport by sea, the best route" !

Mr President, to visitors from afar, the sea crossing to the Scottish islands is the stuff of romance, and indeed the beauty never fails to move both native and visitor.

But for those who live and make their living there, the island shipping services are both an essential lifeline and a costly hurdle to be overcome for their economic and social well-being.

The costs that impede are not only the fares, difficult as those often are, but also the inconvenience of pre-booking, of waiting in queues, of fitting in with timetables which provide low and variable frequencies; and then there are the risks of delays and cancellation due to weather or mechanical breakdown, or strikes which hold the islands to ransom from time to time.

There is considerable concern on the Scottish islands at the moment that the EU's competition policy, which requires putting these services out to competitive tender, will undermine these lifeline services even at their present level and add a further upward ratchet to the cost of living and of doing business.

We need to reassure those who live and work on these vulnerable islands and remote peninsulas that they have nothing to fear from bringing a measure of competition into the process for awarding these contracts.

Can I ask the Commission to do what it can to reassure the Scottish islands, the Scottish executive that is struggling with this situation at the moment and the Scottish Parliament, that it stands ready to make sure that this process works well, that it does not undermine but improves the shipping services in the Scottish islands.

Perhaps through Commission Verheugen I can pass an invitation to the Transport Commissioner, his colleague, Mrs de Palacio, to accompany me on a romantic trip to the Scottish islands.

Mr President, Commissioner, living as I do in a country with an extensive coastline and many islands - in fact I live on an island -, I have first-hand experience of the value of short sea shipping.

Of course, the basic sector is passenger transport, but the report under discussion focuses on freight transport in response to the Commission's communication.

It is worth noting that, although the volume of traffic carried by this form of transport has risen over recent years, road transport has fared better, meaning that special attention needs to be given to this more environmentally-friendly form of transport.

The current situation is still pretty off-putting for the public, which is given the impression that this is a fairly outdated, slow and complicated means of transport.

The development of maritime transport is further hampered by administrative procedures in need of improvement and delays, an incomplete infrastructure and the obscure fees levied by some ports, together with unnecessary mooring charges.

But we can still improve its image and turn it into a viable alternative solution for types of freight which can be transported by various methods.

I refer, of course, to places which are not restricted to maritime transport, such as islands, which must always warrant special attention.

The private sector has a basic role, but there are aspects of the market which call for intervention by public-sector agencies at regional, national and European level and even financial aid, so that islanders do not feel that they are second-class Europeans.

Developing cabotage has an immediate impact on social and economic development in our regions and hence on the cohesion of the European Union.

The rapporteur has obviously approached the subject matter in this spirit and has taken her work very seriously; as an islander I feel obliged to extend her my special thanks.

I should also like to thank Commissioner Verheugen who, I see, has put his headphones on. Thank you for your attention earlier on during the explanations of vote by the honourable members.

Mr President, Commissioner, at a time when we are trying to correct regional disparities, Mrs Peijs' s report is very opportune, since it deals with the matter of short sea shipping and asks Member States and the Commission to adopt measures to promote this type of transport.

As always, I would like to remind you that the regional and structural policy of the Union, as a whole, is a response to the specific disadvantages suffered by certain European regions, such as the so-called outermost regions.

Last March, the Commission presented a report which lays out a strategy aimed at the sustainable development of those regions and which includes various principal aspects, notably those regions' relations with the areas in their geographical vicinity, which, to a certain extent, largely condition their development.

Therefore, we believe that Mrs Peijs' s report is opportune, especially if it is reinforced by the amendment I have presented on the inclusion of sea transport between ports in the outermost regions and ports in the vicinity of those regions.

In this way, we could correct the error made by the Commission when it drew up the two-yearly report on the development of this type of transport, of employing an incomplete definition of short sea shipping.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, short sea shipping is the most economical, most efficient, and most suitable solution for remote regions.

I would like to thank Mrs Peijs for her interesting and excellent proposal.

In my own country, shipping is almost totally of this short sea shipping type: in other words, it is important to us in that respect.

We are unusual in that we only have a land connection with the rest of the EU in the north, so the importance of maritime traffic is enormous.

On top of everything, our railways have a different gauge from those found elsewhere in the European Union.

What is most peculiar about our situation is, however, that our shipping always comes to a halt in the winter unless certain measures are taken, because the sea freezes.

This has led to a situation where we have had to establish a special fleet to break the ice.

They are powerful ships: one ship' s energy is equivalent to that used by a whole city.

This being the case - as we have this hindrance to movement - we hope that this ice-breaking operation may be supported, as the obstacle has been ordained by the Lord, and we cannot do a thing about it.

It is also to be regretted that the effects on employment and welfare of this sort of traffic have not been highlighted sufficiently.

A cheap workforce is a huge risk in these circumstances, especially in the north, and especially in ice.

How can someone wearing shorts, who has no professional skill to his name, cope in minus thirty degrees and three metres of ice?

Aircrews are always well trained, but the same cannot be said of the cheap workforce that is employed on ships.

I expect the Commission to look into this matter.

Mr President, I wish to congratulate Mrs Peijs on a successful report.

There are many problems and bottlenecks with regard to transport in Europe: roads and air space are congested and the competitiveness of the railways is poor.

This week here in Parliament there have been many important reports on the subject of transport, all aimed at relieving congestion and reducing bottlenecks.

Mrs Peijs' s splendid report aims at exploiting the opportunities offered by short sea shipping.

It is an important addition to the reports on railways and air traffic.

We indeed need viable and competitive logistical chains linking road traffic, rail transport, short sea shipping and, in addition, modern information technology.

For remote countries across the seas, and that includes Finland, short sea shipping is an absolutely vital necessity, just as Mr Paasilinna there just said.

I wish to mention the importance of the suitability and availability of ports and port services.

Ports must be included in the Trans-European Network as part of the transport infrastructure.

For the measures proposed in the report to be implemented, good levels of co-operation will be required between the Union, Member States, players at local level, and companies too, as will genuine investment of time and money in short sea shipping.

Mr President, first of all I should like to congratulate the rapporteur on an excellent report.

Quite clearly she has spent a lot of time on it and has brought a lot of problems to light.

We can see the different problems quite clearly from different areas of the European Union.

Each area has its own particular problem.

We have to recognise that it will take time to achieve our ultimate goal. But there is no doubt that short sea shipping is something we must strive to achieve better than we have up to now.

It is certainly sensible to ship more goods by sea rather than by road.

It is more environmentally friendly, more acceptable in every way. But we have to ensure that we get the balance right.

That is what the rapporteur has been striving for.

One of the greatest problems will always be the cost factor.

To be competitive ports have to be more efficient and for this they will certainly require more support.

I support Mrs Attwooll's appeal for the A75.

It recognises that we in Northern Ireland export goods across what is a very expensive stretch of water between Northern Ireland and Scotland.

It is our main outlet for all we produce.

From Scotland they trundle down to England.

There certainly could be a more efficient and environmentally satisfactory way of doing that but there is no cheaper way.

For our industry or agriculture to survive they have to be cost-effective.

We had a very good ferry service set up between Ballycastle and the south of Scotland which was forced to close recently because of lack of support and bureaucracy.

Mr President, Mrs Peijs, I should first of all like to congratulate the rapporteur on the quality of her report.

All the previous speakers have said this, and, like you, regretted the fact that short sea shipping suffered from such a poor image in terms of its slowness and inefficiency, even though it provides one solution to traffic congestion, high infrastructure and environmental costs.

Moreover, in recent years, this form of transport has enjoyed an unquestionable success, even though it is not very well known, or not well enough.

It does however offer, as you said, advantages in terms of costs, energy, efficiency, regional cohesion, the environment and even intermodality, as it is an ideal means in the implementation of multimodal transportation.

Measures must therefore be taken at the earliest possible opportunity to step up the efficiency of dockside operations and reduce waiting times in port.

Speaking personally, I would insist on the public authorities playing a part, at regional as well as national and European levels.

There are, however, two points in your report that I have a problem with.

Firstly, the proposal to draw up a list of ports particularly suitable for short sea shipping.

I do not consider such a list to be necessary, as it entails a risk of penalising the ports which are not currently entirely suitable, but which are going to be modified in future.

Moreover, there is a suggestion that the logistical services offered to users should be combined in a single unit.

I am in favour of an information system but, personally, I reject the idea that a thriving major port should have central control of all the services.

Finally, I should have liked, as a member of the Industry Committee, to have heard someone say clearly that short sea shipping must not be considered as an alternative, but that indeed an intermodal strategy should be found, establishing complementarity between modes of transport.

In this context and in this spirit, the Member States should moreover harmonise their regulations so as to prevent distortions, which, particularly in the case of mainland transport, often cause hold-ups.

If we wish to achieve a multimodal system, it is important to have a set of means of transport and regulations that are, if not common to all, then at least perfectly harmonised.

Mr President, let me thank Mrs Peijs for her excellent report and for the work she put into it.

The report show that short sea shipping is an issue on which there is the widest agreement between you, the Member States, and the Commission and the agreement goes further.

I know of no one and no organisation which does not wish to see short sea shipping developed.

In the past we were guilty of talking short sea shipping down.

We mentioned its potential and by doing so implicitly said that it was not really doing very well.

It was not much publicised but short sea shipping was the only mode of transport which, during the 90s, could more or less keep pace with the development of road transport.

So we must give credit to the short sea shipping industry.

However there is always room for improvement.

The shipping industry is the first to acknowledge this.

Let me mention a few key issues in Mrs Peijs report.

We need a comprehensive approach to make this a genuine door-to-door concept.

It must be fully integrated in the transport chain and be offered through one-stop shops.

Several bottlenecks hamper the development of short sea shipping.

The Commission services are currently identifying these bottlenecks and potential solutions, together with the new Member States and industry.

One area which has already been identified is the diversity of documents required.

To create more uniformity, the Commission intends to present a proposal by the end of the year aiming to harmonise certain ships' arrival and departure documents.

The efficiency of ports is crucial for short sea shipping, and also by the end of the year the Commission will present a package of measures intended to enhance that efficiency through liberalisation.

Further, the old fashioned image of short sea shipping needs to be changed.

That was already mentioned in the debate and I appreciate that very much.

National short sea promotion offices should play an essential role in implementing this policy.

Some promotion offices already exist and the Commission encourages establishing further offices so that we can create a European network of promotion.

In the debate the question of Community grants was raised, and I would like to answer the question here.

The main source of Community grants to short sea shipping has in the past been the PACT Programme, that is a Pilot Action for Combined Transport.

Last year around 40% of the PACT budget was used to favour combined short sea shipping and that amounts to EUR 2.3 million.

It will even be more in the 2000.

We will increase the share up to 50%.

The DG responsible aims to continue this trend, so that short sea shipping will continue to receive its fair share of the PACT budget.

In the forthcoming revision of PACT this principle could even be incorporated into the legal text.

Mr Purvis, has asked me to pass an invitation to Commissioner de Palacio.

I certainly will do that and Mrs Palacio will enjoy a romantic trip to Scotland.

It would be even more romantic if you would invite me to accompany her.

Mrs Peijs, thank you for your work.

Thank you for ensuring that we all move in the same direction.

Let us all do it together, the Commission will certainly do its best.

Mr President, I should like to express my disappointment that on a matter on which I have had a written question before the Commission for more than six weeks, and which I raised in the debate, I have had no acknowledgement, far less a reply.

Thank you very much, Mr MacCormick.

The vote will take place tomorrow, Friday, at 9 a.m.

The next item is the oral question to the Commission (B5-0533/2000), on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs, on the future financing of the civil dialogue.

Mr President, I hope that, at this late stage, we will not be taking up too much time.

It is unfortunate that we now have to round up this important debate, which is important on its own merits.

If I can use this opportunity, I would just like to say that it would perhaps be sensible if in future, for example, we do not manage to vote on a Tuesday evening, we could squeeze in an extra round of voting, so that we do not incur further delays during the rest of the week.

You might be able to submit this to the Bureau for their consideration.

But this is, of course, not really related to these issues.

I do not need to add too many explanatory notes.

Firstly, it is indisputable that non-governmental organisations play a vital role in Member States, in the European Union and outside of the European Union. Everyone is agreed on this.

This is something which the Council states, and which is backed up frequently by the Commission and this Parliament.

Also, Article 136 of the European Treaty, in combination with declarations 23 and 38, underlines that cooperation with Wohlfahrtsverbände (welfare associations) is necessary, and these are also non-governmental organisations, of course.

The European Parliament has always put its money where its mouth is and has for some time, for some considerable time, created a line, B3 4101 in order to finance non-governmental organisations.

However, as a result of different provisions which have been agreed in conjunction with the Council, and following judgments by the Court of Justice, this line has now more or less expired after three years.

The European Commission has been aware of this for three years.

This issue is that so little is happening.

On the one hand, the great need is staring us in the face while on the other we see little in the way of specific action, except for the document which the Commission has issued and which we are specifically asking after.

The six million dollar question now is how we can translate the finely worded ideas we have all expressed into reality.

What I am saying on my own behalf, not on behalf of the Commission, is that bureaucratic issues are bound to crop up.

The reason for this could be that there are different Commission directorates involved.

NGOs are not restricted to one directorate general.

It could be that they are looking for a general angle and at the same time specific angles, but at any rate, this is all taking up too much time, as the budget lines are expiring.

This is also the reason why we are drawing the Commission' s attention to this issue this evening, in itself not a very appropriate time.

It is not so much the Commission' s intention which is at issue, but the speed with which certain things can be brought about.

We might otherwise run the risk of failing to implement not just a core task stipulated in the European Treaty, but also what has been stated by the European Council in Feira, because NGOs - and this is the only problem - are extremely sensitive, at least the majority of them, to breaks in payments to them.

They are far more sensitive to this than other organisations, and certainly Member States.

This means that if we wait around for too long, the patient will die.

This is the serious concern which we have in our committee.

This is the reason why we are asking these questions and this is also the reason why we hope that the Commission will tackle this matter with due haste within the scope which the Treaty offers and within the generally benevolent climate which the Council and Commission have displayed in Feira, as witnessed by the European Parliament.

Mr President, I can be extremely brief.

I thought the response by the Commissioner was encouraging on its own merits.

I think he is right in stating that we in Parliament should make every effort not to obstruct procedures.

I should point out, however, that we in Parliament have tried our hardest, using all the means at our disposal, to keep those budget lines up and running that enabled us to continue financing NGOs.

This can only be stretched so far and speed is then of the essence.

I would like to make one last point following on from the official reply by the Commissioner on the Intergovernmental Conference.

It is, in fact, not so much the content of the present Treaty or present declarations which is at issue, in fact he is more concerned to adapt these declarations, presumably in such a way as to form a legal basis from them, so that a programme can be based on them.

This is the problem, in fact, and I would ask the Commissioner whether it would be possible to give this matter further attention within the Commission.

As such, we are thus not asking for a new treaty, but for some attention.

Finally, because we are of course involved in the development of NGOs in the new Member States, in the context of enlargement, we believe that this should be given extremely high priority.

Mr President, I am speaking on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists in support of Mr Pronk's words on behalf of the Committee as a whole.

I have to say that I was not totally satisfied by the Commissioners' responses, in that the documents that were referred to, with which we are familiar, as Mr Pronk said, need to contain time frames and rather more practical decision.

As we know, we have been discussing the issue for years.

Parliament has played a fundamental role in this dialogue, but it is now time to move on from dialogue and declarations to concrete action.

The Commission needs to start putting forward practical solutions, for otherwise the issue will never be resolved.

I can see a certain contradiction and I am concerned, and I believe I speak for the rest of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs as well, that behaviour within the Commission in relation to the issue appears to be somewhat contradictory.

The role of the non-governmental organisations in the democratic construction of the Union and the economic and social role they play in Europe, the entire social economy sector, the third sector, is now acknowledged in practice as well as in documents - if we consider that approximately nine million workers are employed in this sector - as a major sector of fundamental importance.

Well, the most recent decisions of the Commission - and I refer to the Directorate-General for Industry - have labelled this a negative priority - they have now invented the concepts of positive and negative priorities - and have abolished the 'social economy' operative unit.

In my opinion, this is extremely serious and leaves us extremely sceptical as to whether the declarations made repeatedly in this House, which we have heard on several occasions, will be followed by practical action in the right direction.

The NGO platform, with which Parliament and the Commission have maintained dialogue, and all those involved feel as if they have been taken for a ride, and I think that we parliamentarians also feel rather as if we have been deceived, when declarations are made saying one thing and then, in reality, practical decisions lead to another.

The absence of an interlocutor on the administrative side apart from anything else will make it all the more difficult to resolve these problems rather than making it easier.

So if we genuinely want to make positive progress, speed up the procedures and provide positive responses for the European citizens as well as the Non-Governmental Organisations, in my opinion, we need to rethink a whole series of decisions which have been taken and, most importantly, change them.

Mr President, in the last few years the EU has, of course, been given more and more significant powers in the social area, but it has not been given an awful lot of money for solving social problems.

As long as the Member States are of the basic opinion that social issues should be dealt with by the Member States themselves, there will be no rapid change.

We are, of course, aware that those funds which do exist are strictly budgeted for and that it is difficult to move funds around within the budget.

It is difficult to meet new needs while the Member States have this attitude.

For these reasons, I believe that it is particularly important for those of us who work in the EU institutions to concentrate on according much greater importance than we have until now to the non-governmental public organisations in Europe operating in the social sphere.

I am sure everyone can see that there is a need for transnational activities in the social sphere, too.

There is, therefore, a place for non-governmental organisations.

It would, however, be unfortunate, and that is perhaps the way the Member States see it, if the non-governmental social organisations were to be strongly bound, financially and politically, to the EU - more so than they are already becoming.

Their worth lies precisely in the fact that they are non-governmental and civic and are able to see social problems from a different perspective than the authorities. In that way, they constitute a complement or alternative to the Commission, the Council and Parliament.

I will take the opportunity to make a suggestion, despite there not being many people listening (there are only around six MEPs in the House).

I propose that the Commission try to set up a European fund for this purpose with the non-governmental organisations in the social sphere.

I propose that the Commission turn to the Council and the Member States to try to get them to contribute to such a fund.

This fund ought to be set up as an independent institution whose board of directors is made up of people from the social organisations themselves, together with researchers and experts in the social sphere.

One might imagine that such an organisation would escape some of the bureaucratic problems.

Financial supervision could be exercised by professional auditors.

I believe that if we set to work on a task like this with a certain diplomatic tactfulness, the Member States would react positively to the proposal.

I also believe that all other parties - the socially disadvantaged, the non-governmental organisations, the Member States and the EU institutions - would all be very pleased with such an institution.

Mr President, we must thank Bartho Pronk and the chairman of our committee for speaking about civil dialogue and relations between the Commission and NGOs, because, in the final analysis, the report and other contributions seem to me to be purely administrative and far removed from the practical reality, and this is exactly the impression I had, Commissioner, when you answered Bartho Pronk.

You told us that the Commission was active in meeting the operating costs of NGOs, but what we Members of Parliament want is to ensure that all NGOs, may be supported and funded on the basis of a number of practical projects.

For, nowadays, it is the major NGOs which have the opportunity to respond to a number of invitations to tender: Médecins du monde, Médecins sans frontières, the Red Cross and so on and so forth. That is my first comment.

You must be aware of the problems experienced by a good number of smaller NGOs in being able to respond to a number of invitations to tender.

The work they do in terms of relations and competencies is, however, just as important as that of the major NGOs, but some of them do not have the same administrative facilities that some major NGOs have.

Secondly, what we would also like to see is the needs of NGOs being satisfied before a major tragedy occurs.

Let me take just one example, the protection of childhood.

For four years, a number of Members of Parliament have been fighting for funding for associations working to combat child abuse.

It was not until the Dutroux case that we were able to obtain a budget line enabling two programmes to be run: Daphne and STOP.

Today, regrettably, only one programme is left, the Daphne programme.

I can tell you that, as experts on matters to do with small children, a number of NGOs would indeed love to be able to respond to specific invitations to tender.

Finally, I feel it advisable to simplify the procedures and that, in this connection - I do not know if this has to be a fund -, the Commission should, at least initially, make a service available to NGOs, enabling them to obtain information on the work carried out by other parties and, possibly, establish networks on certain topics in order, ultimately, to be able to submit tenders to the Commission when offers come up.

That, Commissioner, is what I wished to say.

We shall make progress in the social sector because we know that we have to make progress in terms of cooperation in that sector.

This is precisely why, given that social matters are essentially part of the remit of NGOs, we must make progress in the matter of civil dialogue.

Mr President, Mrs Lambert and Mrs Ghilardotti are right.

The European social NGOs are playing a critical role in our work.

Anyone who went through the Article 13 discrimination package could see this.

Since the 1998 budget crisis which saw the freezing of funds destined for NGO work with some of the most vulnerable people in Europe and the developing world, much progress has been made.

The Portuguese presidency broke new ground and invited the European aid platform to the Lisbon informal social affairs summit and the French presidency is following suit.

These kinds of initiatives were recognised in the conclusions of the Lisbon summit.

But words are not enough and two years after the 1998 budget crisis, the difficulties continue.

There have been two years of consultations with NGOs and all the Commission has come up with is a discussion paper and two internal working groups which have hardly met.

Meanwhile NGOs, and I worked in the NGO field, are being squeezed by bureaucratic rules which were introduced to promote accountability and transparency but which in the end have created more red tape.

The troubles of NGOs Mr President are further compounded by this House when it makes difficult rules on co-finance requirements which are set with the tightest deadlines.

The one budget line that we had - B3-4101 has been scrapped and the Commission has failed to come up with a proposal for a legal base for the civil dialogue either through suggesting a Council regulation or a Treaty article.

Worse, the social NGOs have been told by the Commission that they will need to be funded through our new discrimination and social exclusion budget lines.

How can that be when the funds for those programmes have been reduced beyond what is reasonable?

A number of valuable social NGOs are facing serious crises because of the inaction of the Commission and the Council.

I saw one NGO which made an application for projects requiring eighty pages of budget sheets and so many supporting papers that one NGO application weighed over twelve kilos.

Mr President, that has to change.

NGOs are critical to our work and we must support them.

I would like to give warm thanks to all the Members who took part in this debate for their suggestions, as well as for their very strong criticisms.

I will pass them on and will raise them during the Commission' s debate.

Let me just reply briefly to two points.

The first concerns the legal bases and the financing.

Here we should not forget that one of the characteristics of a non-governmental organisation is that it should not be dependent on public funding.

Otherwise it ought to be called a governmental rather than a non-governmental organisation.

So I do not have very much sympathy for the oft-repeated call for governments or the Commission to assure the financing of non-governmental organisations in full.

All they can ever do is provide support and cooperate on projects.

A number of speakers have addressed the question of non-governmental organisations and enlargement.

I will answer them, because this matter is within my direct remit.

All the ideas I have heard put forward in this debate have long since become reality.

With our pre-accession aid, we are working very closely with the non-governmental organisations in the candidate countries; moreover our communications strategy, the organisational and financial framework of which has now been established, is also very much targeted at non-governmental organisations in candidate countries, since the aim is precisely to fully involve civil society in this important political process.

I will faithfully report everything else back to the Commission, without omitting to mention what I perceived to be the basically rather critical mood of this debate, and I can assure you that I myself will certainly urge very strongly that procedures are simplified and decisions taken more rapidly.

Thank you very much, ladies and gentlemen.

(The sitting was closed at 9.08 p.m.)

Approval of the Minutes of the previous sitting

Ladies and gentlemen, first of all I must inform you that it has not yet been possible to make available all of the language versions of the Minutes.

The approval of the Minutes for yesterday' s sitting is therefore postponed until all the versions are available.

The reason for the delay is that we have more than 200 pages of roll-call votes, which have cost Parliament' s budget the modest sum of BEF 4 million.

We are therefore currently producing the remaining versions.

I hope that all the groups will bear in mind how much requests for roll-call votes cost Parliament' s budget.

Therefore, when we have the remaining versions we will proceed with the approval of the Minutes.

Mr President, on a point of order I should like to draw the attention of the House to a very serious incident which occurred yesterday in my constituency of Sunderland, in England.

A fruit and vegetable wholesaler had his premises raided by police and trading standards officers, who seized the weighing equipment which he used to dispense his produce in the traditional British units of pounds and ounces.

Apparently this is now in contravention of an EU directive, although there is a legal doubt about this.

I hope the President will join with me in condemning this extremely heavy-handed reaction and write to my constituent offering the full support of the House in his fight against this nonsense.

If Members are wondering why the EU is so unpopular in the United Kingdom, it is because of incidents such as this.

Mr Callanan, I am extremely concerned about this very serious attack on British tradition, and it will be duly discussed.

However, this was not, in my opinion, a point of order.

Mr President, I just wanted to say something about the Minutes, although it is not yet time for them to be approved. However, it might be possible to make a correction to them already.

Yesterday, with Mr Karas' excellent report, I had intended to vote in favour of paragraph 5, a particularly good one.

I accidentally voted against it. I would ask you to correct this.

Mr President, I should like to ask you to instruct the Security Service to investigate what has been going on.

When I came into my office this morning, the door was open, even though I know for sure that I closed it last night, and my computer was switched on, even though I am quite certain that I switched it off last night.

I think that what went on there last night must be investigated at any rate.

Mrs Gebhardt, this is a concern that I share, because exactly the same thing has been happening to me for two days.

We will therefore notify our security services.

Mr President, I respect the fact that you cannot put the Minutes to the vote yet, but I would just like to comment on a matter which was raised yesterday.

At the beginning of the topical and urgent debate, we had a discussion on the application of Rule 146 of the Rules of Procedure, that is to say adjournment of a debate.

The President declared this not applicable to the topical debate.

I wonder how it is possible for a rule of the Rules of Procedure not to apply to a situation without it being further mentioned in the Rules of Procedure.

Rule 146 was clearly cancelled out in that instance.

I would therefore ask whether the Committee on the Rules of Procedure or the President could explain in what instances Rule 146 would apply.

Yesterday' s incident caused a great deal of confusion.

Mr Maaten, Rule 50(6) stipulates that Rules 143, 144 and 146 shall not apply to those resolutions.

This means that the president of the sitting strictly applied the Rules of Procedure.

Mr President, on the point that Mr Callanan raised a couple of moments ago, I suggest that instead of raising the matter with you he should raise it with the Queen of the United Kingdom as she seems to have an opinion on most European issues these days.

I have taken note of this peculiar point of order.

I would like to inform you that, as you are aware, yesterday a tragic road accident occurred in Spain, near Soria, in which 2 drivers and 25 teenagers died.

The President has decided to send our condolences to the families and to the respective authorities.

I think that this goes some way to satisfying the requests that were made during the debate yesterday.

Mr President, of course, the Catalan Members here today, such as yourself, Mr Gasòliba and I, are particularly affected by this tragedy.

Aside from the rightful decision by the President to send her condolences to the families of the victims, perhaps, Mr President, it would be helpful if that communication from the President urged all the authorities responsible for transport in the European Union once again to step up the application of legislation and the monitoring of safety conditions for the transport of both school children and pensioners, who have frequently been victims of such tragedies.

Mr President, you said that recorded votes cost 4 million from Parliament' s budget.

Could you ask the Committee on Rules of Procedure to look at the following point: we all respect the principles of power with responsibility and subsidiarity so every time a group asks for a recorded vote could a certain sum be debited from the budget allocated to it by Parliament?

Mr Newton Dunn, I am afraid to say that this is not an original idea.

It is not the first time that it has been discussed.

I think that there could be a better solution in the context of the reform of working methods that is currently being examined by the Bureau and the Conference of Presidents.

There are a few documents from a working group chaired by Vice-President Provan, which deal with these matters and which have now been passed on to the groups to be discussed.

Working Document No 4 specifically deals with the actual mechanics of the plenary session, and I think that would be the appropriate environment for this type of discussion and for making improvements to our working methods.

Mr President, I have the following question to ask: we have just received the printed version of the texts adopted.

We have received the bulky paper version with the numerous roll­call votes, but what is missing is the verbatim report of proceedings for yesterday' s topical and urgent debate.

Topical and urgent subjects of major importance are being postponed until Thursdays, certainly not without good reason, but urgent topics also need to be dealt with urgently as well.

We have taken the floor on many occasions.

I recall the subject of Tibet being discussed on the Dalai Lama' s 65th birthday yesterday.

The people are keen to hear that there was great unity here in the European Parliament, how this came about, and what the outcome of our debate was.

It has happened before in my experience that we have only had one opportunity to avail ourselves of the verbatim report of proceedings for the Thursday topical and urgent debate, and that was on the Wednesday of the following week.

Hence, the question: when will we receive the verbatim report of proceedings for these topical and urgent subjects of major importance?

Mr Mann, this week at least, the verbatim report of proceedings has been available to all Members from 10 a.m. onwards on the following day.

I would be surprised if today we were not in a position to do the same.

Mr President, although we consider the prospect of developing short sea shipping in Europe, as well as inland waterway transport, as something positive, Armonia Bordes, Chantal Cauquil and I have chosen, nevertheless, to abstain from voting on this proposal.

The report indicates that the large sums of money which need to be invested in order to develop the infrastructure will come from public funds, whereas the way in which the infrastructure is used will be governed primarily by the requirements for profitability and competitiveness of the private companies that, according to the proposal, should be its main users.

. (FR) We know that short sea shipping is an integral part of the European transport system.

However, as the Commission report and the report of the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism point out, short sea shipping is suffering from a poor public image in terms of its cost, slowness and inefficiency.

Nevertheless, this image no longer corresponds to the real situation and this mode of transport can provide solutions to global problems which are prevalent in this area in Europe.

I am thinking about traffic congestion problems, and high infrastructure and environmental costs.

During the last few years, progress has also been made and there has been a real increase in short sea shipping: from 1990 to 1997, a 17% increase in the tonnage transported and a 23% increase in the number of tonnes per kilometre.

While there is no doubt about its success, this mode of transport has not yet reached its full potential and maximised its hidden advantages: advantages in terms of cost since it is the most economical mode of transport; advantages in terms of the amount of energy consumed per tonne/kilometre; advantages in terms of efficiency since it is the most efficient mode of transport from the point of view of the amount of investment required in relation to transport capacity; advantages in terms of regional cohesion since it is the most suitable mode for servicing the peripheral regions of Europe; advantages in terms of the environment since it causes less pollution than mainland traffic; and advantages in terms of intermodal transport since it is an ideal way of developing multimodal transport.

We must therefore act quickly in order to contribute to its development.

In particular, we will have to develop joint investment programmes.

One of the priorities will have to be to increase the efficiency of port operations and reduce waiting times in ports.

I would stress the fact that the public authorities have a major role to play at regional level, as well as national and European level.

However, two points in my fellow Member' s report pose a problem for me.

They concern the proposal which seeks to draw up a list of ports which are particularly suitable for short sea shipping.

Drawing up such a list seems unnecessary to me and, in particular, runs the risk of penalising those ports which are not yet entirely suitable, but which are being converted for this purpose.

Moreover, a 'one­stop­shop' approach to the transport logistics services offered to end users is proposed.

While I am in favour of the idea that we need to find the means to set up an information system, I am against the service being centralised by a large port, which is already in a dominant market position.

Finally, I would have liked the report to have included the proposal made by the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy, according to which short sea shipping must be considered neither as an alternative to road transport nor as a competitive system.

The European Commission should therefore develop an intermodal strategy to achieve complementarity between the modes of transport.

In this context and with this in mind, the Member States should harmonise current legislation in order to prevent it from representing an obstacle to continuity between short sea shipping and mainland traffic, particularly as regards the total weight of rolling stock.

The proposal which is being put forward to us today therefore represents an important step in the right direction in the area of short sea shipping.

However, we still have a long way to go.

The next item is the debate on the report (A5-0178/2000) by Mr Di Lello Finuoli, on behalf of the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs, on the initiative of the Kingdom of Denmark with a view to the adoption of a Council Framework Decision on combating serious environmental crime [5343/2000 - C5-0078/2000 - 2000/0801(CNS)]

Mr President, the framework decision put forward by the Council merely reproduces the Council of Europe Convention of 1998 on the prevention of environmental crime, a Convention which has not yet been ratified by any of the Member States of the Council of Europe.

The sole purpose of this proposal for a framework decision is to speed things up, at least with regard to the 15 Member States.

In almost every country environmental laws are based almost entirely on very small fines, and this encourages those who are destroying the environment to maximise their profits by trying to avoid using all the modern techniques available to protect the environment.

And so, in recent years we have witnessed major disasters such as that of the Erika, which was a rust bucket used to transport crude oil by sea, or the pollution of the Danube with cyanide from Romanian mines.

And all this because, as I was saying, these big companies are guaranteed impunity, with the aim of maximising profits.

First of all, this framework decision allows European countries to raise fines to make this offence - environmental crime - unprofitable.

Indeed, until such time as environmental crime is paid for by the community and not by individuals, there is no hope of protecting the environment.

Another area where this framework decision impacts is that of encouraging European countries to adopt sanctions, or at least a system making environmental crime a punishable offence for legal persons.

Few European countries provide for the liability of legal persons in their criminal law, but others are taking steps towards this.

Italy too, in revising the new penal code, intends to make legal persons punishable, because today serious environmental crime is not committed by individuals but by large multinationals, which cause huge disasters simply because they do not invest in prevention.

European countries should agree on fairly general regulations soon and, in any case, raise fines so that these offences are not paid for out of the community' s pocket.

Another important aspect is the cooperation that this framework decision will bring about between countries: an information network enabling a rapid exchange of information and an agreement which requires environmental crime to be considered as a crime that may lead to extradition or for example the confiscation of property and profits, and which, in any case, makes these offences unprofitable.

I would just like to point out that the committee approved this report almost unanimously, with only one abstention, and all the political groups, from the PPE to the PSE to the Greens, contributed to improving it.

This report therefore expresses the point of view of the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms, and, we hope, expresses the point of view of the European Parliament, which must ensure that the European countries at last adopt effective legislation on the protection of the environment.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, Commissioner, I must begin by highlighting the excellent work that Mr Di Lello Finuoli has carried out on this report, which received, as he has already said, the almost unanimous support of the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs.

I also wish to praise this initiative by Denmark, which seeks to ensure that a Framework Decision on combating serious environmental crime is approved.

We are all aware of the increasing scale and the frequent cross-border effects of this type of crime.

I must also mention one of the recent surveys by Eurobarometer, which confirms that the environment, together with security, health and unemployment, is one of the concerns closest to the hearts of the European citizens.

We therefore have an obligation to respond to these concerns, in a way that will guarantee the protection of the environment and public health, with a view to improving the quality of our citizens' lives.

The truth requires us to recognise that the European Union has made considerable progress in the area of the environment over the last five years.

Today, even from the point of view of the Treaties, we have already seen a balanced and sustained form of development taking place.

Under the terms of the Tampere conclusions, environmental crime is one of the areas specifically mentioned, on which efforts must be concentrated in order to establish common definitions, charges and sanctions between the various national criminal laws.

There is therefore a crucial need for joint action by the Member States in order to protect the environment under criminal law.

We in the Member States are facing a common problem, which, more and more, is having effects which go beyond the borders of the State in which the crimes are committed.

This makes it crucial that we implement concerted measures for protecting the environment under criminal law, which are in force right across the territory of the European Union.

Either through criminal laws or through severe sanctions - and I stress the adjective severe - which are commensurate with the offence and which act as an effective deterrent.

Furthermore, as Mrs Schörling pointed out, there must also be a global course of preventive action, under which Member States can guarantee that companies whose activities involve a greater risk to the environment and which might have harmful effects on public health are properly informed about the environmental consequences of their activities and that they adopt the appropriate safety measures and precautions.

It is therefore imperative that the methods for combating serious environmental crimes are strengthened and coordinated between Member States.

To conclude, I wish to call on the Member States that have not yet signed up to the Council of Europe' s 1998 Convention on the protection of the environment, to adopt, under their national legislation, the necessary measures to do so as quickly as possible.

) Mr President, the harmonisation of Member States' criminal law on combating environmental crime forms a very serious part of the policy to create an area of freedom, security and justice and an essential supplement to any effective environmental policy.

I would therefore like to congratulate both the Danish Government on the initiative it has undertaken and the honourable members, Mr Di Lello Finuoli and Mrs Schörling, who have used their texts to broaden and specify the scope of the initiative.

Despite the Danish initiative being a positive step in the right direction, it does in fact have its weak points in comparison, for example, with the 1998 Council of Europe Convention.

This is because it focuses solely on criminal law and disregards questions of prevention, health, protection of cultural heritage and so forth.

However, despite its weak points and contradictions, the initiative is a positive one because it promotes the creation of a legislative framework which will allow for more coordinated joint action through a stronger Europol, mainly in tackling cross-border environmental crime.

It lays down minimum sanctions, particularly for cases in which the environment is sacrificed at the altar of profit.

I fully endorse this approach because, as we all know, the punishments laid down for environmental crime are grossly out of proportion with the effect which these crimes have on society as a whole.

However, we feel that the Danish initiative has not properly examined the Member States' legislation and will probably be difficult to implement because of the major discrepancies between them.

But I do agree with the reference to the liability of legal persons given that, by definition and by nature, the majority of environmental crimes are committed by corporations and industries.

I also feel that the reference to the countries of Central and Eastern Europe is essential as I think that every proposal ought to take account of the prospect of enlargement.

Furthermore, I must stress the need for educating and training the personnel who will be responsible for investigating and prosecuting environmental crimes, the need to highlight preventative measures and the need for all the Member States to ratify the 1998 Convention of the Council of Europe. To date, not one Member State has ratified it.

I should also like to stress that the Member States will have to pledge to work together on this extremely important issue.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, this is both an incredibly complicated and, at the same time, incredibly important area.

It is a logical continuation of the Treaty of Amsterdam and the Council of Ministers' summit in Tampere.

It is a classic area requiring cooperation.

When we look at the Danish text, as well as at Mr Di Lello Finuoli' s report and Mrs Schörling' s opinion, which are both excellent, we see, however, that it is an extremely complicated area.

We must have good coordination between the assistance agreement, which has recently been debated here in the Chamber, and the rules concerning money laundering.

I am not completely certain that the instrument is ready in every respect, but I am pleased that the attempt is being made to avoid duplicating the work of the Council of Europe.

We see that there are really three parts to the Danish initiative, plus the demand for ratification of the Council of Europe' s Convention.

It is important to have regulations in criminal law so that we can prevent environmental crime.

I personally believe that confiscation rules are more important than the demand for strict penalties and severe fines.

Experience shows that a very great deal can, in fact, be achieved by means of strict confiscation rules.

We have the old saw, 'Crime must not pay' .

As Mrs Schörling also pointed out, we must have close cooperation, including when it comes to the rules relating to environmental liability which we are to draw up and which are mentioned in Article 2 (a).

I am pleased that, in the opinion she has drafted, Mrs Schörling also takes up the question of animals, which does not surprise me at all.

I think that we in this Chamber should say loudly and clearly that this must be an instrument with which we tackle the disgraceful ways in which animals are transported.

We are quite surprised that the Commission, for example, has not set to and wanted to apply the existing rules.

Why is the Commission so passive - much more passive than in many other areas - when it comes to being the Guardian of the Treaties on the issue of protecting animals in transit?

Amendments 16 and 19 introduce interesting matters which I doubt would be a part of many other countries' criminal legislation.

They concern misleading information provided by local or national authorities, at the same time as the latter, in their turn, have been misled.

I think this is something we should study in the future.

I see this as a clear illustration of the current questions in Baia Mare and of the investigation which is under way there concerning who is really liable.

These are very complicated, very interesting and very important questions.

I am also pleased that specific vessels have been cited and that there is also a readiness to apply measures outside the territory of the EU.

We should nonetheless be aware that, if we do this, we must also define what constitutes the type of serious environmental crime we are talking about combating.

Mr President. I think it is accepted by most people that the existing laws are much too lenient and it is important that some sort of provision is put in place to ensure that criminal law cases are possible.

In the present situation there is no incentive whatsoever either for companies to clean up their act, to take responsibility to ensure that negligence does not occur.

This has a knock-on effect on other companies as well.

When it comes to taking legal action it is up to individual citizens themselves to take up these cases and that can be extremely difficult and expensive.

Of course, people can be up against big companies with huge amounts of power and resources at their disposal which makes it very very difficult in many cases for them to pursue these cases to the end and ensure that the companies pay the price.

They really are criminals who through negligence or through deliberate action are destroying the environment, affecting human health, affecting our flora and fauna and causing in many other ways long-term damage, all in the interest of profit.

Companies that manage land and sea transport, for example, have in many cases absolutely no sense of responsibility and it is essential for some sort of sanctions to be put in place to ensure that they are forced to act responsibly.

Governments should provide more information and make clear to the public the scale and effects of environmental crime because many sections of our society are unaware of this.

For example in relation to water, soil, our health, flora, fauna and indeed climate, it is extremely important that proper information is made available.

Moreover it is not just companies.

Sometimes it is national authorities who are actually flouting the law and behaving in an utterly negligent way.

I do not have to go any further than my own country to see that in many cases local authorities and so on are actually responsible themselves for environmental damage.

And, when it comes to enforcing the law in relation to companies that are operating in their area, they are negligent in that respect as well.

It seems that profit comes before the interests of the public and the environment.

That should not be allowed to continue and authorities who fail to enforce the law should themselves be held liable for the environmental damage caused as a result.

Whether it is deliberate or through negligence, at the end of the day it makes very little difference because the damage is done.

In many cases companies use the argument of negligence rather than saying it is deliberate but in fact negligence in its way is deliberate.

These firms knew the consequences and they should be held accountable for the complete and total cost of cleaning up the damage that they have caused wherever possible.

The other thing I would like to point out is that there are companies, such as British Nuclear Fuels, who have absolutely no sense of public responsibility or environmental awareness.

They have been causing pollution for such a long, long time the length of our coast by polluting the Irish Sea and putting the public in Ireland, and indeed on the west coast of the United Kingdom, at serious risk.

You only have to look at what happened in Chernobyl which again was due to a negligent attitude.

How long is that going to take to rectify?

These situations can no longer be allowed in a world where we should be fully aware of the environmental problems that we are causing.

We have the technology, the know-how and the resources to ensure that these things do not happen.

The Erika is another example of negligence.

I would also like to support the last speaker who talked about animal transport.

This is deliberate exploitation and ill-treatment of animals and should be taken into account as well.

On an international level we have seen many many disasters in the past, just to take Bhopal as an example.

Cost-cutting and cutting corners caused the biggest environmental disaster in history.

That company still has not been held properly and legally responsible.

It was taken to court in India.

The head of the company was supposed to be arrested and a warrant was issued for his arrest.

He absconded to the United States where he has decided to stay and has not come back to face the consequences of his action, even despite warrants from Interpol.

Then there are the issues of forestry and fishing.

The malpractice of many fishing activities should be taken into account because it is also an environmental crime which has long-term consequences.

It is about time that we all faced up to our responsibilities because we have not only ourselves and our environment to think of but future generations as well.

The only way we are going to do that is to ensure that environmental damage is considered one of the most serious crimes in our society.

Mr President, it is not difficult to express one' s support for the analysis that has been put forward in this report.

The effects of environmental crime spread into the territory of many countries.

The importation and exportation of crimes does not recognise the EU' s external borders.

The crimes are often committed by a corporate body.

The crimes are often perpetrated in a spirit of profit-making.

The perpetrator makes the profit; external costs are left for others to pay.

You analysed the situation quite correctly: the environment must be broadly interpreted as people' s health, biodiversity and artistic and cultural heritage.

It is not hard to support a policy that makes it easier to combat environmental crime.

These crimes must be made unprofitable; they cannot be allowed to have merely financial consequences. They have to be prevented.

Publicity is also one way of combating environmental criminality.

Why do we not start by publicising, or demanding publicity for, the fact that the Belgian Government allows unclean waste water to run into the river in the city of Brussels?

Mr President, on behalf of the Italian radical members of the Technical Group of Independent Members, I would like to say that the Di Lello Finuoli report certainly contributes to improving Denmark' s initiative, and we therefore congratulate the rapporteur.

However, in addition to repeating the positive things that have already been said, it is important to stress some of the limitations of Denmark' s initiative, precisely to help us to take more effective action in the future.

Mrs Karamanou has already made an important point: in reality, the Council is not telling us what the current state of the Member States' laws is.

Now, my reaction may well be over-cautious, but I am very suspicious of those who say: let us raise fines, let us increase the sanctions, without, however, telling us what these fines and sanctions are.

I think it would have been appropriate for Denmark and the Council to have also given us a framework of sanctions, so that we could have seen what really are the most serious gaps that need to be filled and the most serious limitations of the European situation.

The part on criminal sanctions is, of course, important, and the European legal framework must surely be made consistent. Nevertheless, this is not the only question concerning respect for the environment and environmental disasters: we need to take a more comprehensive view of the matter.

We know, for example, that the levels of pollutant emissions are decreasing in the European Union, and they are decreasing because of the structure underpinning the way the economy operates.

Clearly, we also need to intervene with the criminal framework where real crimes are committed, but it is important for the criminal framework to be consistent with the rest of the legislation, administrative sanctions and provisions regulating the economy in order to make the overall framework consistent.

Indeed, administrative sanctions, which affect the effective costs of businesses, are often sanctions which have an even stronger preventive effect than criminal sanctions: the person in charge of a business or a company is unlikely to consider the risk of being arrested or of facing criminal sanctions when a tragedy occurs, while on the other hand, it is preferable if he or she is obliged, on a daily basis, to consider the higher expense that polluting processes entail.

Having said that, if, as many of the Members have said, the Council of Europe Convention is more comprehensive and more consistent, perhaps in these cases we should also ask ourselves how the European Union might be able to consider the Council of Europe texts directly in order to make legislation more homogeneous, both within and outside the Union.

I would like to make one final remark about the sensitive matter of the relationship between the State and pollution.

We speak of individuals and companies, whereas the state-owned companies or the State itself are often partly responsible for major environmental disasters.

This is something which should be taken into account, and I think that the initiative of Denmark and the Council does not do this directly enough.

I will end by extending my congratulations once more to the rapporteur, Mr Di Lello Finuoli.

Mr President, in all decisions and acts, it is sensible first to examine what has already been regulated and what else we are prepared to do or can do.

In the Council of Europe - and this has already been echoed by others - a convention was concluded in 1998 to fight international environmental crime.

However, most Member States have yet to sign and ratify this "Convention of the Council of Europe on the Protection of the Environment" .

Denmark has proposed that more far-reaching measures be taken at EU level to fight environmental crime.

Within the Council of Ministers, the only item which survived in the framework decision was that of criminalisation, and all Denmark' s other ideas have been taken out.

As such, the added value of such a framework decision has been nullified, since penalisation was already included in the Council of Europe' s Convention.

In more concrete terms, fewer countries have signed up to the framework decision than the Council of Europe' s Convention.

Hence it is preferable for various Member States to sign and ratify the Council of Europe' s Convention.

Needless to say, I welcome further steps at EU level, such as the Danish proposal.

My question to the Council of Ministers is whether it would be prepared to go this extra mile.

The European Parliament, however, is now caught in a dilemma. Should it issue a recommendation with regard to the Danish proposal or with regard to the Council of Ministers' amended proposal?

Since we only have the Danish proposal at our disposal, we will use it as our basis, although we wonder whether this is at all useful, because if the Council enforces the watered-down proposal, I for one will argue against laying down any EU framework decision at all.

Concerning the Danish proposal, I would firstly point out that this framework decision should mainly be considered as a supplement to the national approach to environmental crime.

This supplement must have a legal framework for an international approach, such as coordination, information exchange, reporting of crimes, central registration and criminal prosecution in international environmental crime.

In order to make clear what does and does not fall within the scope of the framework decision, a sound definition of environmental crime is vital.

I principally assent to the formulations proposed by Denmark, although I wonder whether the illegal trade in threatened flora and fauna could be added to the definition.

Even if we can agree on a sound definition, the application will be difficult in practice.

Was the Erika disaster an example of environmental crime?

And what about the cyanide pollution in Romania?

It was a clear case of extensive environmental damage, but do the other criteria apply too?

It is important that liability for these acts eventually falls to those responsible.

It would be useful if this issue could be included in the White Paper on environmental liability.

Many of the amendments tabled by the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs concern editorial changes, some of which are redundant.

In my opinion, it is better to give the Danish proposal to the Council our full backing than to propose minor changes of no real consequence.

I do, however, support additional ideas, such as providing information on the effects of environmental crime and court rulings.

Mr President, naturally I am interested in the European Commission' s view.

Could Commissioner Schreyer clarify this rather odd procedure which we have ended up with?

Mr President, on most occasions when my Irish colleague Mrs McKenna speaks in this House we would disagree, but on an issue like this we have far more in common than that which divides us.

I certainly recognise that the greatest environmental disasters occur as a consequence either of irresponsibility or the actions of those who are driven by the profit motive, irrespective of the consequences.

Regrettably such disasters affect many countries at the same time.

We know only too well that major environmental disasters respect no international frontiers.

In more recent times we experienced the problems caused by the pollution of the Danube with cyanide from Romanian mines, the Erika tanker break-up off the French Atlantic coastline and, from an Irish point of view, the continuing problems caused by Sellafield.

And of course in the not-so-distant past there was Chernobyl, the memory of which still haunts us.

Events such as this will continue to recur unless and until we establish the "polluter pays" principle in the fullest sense of these words.

Multinational firms will only change their behaviour when they are forced to pay heavily for their misdeeds.

They will continue to inflict damage on the environment when the rewards far exceed the punishment.

Their attitude is based on the simple belief that implementing restrictive environmental protection either harms their business activities or increases their financial overheads significantly.

Furthermore, any meagre fine they will be obliged to pay pales into insignificance when compared to the huge profits that they make.

I therefore welcome this initiative that acknowledges the international nature of environmental damage.

It recognises the need for strong punitive sanctions.

In particular the criminalisation of environmental damage will send a clear warning to those responsible for it.

If the Danish proposals were to be implemented, those who put unsafe vessels on our seas would think twice.

Others, such as the management at Sellafield, who deliberately conceal information and involve themselves in bad practices, be held accountable for their deeds.

And the chief executives and managers of the multinationals who make the important decisions displaying the callous disregard for the consequences would face the proposal of not only seeing their businesses maybe in some cases closed down because of heavy fines and seizure of assets and so on, but they themselves could face imprisonment.

I believe that this is a direction in which we must go but I would also like to make one additional point.

Proposals and actions in this field should not simply be confined to the territory of the European Union.

We have a responsibility to ensure that multinational firms are unable to transport their damage and their behaviour to the developing world because of restrictions that we may place upon them within the European Union.

We must also impose standards on European firms that operate in the developing world and seek international cooperation to have tough standards and sanctions applied on a worldwide basis.

Mr President, I would first like to congratulate the Danish Government on taking the initiative to propose the Council framework decision that we are discussing, which aims to equip us with more effective tools for combating serious environmental crime.

We also congratulate the rapporteur, Mr. Di Lello Finuoli, who, throughout the negotiation of this initiative, has acted with great clarity and strength in relation to our shared principles and values, but also with prudence and flexibility, which led him to adopt several amendments incorporating various adjustments.

We are therefore arriving at a final proposal that we consider to be both reasonable and ambitious.

We welcome the fact that, by means of this framework decision, the European Union is supporting the Convention on the Protection of the Environment through criminal law that was approved in the Council of Europe in 1998 and which has so far not been ratified by enough States to enter into force.

In the European Union, only nine Member States have signed it, and only one has so far ratified it, which is still quite scandalous.

My colleague and compatriot Carmen Cerdeira contributed ideas and amendments that are now part of the text on which we are going to vote.

I agree with these and would like to highlight four aspects in which I feel that we have succeeded in improving the initial proposal during the parliamentary process.

The first aspect is that it is recognised that a country may act against criminals when the crime against the environment has been committed on its own territory, but also when it has been committed in another country, if the consequences of that crime affect the former.

The second aspect is that this ability to act has been extended and will affect not only crimes that have been committed, but also attempted crimes which, for one reason or another, do not have any effect, but could have had effects.

A third element is that it is applied to legal persons, when they are responsible, as it is they, rather than individuals, that commit the vast majority of serious environmental crimes.

The fourth element that I wish to highlight is that the financial and other penalties imposed for such crimes will always have to be greater than the benefit that the perpetrators would gain from them.

This will put an end to a situation in which, in many cases, it is not only cheap but actually profitable for them to commit a crime.

This is a good document, which we hope will be effective, but we also need to be committed to it.

Mr President, I would first like to join in congratulating the rapporteur, Mr Di Lello Finuoli, on his work.

I am pleased with this initiative from the Danish Government, which is based on the new procedure established in the Treaty of Amsterdam, in order to deal with the matter of ensuring better and greater protection for the environment in the European Union, something which should obviously not be limited by borders within the Union.

My colleague, Mrs Thors, has already expressed our favourable position with regard both to the report and to the amendments tabled by the respective committees, and I will therefore focus on three points.

For some time, I have been trying to ensure that the Commission deals appropriately with European forests, and I have seen the problems that have arisen as a result of the need to deal in a variety of ways with this issue which has a clear environmental dimension.

The first difficulty that I see in truly applying this proposal is in categorising environmental crimes, given the diversity within the Union.

The second matter is the need to consider the international dimension of the crime.

We have seen how difficult it is to find out who is ultimately responsible for many large-scale environmental crimes, but, furthermore, the set of legal responsibilities of the entities who, ultimately, appear to be responsible, really makes it very difficult to actually deal with these crimes from a criminal point of view.

I think that this will be an important task for the Commission.

We have to prevent criminal responsibilities from being blurred.

Thirdly, Mr President, I just want to say that it is essential that the field of justice and home affairs be communitised in the European Union, and this proposal demonstrates that.

Mr President, yesterday we debated and voted on a report from the Committee on Petitions.

This year that Committee has dealt with a thousand complaints from citizens.

Forty percent of those one thousand complaints are associated with violations of Community environmental law.

Given these complaints we can appreciate the need for the proposal that we are examining, a Council proposal at the request of the Kingdom of Denmark, and also the need to approve the reports by Mr Di Lello Finuoli and by Mrs Schörling, from the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy.

I believe that this report covers three important aspects.

Firstly, the request that the Council of Europe Convention on the Environment should not only be signed, but also that it should be ratified.

No state has ratified the convention so far, but that is not contradictory with adopting this report here today.

The report gives a quite correct definition of the parameters that are useful for defining the crime: repeated violations of Community law, the seriousness of the damage and, in some cases, putting profits before any other consideration.

We believe that the crimes are often clearly premeditated.

Of course they are, Mr President, even in the case of some environmental crimes that appear to be accidental.

I well remember the case of Doñana in Spain or of the Danube.

It was obvious that a reservoir containing such a large quantity of dangerous products near to a natural park such as Doñana could cause an accident at any time.

Secondly, Mr President, I feel that penalties are essential.

I am in no doubt about this.

Some of the Members here today shed doubt on the need for penalties.

I do not. I think that even the 'polluter pays' principle is a partial one.

Sometimes there are those who prefer to pollute and pay a small amount, which is much less than the profits that they will gain from committing the crime.

Penalties are therefore essential, and they need to be designed to act as a deterrent and to be proportional to the damage to citizens' quality of life.

Thirdly, the natural environment should be regenerated.

Mr President, is it not acceptable that, in the case of Doñana, public money should be being used to regenerate the area, while the company that caused the major damage has only contributed a small proportion?

It is therefore essential to regenerate the damaged environment, and also for legal persons to be liable.

Only in the United Kingdom, Finland, and Denmark are there rules that enable legal persons to be held liable.

To conclude, Mr President, I would like to mention cooperation between states, which is essential.

In the Committee on Petitions, we are aware of the terrible frustration felt by those citizens who take the trouble to report environmental crimes and see that, in Europe, we are incapable of coming to their aid in order to improve the natural environment in which they live and to prevent these crimes.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, many thanks to Denmark for this excellent initiative, and thanks too to the rapporteur for the good work.

It is definitely so that when the fines are small, environmental crime becomes lucrative.

But we have to remember that this branch of criminality also affects people, people within and outside the workplace.

The framework decision would prevent this sort of crime from being profitable.

In my opinion, however, the multinational giants are the big problem, and co-operation between the authorities is needed in this area, also so that these regulations might enter into force before enlargement.

The worst environmental crimes are those perpetrated by companies, for which it is just part of their business.

Some of these are repeatedly found guilty of these crimes.

It is just this repeated, intentional, environmentally criminal activity that is what we should be looking into.

I hope that the Commission will make a public register of such companies, as for them it has become just a part of their business. Consumers and people in general could then bring public opinion to bear on the situation.

I come from a country where we can initiate criminal proceedings against a corporate body, and that has had an impact and preventive effect there.

It is obvious that the director of a company will take a more serious view of the environment, as it is possible that he will end up isolated from it as a result of having gone to prison for criminally abusing it.

I therefore think that when people start having to face the consequences, progress will be made in the matter both within the Union and in other respects.

Mr President, like everyone else, I want to join in the praise of the Danish Government which has taken this initiative.

It goes to show that there can be aggressive and progressive action in the Council when it comes specifically to environmental questions.

As we know, conscious and intentional misconduct by companies and individuals in environmental matters not only puts our countryside at risk but also endangers people' s lives.

I am quite convinced that if anyone says the word Teckomatorp in my country, Sweden, then everyone - or at any rate the majority of people - knows what the word signifies, even though it is an environmental crime which was committed more than 20 years ago.

It concerned a company which did not manage to deal with its poisonous waste but chose instead to bury it in the ground and in that way put a whole district at risk.

Unfortunately, Teckomatorp is not the only event of this kind, and many representatives here in Parliament have also witnessed other events which have occurred since then, not to mention the situation - akin to that in the Wild West - which prevails on our high seas.

Obviously, we must regard environmental crimes as seriously as we regard all other criminal acts.

Common definitions of environmental crime are therefore also needed.

I agreed with the draftsperson of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, Mrs Schörling, that, in order to prevent environmental crime, we also need effective legislation governing environmental liability.

Preventive measures are the best way of guarding against further crimes against our environment.

If we are to be able to investigate suspected environmental crimes efficiently and well, special knowledge is also required on the part of both police and prosecutors.

Otherwise, there is a danger of these crimes' not being properly investigated.

If these crimes are not detected quickly, they can remain unsolved or perhaps not have anything done about them at all.

In the few seconds I have left, I want to address the Commission directly with the request which, among others, Mrs Thors and Mrs McKenna mentioned in connection with the transport of livestock, instances of which occur every day within the Union and which are perhaps the most obvious environmental crimes we face today.

I should like the Commissioner to take this issue seriously on board and ensure that we get something done about the current situation.

I really believe we have the citizens of the entire Union behind us when it comes to doing something about the dreadful ways in which livestock are transported.

Mr President, honourable Members, I think I can say with regard to your last request that I would be happy to accept it along these lines.

The Commission takes the view that the initiative of the Kingdom of Denmark for a Council Framework Decision basically consists of two parts.

The first part should lead to any serious culpable breach of environmental legislation within the Community being punishable with criminal sanctions which are effective and act as a deterrent.

It puts forward a minimum standard with regard to criminal acts.

The initiative mainly focuses on this part, which in essence corresponds to the provisions of a convention which was adopted by the Council of Europe in November 1998.

Unfortunately, none of the Member States - and this has also been pointed out several times here - has ratified this convention yet. I can therefore understand Denmark' s initiative, which now seeks to deal with this issue afresh within the framework of the Community powers.

The second part, on the other hand, contains provisions on improving cooperation and the exchange of information between the law enforcement authorities and the courts of law of the Member States.

There is a lot to be said for an all­embracing approach to such issues of legal assistance and improved cooperation within the judicial field that is not limited just to environmental law.

In accordance with this, a Council working group - one speaker has gone into it already - is currently working just on the first part of the initiative, that is, on substantive criminal law.

There are already several initiatives and proposals on improving cooperation in criminal law matters, which are not limited to environmental criminal law.

A primary aim of the Treaty of Amsterdam and one of the Communities' general objectives is to improve mutual legal assistance, the exchange of information and other forms of cooperation between the courts and the public prosecution authorities of the Member States, in order to create a genuine area of freedom, security and justice.

What we need for this are very clear and transparent provisions, which are easy to deal with, and to which the individual authorities can quickly refer when applying the law.

The Commission takes the view that in order to achieve this and counteract fragmentation within the field of justice, the rules on legal assistance should have as much general applicability as possible.

Special provisions, such as in environmental law, should only be made when required and as an exception.

With this in mind, the European Judicial Network was established in 1998 through a joint action. It has started its work and is developing many activities to make legal assistance and the exchange of information easier.

Of course, the Commission takes the view that this must be developed further.

As well as the international convention already in existence on legal assistance and mutual recognition of judgements, further Community actions are planned in this area.

The Commission very much welcomes the first part of Denmark' s initiative.

Until now, the environment has certainly not been protected as legal property by criminal law in all Member States.

While some Member States have specified particular environmental offences in their criminal law, this is not the case with others.

A serious breach of environmental law is therefore not necessarily punishable in every Member State.

This is then naturally to some extent an incentive for cross­border environmental crimes.

The overall lack of enforcement in environmental protection cannot, of course, be corrected by criminal law measures alone, but here too, this framework decision would certainly provide new impetus.

In the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy and the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs, the question has already been raised as to whether the existing Community law of the first pillar already contains adequate obligations for the Member States.

On this subject, it must be said that the instruments of the first pillar frequently provide for sanctions, but these do not necessarily need to be in the form of criminal law.

Under the first pillar, it is in principle up to the Member States whether they regard sanctions of administrative law as adequate or whether they take up the sharper sword of criminal law.

I would like to mention one point, which still appears problematic from the Commission' s point of view, and which has also been mentioned in different speeches here, and that is the question of the punishability of legal persons.

The Danish initiative provides that legal persons must be made responsible under criminal law for serious environmental offences.

In the Commission' s view, however, account must be taken of the mature legislation of some Member States, which generally rules out punishing legal persons.

Comparable provisions of Community law merely provide that sanctions should be imposed on legal persons, which may then be entirely in the form of administrative law, and - as has rightly been said repeatedly - that the material damage caused is then punished by financial penalties.

On the question of financial penalties, I should once again like to point out the significance of the Green Paper - which the Commission published a few months ago - on environmental liability, which ultimately aims to include the environmental damage caused.

In the interest of the initiative' s chances of implementation, it may well be advisable to proceed in this case by talking about responsibility of legal persons without using the words "under criminal law" .

Irrespective of this, however, the persons responsible for serious environmental offences should, of course, also be subject to criminal law.

There was in fact unanimous agreement on this in this very interesting debate.

To conclude, may I say, on behalf of the Commission, that, unfortunately, we are repeatedly having to instigate infringement proceedings against Member States in matters of environmental law, and there is a large number of infringement proceedings pending in this self-same sector.

Unfortunately, this gives the overall impression that perhaps many Member States do not take the area of environmental protection and environmental law so seriously after all.

Against this background, the Danish initiative is very noteworthy and significant from the Commission' s point of view.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, we were more than happy to endorse this report, because we believe that environmental crime is still being underestimated, that its effects often go undetected and liability is sometimes difficult to establish.

The dioxin scandal in Belgium started with the illegal dumping of a few litres of toxic spent oil from transformers which ended up in animal feed.

In some cases, environmental crimes are not detected or are detected when it is too late.

Often, environmental officials draw up official reports which are subsequently 'filed away' within the legal system.

After all, fighting and prosecuting environmental crimes is not a priority for many Member States.

At any rate, cooperation in terms of criminal prosecution at European level still leaves a great deal to be desired.

This was once again borne out in this report.

We have established that as yet, Europol has no authority whatsoever to act.

What is more, the majority of Member States still need to ratify the Council of Europe' s 1998 Convention and environmental crimes are still not being penalised adequately in many countries.

If Europe wants to prevent and fight environmental crime effectively, Member States will need to adopt a consistent approach and will need to accept the instruments required to achieve this.

Mr President, this time I shall speak not only as representative of the Pensioners' Party, but also as a former sailor, because both the measures that we have discussed this morning concern the sea: the first, short sea shipping and the other, the environment, and the sea is often the victim of environmental crime.

This morning, a pensioner telephoned me from Liguria and said: "It is really hot.

I wanted to go swimming but I had to come home straight away because the sea was very polluted and full of tar.

So what are you doing for those of us who live in Liguria, in Genoa, and although we have the sea, it is polluted?"

"Do not worry" , I said, "Today is Friday 7 July.

On Fridays we normally discuss fish, and today we are discussing the sea."

Now, just as I voted for the measure on short sea shipping ports - and I hope these will include Genoa, Imperia, Savona, Toulon and Marseilles - I also voted for the measure on cleaning up the sea, which is so important for pensioners and people who live on the coast.

Mr President, I came into the Chamber to vote against this report as a protest against the misleading and inaccurate comments made by Mrs McKenna in relation to the management of the nuclear reprocessing plant at Sellafield in the United Kingdom.

I see that Mrs McKenna felt so strongly about the matter herself that she did not bother to attend the vote.

I can only hope that the rest of the debate and the report are more accurate than Mrs McKenna.

Approval of the Minutes of the previous sitting

We will now proceed to the approval of the Minutes from yesterday' s sitting.

Mr President, yesterday, I gave an explanation of vote in writing on trafficking in human beings, and there is no record of it in the Minutes.

It will be duly corrected, Mrs Laguiller.

Mrs Lulling, we are approving the Minutes.

The President has taken note of your correction to the Verbatim Report of Proceedings, and Parliament' s enthusiasm for your comments will be duly noted in the Minutes.

I declare the session of the European Parliament adjourned.

(The sitting was closed at 10.40 a.m.)

I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Friday, 7 July 2000.

Ladies and gentlemen, once again it is my sad duty to open our plenary sitting against the background of the violence in the Spanish Basque Country which has intensified dramatically over the summer.

A further seven victims have been murdered by an organisation whose strategy is clearly, henceforth, one of attempting to defeat democracy by the use of terror.

Let me give the names of the murder victims: José María Martin Carpena, a Popular Party municipal councillor in Malaga, whose widow and daughter are to visit the House tomorrow morning at 9 a.m.; Juan María Jauregui, the former Civil Governor of Guipuzcoa; José Maria Korta, president of the Guipuzcoa employers' association; Francisco Casanova, a Second Lieutenant in the Spanish army; Irene Fernández Pereda and José Angel de Jesus Encinas, members of the Guardia Civil in Sallent de Gallego; Manuel Indiano, Popular Party municipal councillor in Zumarraga.

On each of these sad occasions, I expressed our solidarity with the victims.

I have expressed our condemnation of these unspeakably barbaric acts.

I have also offered the Spanish authorities our support.

Today, Parliament as a whole, unanimous in spite of the range of our political affiliations, is honouring their memory, affirming loudly and clearly that terrorism is the very antithesis of democracy.

To deny the right to life is to kill liberty.

Not only is violence a solution to be condemned, it is also inefficient, as it isolates and excludes the perpetrators of such actions.

I propose a minute' s silence as a last tribute to these victims, as an expression of our support for their families and friends and, indeed, to all democratic men and women in Spain, and particularly in the Spanish Basque Country, who, despite the climate of terror, continue to believe in political dialogue, the fundamental values of civilised society and the ultimate victory of democracy.

Please stand and observe this minute' s silence.

(The House rose and observed a minute' s silence)

- Madam President, unfortunately I cannot agree with what you have said.

There is no truth except the whole truth.

A part of reality is not sufficient by itself.

The whole is the only real truth.

This is much more than a metaphysical quotation from Hegel.

We in Euskal Herritarrok also regret profoundly the loss of human lives and share with all Basque citizens the shocked feelings of our people at the moment.

Bertrand Russell denounced the obscenity of deliberately humiliating a nation, of making people crazy so that a straitjacket would be needed.

This is actually the Spanish Government's strategy towards the Basque country.

The action of ETA is a righteous expression of the struggle for recognition of something quite elementary.

(The President cut the speaker off)

Mr Gorostiaga Atxalandabaso, in view of the circumstances, I must say, personally, and this is perhaps not quite in keeping with my duties as President, that I find your contribution quite unacceptable here.

Addressing more particularly those Members of Parliament that were members of the previous legislature, it is my very sad duty to inform you of the deaths, this summer, of Vassilis Ephremidis and Staffan Burenstam Linder.

Many of you will have very clear memories of their time with us, of their particularly dynamic presence, and I have taken the liberty of sending condolences to their families on behalf of the House as a whole, of course.

Approval of the Minutes of the previous sitting

Madam President, on a point of order.

In a letter I sent to you on 1 September, I referred to various allegations in the British Press about one Member of this House, Mr Hannan, and the fact that he is alleged to have raised over GBP 100 000 for the 'no' campaign in the Danish referendum on the euro.

Could you launch an investigation into this matter to establish that Mr Hannan did not use Parliament premises or the staff to which he is entitled as a Member of this House to raise that money?

Could you also ensure that Mr Hannan states the position in his declaration of financial interests in advance of the referendum in Denmark so that the citizens of that country can see where the money came from?

Mr Murphy, I note your statement.

I have indeed received your letter, and I have forwarded it to the quaestors, who will see what action needs to be taken in response to it.

Madam President, could I ask you to invite colleagues, when they make declarations of that type, to assure themselves that the Member concerned has been informed of such a declaration?

It is very discourteous to make that sort of remark, openly in the Chamber, when the Member concerned is not present.

Mr McMillan-Scott, the problem I have is that I never know what subject the Member is going to raise.

In fact, that should really have been a procedural motion.

Madam President, I rise on a point of order on the issue of the recent industrial action at the French Channel ports, which caused major disruption yet again to EU citizens legitimately travelling between the United Kingdom and other Member States.

Is the House aware that the Strawberry Regulation permits expedited procedures for the owners of goods delayed by this type of action to receive compensation, but does not give the same rights of compensation to tourists and other travellers?

Are you aware of the anger felt by citizens of this Union who seem to be regularly disrupted by these wildcat actions which are now taking place for the sixth summer running at the Channel ports?

Would you, Madam President, undertake to raise with the President-in-office and the Commission what action can be taken forthwith to stop this happening in future by strengthening the regulation, which I believe is No 2679/98.

Thank you, Mr Bradbourn, I shall happily take note of this comment.

Madam President, I am sorry to take the floor to raise an issue which is not a point of order, but I feel that I should explain what happened today to some interpreters, officials and MEPs.

All of us here today know what a problem it is to get to Strasbourg.

I, for example, need to take three flights, starting at half past seven in the morning, to get from Asturias to Strasbourg.

However, given that we arrive in Paris at 1.20 p.m. and the plane for Strasbourg leaves at 1.30 p.m., it is not acceptable to have a situation where, if the Madrid-Paris flight is delayed, we are left behind.

Some interpreters were due to work at 4.30 p.m. and were unable to do so, and some MEPs, such as Mr Medina, left the Canary Islands yesterday evening to arrive here today at 5.00 p.m.

If we arrive an hour late, they clearly cannot be expected to wait for us.

However, if we arrive in Paris ten minutes late, it is not right that nobody bothers to tell the next flight to wait for us.

This cannot continue, Madam President, because some of us have enormous problems getting here, specifically those of us who come from outlying regions.

I would ask you to speak to Air France.

Mrs González Álvarez, as you know, I am well aware of all these problems.

Believe me, I am continually informing the relevant authorities, both governmental and airport, of our problems.

I should like to thank the 300 Members who sent in their completed questionnaires. These will enable us to get an overview of the situation, as the saying goes, and indeed, I have every hope of achieving tangible results, which is what we really need, not another committee or some other such thing.

We need real results which will change the conditions governing Members' travel to Strasbourg and I shall fight at your sides, believe me, in order to obtain them.

Madam President, during the last Strasbourg part-session I communicated to the Presidency the enormous concern in the Bay of Algeciras and the Campo de Gibraltar about the presence of an English nuclear submarine suffering from a serious fault in the cooling system of its nuclear reactor.

I am yet to receive any reply in this regard.

Madam President, we Andalusians are proud to receive this broken-down vessel in our waters, but we are very concerned about the United Kingdom' s stubborn determination to repair the fault there.

It is common knowledge, from the Royal Navy' s own documents, that this port is not sufficiently equipped for the repair of this type of fault.

We would therefore ask for your help so that a section of the European Union' s population may be protected from any possible risk.

To this end, I would ask you to take the necessary steps so that the said submarine may be towed away and repaired somewhere where there are sufficient safeguards, and so that we can thereby prevent the social alarm which is being caused.

Mr Bautista Ojeda, I should like to point out that next Thursday, in the topical and urgent debate, the safety of nuclear submarines will be discussed.

The Conference of Presidents specifically wished to widen the debate beyond the tragic accident of the Kursk.

This will be the appropriate opportunity for you to state your case.

Madam President, I would like to point out that this House has on many occasions condemned the death penalty, and has also made representations to the United Nations requesting moratoria.

Furthermore, it has given its opinion on specific cases, including the case in question - the execution of Derek Barnabei which was announced in July.

The execution is to take place in ten days time on 14 September, and I therefore feel that it is important that you, Madam President, who are well-known for your sensitivity, write to the Governor of the State of Virginia on behalf of this House and request a stay of execution.

I shall be happy to do so, Mrs Napoletano.

Indeed, we have already made representations on several occasions and, even if we were unsuccessful in changing the course of events, I believe we must continue to do so, and I shall do so wholeheartedly.

Madam President, as other Members have said, there is indeed a problem with air services to Strasbourg.

I should, however, like to remind those members that are such devotees of free competition, that since we deregulated airlines, it is no longer possible to subsidise them and to class services to and from Strasbourg as public service operations, and hence, many invitations to tender have failed to bear fruit because no airline has been prepared to offer flights which are considered to be unprofitable.

Madam President, I am not about to enter into this debate, but I would just like to draw your attention and my fellow Members' attention to another matter concerning this city, which is the extremely sensitive and worrying situation of a group of Hungarian gypsies who arrived in Strasbourg on 24 July, following persecution and racial discrimination in their own country, and who are seeking political asylum not only in our country, but also in other European Union countries.

I do not wish to go into the details of the situation, but the essence of the problem is of very direct concern to us since, on the one hand it provides a very tangible and specific illustration of the problems involved in applying the Copenhagen criteria, which require urgent solutions, and on the other hand, the problems that certain countries that are candidates for membership of the European Union have in fulfilling the terms of the treaty.

Then again, it also forces us to state, once again, that respect for minorities and human rights must be assessed in the same way and on a par with compliance with the economic criteria.

So, Madam President, and I believe you are in complete agreement with this opinion, which is also in line with the opinions adopted by this House on these issues, I should like to see the matter referred to the joint parliamentary committee, in this case the EU-Hungary Joint Parliamentary Committee, at your request, as a matter of urgency.

The group of 46 people who are here, Madam President, the Zamoli gypsies, are placing all their hope in the ability of this House to achieve progress in these matters.

I shall write this evening to the Chairman of the Joint Parliamentary Committee, so that he can look into the situation.

Madam President, Mr Murphy was speaking about Mr Hannan' s ill-timed interference in the Danish election campaign.

It is not a problem for us Danes that the Conservatives have nothing to do in England, but are acting the fool in Denmark.

We just smile at them and say, "Heaven knows why they do not just mind their own business over in England and leave us to get on with our own business in Denmark."

Madam President, given that the Chairman of the Joint Parliamentary Committee is present, I should like to respond immediately to my fellow Member by saying that we are indeed going to hold a meeting of the Joint Parliamentary Committee this week, and I shall immediately contact the Ambassador, who is scheduled to visit us on Thursday, to see if he can offer some response to these questions as early as the Thursday sitting, and I am perfectly willing to invite my fellow Member to take part in our proceedings on Thursday morning.

Thank you, Mr Desama, you have pre-empted us, so I do not need to write to you.

Madam President, I am one of those MEPs who need to travel for 24 hours in order to be here by 5.00 p.m.

I say this because I have spent half an hour trying to talk about the Minutes of the sitting of Friday, 7 July of this year.

On Friday, 7 July, on behalf of the ELDR Group, I tabled an amendment to Mrs Peijs' s report, which was fortunately accepted.

However, the amendment has not been correctly translated into Spanish since, where it talks about the peripheral regions, I wished to refer, and I in fact did refer, to the outermost regions of the European Union.

Mr García, I apologise. We shall make the correction.

We had not understood that you wished to speak regarding the Minutes.

Madam President, since a colleague has mentioned the name of Gibraltar could I remind the House that Sunday, 10 September is the national day in Gibraltar and some of us will be there.

But I am surprised that the House is not debating Burma on this day.

Yesterday, the ministers of the 15 imposed sanctions on Burma, and there has been a siege of the elected leader of Burma, Aung San Suu Kyi, and an outburst of violence around her home.

The British Ambassador was beaten up this morning, and the European Parliament should take strong action towards Burma, just as the ministers are doing.

Lord Bethell, I have, myself, already made a statement on this subject because we are extremely concerned about the highly insecure situation of the winner of the European Parliament Sakharov Prize and we are monitoring this situation extremely closely.

Indeed, it is on the agenda for the topical and urgent debate on Thursday, i.e. the day after tomorrow.

Madam President, I also refer to the point of order that was raised about the nuclear submarine in Gibraltar.

I would ask you and other Members to bear in mind, when considering this issue and when it comes for debate that, although Gibraltar is part of the European Union, the residents of Gibraltar do not themselves have direct representation in this Parliament.

I would ask this House to give urgent consideration to the exclusion of those citizens and to secure their representation in this Parliament so they can bring their concerns to this House themselves.

Mr Perry, Members of Parliament will be able to express whatever opinions they see fit in the course of the debate.

They do have freedom of speech.

Madam President, some MEPs will probably be surprised to hear the reality of the situation, which is that Gibraltar is a British colony.

It is very odd that there are still colonies within the European Union in the year 2000, but that is the case, Madam President.

Madam President, I am afraid I must raise this issue again.

In your letter of 14 July it appears to me that this House is putting Members' health below that of the state of the carpets.

I was quite shocked to receive the letter to say that ashtrays will be put outside the Chamber, along with no smoking signs, because you have always been helpful in the past on this matter of smoking in this building.

It is incredible to me that there are Parliament rules stating that there are no smoking areas yet we do not have a safe passage into this Chamber.

I have just been diagnosed with deep vein thrombosis and the medication I am taking makes my asthma worse.

I plead for a safe route from my office into this plenary session, not only for me but for other Members here who suffer from other breathing problems.

I hope this will be put into place immediately because, otherwise, my health and other people's health will suffer.

I hope you will look into it as a matter of urgency and remove all ashtrays from all the no smoking areas as a matter of course.

Mrs Lynne, thank you for making this point.

I noticed a number of quaestors applauding heartily, and so I do not for an instant doubt that they are going to draw up regulations along the lines you suggest.

To reply to what you said to me, the regulations are already in place.

European Parliament rules have been drawn up, and we are not abiding by them.

Mrs Banotti will give you an answer, but if the regulations have already been drawn up, then they must and shall be applied.

Madam President, I fear that I must say something that might upset some Members, but the ushers outside are afraid - and I use the word advisedly - to ask some Members to stop smoking, because of the kind of abuse they get when they try to do that.

I need hardly say that I am totally against smoking as an ageing ex-nurse.

I have personally gone round to both Members and visitors to ask them to put out their cigarettes.

The ushers themselves have tried their very best to be diplomatic, but they are subjected, and I use the word advisedly, to abuse by some smokers when they ask them to stop smoking outside the doors.

Members ought perhaps to be aware that this is not a very nice way of behaving towards the staff of Parliament.

Madam President, I should like to express my respect for those who do not smoke and to state there must indeed be routes which allow them to move through the Parliament building without being affected by smoke.

I should also like to express my respect, however, for those who do smoke, and to defend their right to smoke.

It is important for my mental and physical wellbeing that I smoke, and I must point out that if there were no ashtrays, we would be creating even more unpleasant situations.

There must be ashtrays, just as there must be separate areas in which smokers can smoke and non-smokers can feel comfortable.

Mr Graça Moura, what we need is for non-smokers to respect the rights of smokers and for smokers to respect the rights of non-smokers.

We will have a calm discussion with the quaestors in order to designate areas where Members who wish to smoke, and feel a real need, may do so reasonably while respecting the rights of those who are bothered and even made physically ill by the smoke.

I promise you that this is something that we shall certainly sort out.

Madam President, as a rule of thumb, when a person wishes to condemn irregular behaviour they should state the name of the offender and specify when the event occurred.

This complaining about the rude behaviour of entire categories - whether smokers, non-smokers, reds or whites - is disgraceful!

In my opinion, if a Member of the European Parliament is asked to put out his cigarette by an usher, it is his duty to acknowledge civilly that the usher is doing his duty and thank him for it.

Would Mrs Banotti, who has complained of such incidents of irregular behaviour, like to state the names of those responsible and those affected, for I will be the first to request that measures be adopted to protect ushers and officials who are doing their duty.

Having said that, it goes without saying that if some of the general rules are stupid or petty, then it will, of course, be much more difficult to uphold them.

For example, it would appear appropriate to place an ashtray at the point which marks the end of a smoking area and the start of a non-smoking area in order to avoid cigarette butts burning the floor, but this is a question of common sense.

In conclusion, Madam President, it would also be sensible for us to stop complaining and to behave in a manner befitting Members of Parliament.

Just as you do over the issues of flights and Strasbourg part-sessions, you are whining like the hoi poloi instead of behaving with the dignity of representatives of a sovereign Parliament!

Mr Pannella, let me reassure you straight away. The quaestors are not lacking in common sense, believe me.

The next item is the order of business.

The final version of the draft agenda, as drawn up by the Conference of Presidents, has been distributed.

The Group of the European People' s Party have requested that the vote on the report by Mr Valdivielso de Cué, on behalf of the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy, on the MEDA programme, be postponed until the Brussels part-session in order to enable a number of technical problems to be resolved.

Madam President, the rapporteur, Mr Valdivielso, has just informed our group that the amendments are not yet all available in translation.

I do not know when they will be available, but if it were to be before tomorrow then - in accordance with our agenda - the vote would have to be taken as early as tomorrow at noon!

This is simply impossible because we need to discuss this in our groups.

Hence our request: if the groups still have sufficient time for discussion then the vote could be taken at the end of the week.

But if this is not guaranteed then it will just have to be taken at the mini-session in Brussels.

In any case, we insist, or at least we ask - as we have, of course, already decided - that the debate take place now without delay.

After all, the Commissioner is here!

Madam President, I would like to speak against this proposal.

We had initially heard that it was not possible to vote on the Valdivielso report because Commissioner Patten was not here.

It now turns out that Commissioner Patten is here and it seems to me that any technical problem that there may have been, and I am aware of that possibility, could be resolved by the Parliament services within no more than 2 or 3 hours.

I would therefore ask that the vote on the MEDA regulation be included in this part-session and if the services really need one more day to resolve the technical problems, that the vote be delayed for one day.

However, it seems to me that the groups have debated this sufficiently, it has been on the table for too long now and I believe that there is no reason why it cannot be voted on during this part-session and in the presence, as we had asked so many times, of Commissioner Patten, whom I would like to thank for being here.

Mrs Terrón, there is clearly a technical problem here.

I have received confirmation that the amendments are not ready today because some of them still have to be clarified.

All the language versions will be available tomorrow morning.

It will not therefore be possible to vote tomorrow at noon because not all Members will have had time to see the amendments.

I think it would be reasonable if the House were prepared to postpone the vote until Wednesday. This would be in accordance with our Rules of Procedure, which stipulate that Members must have received the texts in their own languages.

I see that Mr Poettering agrees with this.

So, if the texts are indeed available tomorrow morning, we shall vote on Wednesday.

Madam President, it is with regret that I must rise this time to address the following point: we have been astounded by the content of a statement made by a Member of the Commission - Commissioner Verheugen - on the issue of the enlargement of the European Union.

Commissioner Verheugen has made the enlargement of the European Union to incorporate the countries of central Europe conditional - this is the impression which he gave - upon a referendum, or at least he is recommending making it the subject of a referendum in one Member State of the European Union, the Federal Republic of Germany.

Now, although I am German, it is certainly not my concern - I am speaking here not as a German but as the chairman of my group - to debate the constitutional situation in Germany, but in the countries of central Europe, the unfortunate impression has been given that new conditions have been attached to the enlargement of the European Union.

We need to refute an impression of this kind in the strongest possible terms!

That is why this statement from Commissioner Verheugen - and I do not know whether it was made deliberately as part of a predetermined strategy or whether it was simply a rash comment - is not only incomprehensible but also damaging.

My group is asking - and I have heard similar noises from other groups - for the Commission to make a statement on this.

A suitable time for it to speak on this matter would be tomorrow morning when the Council and the Commission make their statements on the Union's external action priorities.

Should the Commission feel that tomorrow morning is too soon, because it usually meets here on Wednesday mornings, and would prefer to make a statement at a later stage, then the appropriate time would be on Wednesday afternoon at 5 p.m. when other Commission statements will be made.

But I would ask the Commission to ensure that our position on the enlargement of the European Union is the one which we have always held, namely that by the year 2003 we in the European Union wish to be capable of enlargement, and to ensure that these principles are upheld here!

If the Commissioner gives the impression that this is no longer the case, then I believe that this is irresponsible, and the Commission as a college must set the record straight!

I have received several requests to speak on this subject, which is perfectly understandable, but I can see that Commissioner Patten is asking to be given the floor and, if you permit, I shall give him the floor immediately before allowing other Members to speak because he may well have some explanations to give us.

I will tell my colleague, Commissioner Verheugen, of the views that have just been expressed, which I know are held by other Members of Parliament.

I am sure that he will want to respond fully and rapidly to the concerns which have just been raised.

I want to make two points absolutely clear.

These are the strong views of the Commission, including my colleague Mr Verheugen.

First of all, in our view, the enlargement of the Union, the incorporation of other European countries in the liberal order of Europe, is the number one priority that we face in the next few years.

In my view and the view of other members of the Commission, there is not only a strategic and economic argument but also a moral argument for enlargement.

We want that message to go out loud and clear to all the enlargement candidates.

Secondly, all of us have the task in the next few years of convincing public opinion of what I have just said.

Mr Verheugen was trying to make that point very strongly.

We have to go out and sell the case for enlargement to public opinion in all the Member States of the European Union.

It would be wrong if it seemed to some of our voters in the fifteen Member States that enlargement was an issue for the political elites of Europe.

We have to convince them that it is in their interests that we enlarge and that there is an obligation on us to press the case for enlargement.

That is certainly a cause about which I feel very strongly and which I know President Prodi and the rest of the Commission will be arguing with vigour and passion over the next few years.

The point that the honourable Member raised expresses a legitimate and understandable concern.

I will relay it to Commissioner Verheugen.

Madam President, I am very grateful to the Commissioner for his statement.

To some extent it addresses the matter and to some extent it fails to do so.

I think it is very important as a matter of public record that we should have a declaration in the clearest terms from the Commission in a body, that it is continuing to act as the essential European prime mover of enlargement.

I applaud the view expressed by the Commissioner that we all share the task of selling this historic challenge but I deplore the fact that someone as pre-eminent as Commissioner Verheugen, at least according to a number of newspapers today, should say the Member States should not leave the Commission to do the dirty job alone.

This language is not appropriate to the sensitivities and subtleties required in this historic debate and it constitutes loose talk which opens up an appalling prospect, not least in the hearts and minds of those who support enlargement, and especially in candidate States and in their capital cities.

That is why this matter is of exceptional political importance this week.

It is important to understand that a Commissioner, Commissioner Verheugen in this case, has a role to speak for Europe.

Of course he is a German politician, but the German Government is empowered and in a position to speak for Germany.

I believe it is entirely proper that Mr Poettering should demand that this issue be dealt with here this week and I would urge the Commission to give the necessary assurance, not only because I agree with the sentiments of Commissioner Patten, but because the world at large wishes to be reassured that there is no dysfunction at the heart of Europe on the question of enlargement.

Madam President, there was a lot of animated discussion in our group about the position Commissioner Verheugen has adopted, and our main conclusion was that transparency, more than anything, is now required in the negotiations on enlargement.

Our citizens need it and so does Parliament.

It seems to me that Mr Poettering' s proposal would serve the purpose well if we were now to create a little transparency, for it is just as Commissioner Patten says: enlargement must not be allowed to be merely an issue for the elite.

I can well understand why Commissioner Verheugen is somewhat vexed by the fact that candidate countries are being toured in the name of the Council and the various Member States and being promised that they can definitely join our club one year or the other.

Perhaps we can also talk a little about what part the Commission, the Council and Parliament should have in the talks that are now going on.

Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, Mr Poettering spoke here as a group chairman and not as a German.

I am speaking here as a German and as the acting chairman of my group.

Commissioner Patten has already outlined the Commission's views on Mr Verheugen's comments.

For me, that would actually suffice as a Commission position.

My group has always believed that not only the Commission as a whole but also all of the individual Commissioners must justify themselves before this Parliament, and this regardless of their nationality and regardless of any affiliation to a political party.

That is why we would welcome Mr Verheugen's being given the opportunity this week to clarify his remarks here before the European Parliament and, if necessary, also to amend them.

Madam President, I should like to declare myself in favour of Mr Poettering' s proposal.

I should like to say that my own group is in favour not only of "selling" enlargement or other major projects to public opinion but also of getting our fellow citizens closely involved in all the major phases of European construction, including by means of referenda.

We are, however, totally opposed to the idea of using the referendum as a sort of threat which could be abused by some "stirrers" , exploiting fears and, in particular, unwillingness to open up to others.

Consequently, in order to ensure that enlargement is a success in the eyes of public opinion in our respective countries and in the eyes of the citizens of the countries of Central and Eastern Europe, I am in favour of dispelling any misunderstanding, and thus of giving Commissioner Verheugen the opportunity to offer Parliament a clear explanation.

Commissioner Verheugen should indeed come and address the House to offer some explanation.

We are not about to start a debate on this matter. I shall put this proposal to him.

I think the most suitable time would be on Tuesday, when the Council and Commission will be making their statement on the European Union' s priorities for external action.

Commissioner Verheugen was not scheduled to attend at that time, he was not expected, but Commissioner Patten and I shall insist that he makes himself available and comes before the House to offer some explanations.

Madam President, we would of course welcome a statement from Mr Verheugen.

Since this is a very important issue, a statement from the Commission President would obviously be even better.

But we do not insist on this.

What we do insist on, however, is that the statement which Mr Verheugen eventually makes is unequivocally a declaration by the Commission as a whole, and that any misunderstandings are then cleared up.

This is not then a private, personal statement by Mr Verheugen, but a clarification by the whole Commission acting as a college.

Let me remind you, as if I needed to, of the formal sitting at 11.30 tomorrow morning on the occasion of the joint visit by Mr Avraham Burg, the President of the Knesset, and Mr Abu Ala, President of the Palestinian Legislative Council.

There is no need for me to stress the importance of this joint visit. The fact that I am stressing it should show you, as you might imagine, that I should like to see the Chamber as well attended as possible.

Let it be understood I am counting on all Members of this House, men and women, to attend.

The Group of the Party of European Socialists has requested that the statement on human cloning should not conclude with a motion for a resolution being tabled.

Who wishes to speak in support of this request?

Madam President, my group believes that the issue of biotechnology - because we are not only talking about cloning - is an issue which not only concerns various Member State governments, but is one which is also of considerable concern to public opinion.

This is the case not only because of the advances being made in this area, but also because of the scientific, industrial, ethical and religious consequences of this matter.

We pointed out at the time in the Conference of Presidents, and we have said so publicly, that we believe that this is a debate which cannot be resolved through an urgent resolution.

We believe that it requires well-considered and serious work, and proof of this can be seen in the drawing up of the directive on biotechnology which has been going on for a long time. An attempt was made to finish it, for the second time, during the previous parliamentary term, and it is yet to be finished because it is still facing certain problems.

We believe that we must ensure that the work requested by Parliament of the Ethics Committee - which advises the Commission and Parliament - is speeded up and we believe, furthermore, that an issue as important as this, which involves various committees of this Parliament and which is generating enormous concern in many areas - frozen embryos, the patentability of cells which may be multiplied for the purposes of transplants etc. requires a temporary committee.

We have therefore accepted that this declaration should be made.

However, we do not believe that it is appropriate at the moment to vote on a resolution, drawn up as we go along, which may create problems and be divisive.

Madam President, I would like to speak in favour of Enrique Barón Crespo's proposal for the reasons he has outlined so eloquently.

Madam President, my group takes the opposite view, to the effect that it is important to vote upon a resolution.

In the first place, it is not the first time that Parliament has given an opinion on the subject of human cloning.

On several occasions since the advent of Dolly we have voted on a number of resolutions.

If anyone adopted a unilateral stance on these occasions, it was the British Government which, without any prior consultation whatsoever, adopted a position in favour of therapeutic cloning.

We therefore consider that a reaction from the European Parliament which does not close the door on the debate is a useful move.

When I say we must not close the door, clearly the suggestion of a temporary committee must not be rejected out of hand.

I am not saying that I am for or against that, but I do think that it would be a good idea for Parliament to deliver its opinion by some means other than an inconclusive debate.

Mr Lannoye, I can confirm that the Conference of Presidents did decide to set up a special committee to deal with all these matters.

Madam President, before the vote I should like to make a point of order.

I refer to Rule 118 of the Rules of Procedure.

This is about all Members of the House having access to all the necessary documents.

With a view to the vote, which will probably take place on Thursday, I should like to confirm the substance of what Mr Lannoye said on this issue.

There are Parliament resolutions in which we have made our views on cloning very clear.

That was also true of therapeutic cloning!

People are acting now as though the proposals put forward by the British Government were something entirely new.

In actual fact we have already discussed this and Parliament has always been opposed to it.

Those who now want to prevent the debate and a resolution have always represented a liberal standpoint.

But a majority of Parliament has always adopted an uncompromising position.

It would not be very consistent if now - since the issue is topical - we were not to stand by our earlier statements.

Mr Liese, you very cleverly associated your speech to one of the Rules of Procedure to make it look like a procedural motion, but I have to say the connection was tenuous.

I have received several requests for amendments to the agenda relating to topical and urgent subjects of major importance.

On the subject of Item 3, 'Human rights' , and Item 4, 'Burma' , the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance has requested that the current Item 4 'Burma' be replaced by a new item entitled 'Temelin' and that the item on 'Burma' be brought forward into item 3 'Human rights' to replace the sub-item 'Fundamental freedoms in Iran' .

Madam President, I support this proposal and justify it on the basis of the fact that quite a lot has been said about Iran recently.

The situation is very delicate and a lot is happening there, but there has been discussion about it.

We would very much like to see a place on the agenda to discuss the nuclear power plant at Temelin, as in many Member States, especially in Austria, obviously, as it is next door to it, the situation is very tense.

I would like this proposal to make it possible to include the Temelin resolution on the agenda.

I shall therefore put the request from the group of the Greens to the vote.

We are talking about adding the item on the Temelin nuclear power plant. The item on 'Burma' would, however, be retained as this has been moved forward into item 3, 'Human rights' .

Instead, it would be the item on 'Fundamental freedoms in Iran' which would be taken off the agenda.

Still on the subject of item 3, 'Human rights' , I have received two identical requests from the Technical Group of Independent Members and the group of the European People' s Party to replace the sub-item entitled 'Turkish bombing in northern Iraq' with a new sub-item entitled 'Higher education and universities in Macedonia' .

Who wishes to speak in support of this request?

If you are looking for support, then I would be pleased to support this proposal from the PPE because it concerns an extremely positive development in Macedonia, which could in fact be further consolidated by a swift endorsement from Parliament.

I believe this to be a matter of great importance.

The order of business is adopted thus amended.

The next item is the joint debate on the following reports:

Report (A5-0204/2000) by Mr Valdivielso de Cué - MEDA, on behalf of the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy, on the proposal for a Council regulation amending Regulation (EC) No 1488/96 on financial and technical measures to accompany (MEDA) the reform of economic and social structures in the framework of the Euro­Mediterranean partnership [COM(1999)494 - C5-0023/2000-1999/0214(CNS)];

Report (A5-0205/2000) by Mr Piétrasanta - MEDA (annual report 1998) on behalf of the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy, on the Commission report: Implementation of the MEDA programme - 1998 annual report [COM(1999)291 - C5-0117/1999 - 1999/2120(COS)]

Mr President, certain circumstances could have justified postponing this report to a time when everything was available, including the amendments.

However, in any event, I believe that we, as MEPs, must take the work forward so that the MEDA report is not delayed at any time, with the resulting harm that that could mean for the countries concerned.

Having expressed these reservations, I shall summarise the MEDA programme.

I shall then give my opinion of the proposed regulation, as well as the report as a whole.

As is well known, the MEDA programme comes within the framework of the Euro-Mediterranean partnership, which was created after the Barcelona declaration of November 1995.

The Foreign Affairs Ministers of the European Union participated in that meeting.

This is an initiative which encompasses 27 countries from both sides of the Mediterranean.

On the one side, there are the 15 states of the Union and, on the other, Algeria, Cyprus, Egypt, Israel, Jordan, Lebanon, Malta, Morocco, Syria, Tunisia, Turkey and the Palestinian territories.

As for Libya, for obvious reasons, it only has observer status.

Our main objective, through this cooperation, is to forge links, especially in the numerous areas of common interest which we share with our Mediterranean neighbours.

To this end, around EUR 3 500 million have been invested over the last five years, shared between two broad cooperation formulae: bilateral and regional.

Specifically, this economic and financial aid must facilitate the completion of a free trade area by 2010, to which end aid programmes have been implemented, both for macroeconomic reforms and for sectoral reforms and structural adjustments.

We must remember that the ratio between the per capita income of the European Union and the MEDA countries is 1 to 10, that is to say a very considerable gap.

Therefore, in my judgement, it is logical that the sustainable economic development of the area should be our main goal.

In this regard, I must add that the commercial balance between these two blocks favours the European Union to the tune of EUR 21 billion.

Meanwhile, measures are also being considered to facilitate private investment in these 12 countries, which in 1994 amounted to EUR 3 500 million, particularly by means of updating legislation and administration, as well as by means of meetings between companies belonging to the MEDA countries and the European Union.

We should also remember that we are discussing an area of the world which is particularly affected by military conflict.

There is no point in listing the different wars being waged by many of the countries which are members of this partnership.

The MEDA programme seeks to clear the way towards a definitive and lasting peace in that part of the world by means, amongst other things, of economic stability.

We are talking about a population of around 230 million people which, given the current rate of growth, will reach 300 million in 10 or 12 years time.

There is a significant diversity of religions and traditions in all of those countries and this is one of the pillars on which the European Union' s work is based.

As you know, MEDA also includes a short- and medium-term action programme for the environment, which aims to reverse the current environmental deterioration in the area.

Turning now to an analysis of the Commission' s proposal, I think the proposal as a whole is insufficient, partly because of the criticisms made about the implementation of this programme.

The Commission principally defines three initiatives for achieving greater efficiency: on the one hand, making the decision-making process more dynamic, focussing the activity of the "MED Committee" on strategic planning and programming.

The national and regional funding plans will be adopted annually on the basis of indicative programmes.

It also proposes an increase in programming and implementation abilities, for which greater human resources must be provided.

Lastly, the Commission intends to scale down procedures in order to achieve more effective implementation and increase the percentage of programmes that are implemented.

Specifically, the intention is to develop common harmonised procedures for all aid programmes.

Finally, I wish to say that I believe this report is important because anything that helps the countries to the south of us, in turn, helps us.

Mr President, MEDA represents the practical implementation, the instrument of our Euro-Mediterranean policy, as defined following the Barcelona Convention in November 1995, followed by a number of forums, particularly those in Malta, Naples and Stuttgart.

We are now presenting the first progress report, or annual report for 1998, but which, in fact, summarises the initial implementation period, 1996-1999, and prepares the way for the implementation of the actions for the second period, 2000-2006, in the form of the regulation proposed by our fellow Member, Mr Valdivielso de Cué.

Given that this report is subject to the Hughes Procedure, we have included all the proposals adopted unanimously not only by the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy, which was chiefly responsible, but also those of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy and the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism.

The context is this: approximately EUR 4 billion over the last four years, plus the considerable appropriations contributed by the EIB, have been allocated.

The Barcelona Agreement signed by 27 countries, those of the European Union plus the 12 countries of the southern Mediterranean: Algeria, Cyprus, Egypt, Israel, Jordan, Lebanon, Malta, Morocco, the Palestinian Authority, Syria, Tunisia and Turkey.

The three main objectives involve the political and security dimension, the economic and financial dimension and the social, cultural and human dimension.

The following observations have been made: this is a programme still in its infancy which has experienced implementation problems and has suffered from various administrative problems, as highlighted by the European Court of Auditors and the Committee on Budgetary Control.

There has been particular criticism of sub-contracting associations such as RTM.

In the final analysis, implementation has been virtually paralysed and, despite the almost 100% commitment of appropriations, only 26 % have been paid to date, and that only with difficulty, with payment taking, on average, four years.

We presented the ins and outs of the matter in sufficient detail in our report, so I am now able simply to summarise our conclusions, which are as follows: firstly, there is a need to simplify the regulation in order to enable the process to be speeded up, while ensuring greater transparency by providing the resources necessary for the Commission to plan the programme and for the Council to monitor it.

Above all, the European Parliament must take part in the process and must be kept informed more regularly, particularly through the Euro-Mediterranean forum.

It would be appropriate to speed up the signing of the association agreements, which to date have been signed only with 7 countries.

This particularly concerns Lebanon, Algeria, Syria, etc.

Secondly, project selection must be more democratic and must, to a greater extent, involve greater participation by civil society and NGOs, who continually expressed this desire, especially at the European Parliament round table held in Brussels on 29 June this year, entitled 'Towards a sustainable MEDA' .

Thirdly, respect for human rights must be monitored more carefully, for cooperation is not only targeted at economic progress, but is fundamentally related to democracy, freedom, peace, the eradication of inequality, and sustainable development.

We would therefore ask that a report on the human rights record of each of the signatory or candidate countries be presented to Parliament annually to be taken into consideration in the selection of projects.

Fourthly, we consider that the 10% of appropriations allotted to regional cooperation are inadequate as compared with the 90% allocated to bilateral cooperation.

We must therefore comment on the volume of appropriations dedicated to regional schemes which, we acknowledge, are harder to negotiate and implement but which correspond to the objective of efficiency, particularly in improving South-South relations and, above all, in safeguarding more extensive action for decentralised cooperation, which we all consider to be an important goal.

Fifthly, on the subject of the six priority areas of partnership, the environment, water policy, industry, energy, transport and the information society, we think it essential to reactivate programmes disregarded until now, the SMAP adopted in Helsinki in 1997 on the environment.

At least EUR 10 million must be allocated annually for water.

Action must be undertaken to promote renewable energies and to provide support for SMEs and for transport.

We should support each country' s sustainable development plans.

We therefore consider it absolutely essential to implement the proposals for regulations suggested by Mr Valdivielso de Cué, particularly those on simplifying procedures in order to increase the transparency, efficiency and speed of payments and on deploying more Commission staff in order to ensure better administration of the programme, which must cease to be a poor relation in comparison with the cooperation programmes for Asian or ACP countries.

At this point I should like to thank not only the many participants, particularly the countries concerned and the NGOs that helped me to finalise this report, but also our European Commissioner, Mr Patten, who has a clear overview of the situation and whose external relations departments should contribute towards improving Mediterranean projects from now on.

Thanks, too, to Mr Patten' s colleagues, especially Mr Patrick Laurent.

I should also like to stress the interest which Commissioner Busquin has taken in our work, reactivating Mediterranean cooperation in the field of research, particularly at the forthcoming informal summit on Capri, on 29 September.

Thanks are also due to all our fellow Members of Parliament, particularly Mrs Terrón, Mrs McNally and Mr Sami Naïr who are working on this issue.

It is crucial to implement our proposals in order to achieve the necessary revitalisation of the Euro-Mediterranean process.

Above all, the appropriations for 2000-2006 should not be penalised because of the programme' s earlier problems. Instead the programme must be the spearhead of our policy, which we shall be discussing again at the Marseilles Conference in November.

We wish the French Presidency every success. I know that they are extremely concerned to resolve all difficulties and determined to achieve their objectives.

(FR) Mr President, I too would like to thank Mr Valdivielso de Cué and congratulate him on his excellent work.

Broadly speaking, his report makes all the points which I, personally, consider important and also those which the Socialists consider important.

I should also like to thank Mr Piétrasanta, who has just given us a highly clear and pertinent outline of both the content of this report and the points which we were hoping that he would stress and mention.

The points which were missing from the Commission proposal and which were added by Mr Valdivielso de Cué are important ones.

Firstly, Mr Valdivielso de Cué added, and I congratulate him on this, a fundamental idea, namely the need to make a real commitment to the Mediterranean by granting this region aid comparable with that granted to the countries of Eastern Europe.

The countries of the South, rightly or wrongly, have the impression that they have been rather overlooked, even though everyone knows that the Mediterranean is one of the most sizeable divided regions existing in the world today.

The second idea which was restored was the harnessing of financial resources that were adequate to the challenges.

Reference was also made to the overall approach defined in Barcelona (and not just, as the Commission thinks, the structural adjustment dimension), the intensification of regional cooperation, particularly South-South relations, the importance of decentralised cooperation (contrary to the wishes of the Commission which would apparently like to do away with it), the maintenance of support for micro-projects, i.e. for NGOs and civil associations and the need to finance initiatives for industrial cooperation, particular for SMEs.

Mr Valdivielso de Cué has done excellent work on all these points.

I do, however, feel that one fundamental matter, immigration, has not been sufficiently taken into account by this proposal for a regulation.

The Commission' s proposal looks at the question of migration from a strictly negative point of view.

They make a very serious connection, and I say this weighing my words carefully, drawing a parallel in the very same indent between, on the one hand, the campaign (which I consider to be legitimate and necessary) against illegal immigration and in favour of repatriation and, on the other hand, the fight against drug-trafficking and international crime.

This intolerable attitude is an insult to the millions of immigrant workers who contribute to the wealth of Europe.

A distinction has been made, as I requested, but it is still insufficient.

I believe the time has come to consider a genuine policy of movement between the two sides of the Mediterranean, north and south.

Europe must, I feel, today establish a genuine co-development policy related to migratory flows, which should, Mr President, centre on a few simple proposals, such as the framing of aid policies for projects by migrants, devising instruments for channelling the savings of immigrants, the placement of students in training and the placement of young trainees.

Voting in favour of the amendment I have tabled would therefore, I feel, be a contribution towards giving immigrants legally resident in Europe the opportunity to be acknowledged as vectors of co-development for their country of origin.

Let me, in conclusion, quote Mr Prodi who said that immigration must become a factor in development.

Mr Valdivielso' s work has gone some way to achieving this, and I would like to see us go further still.

Mr President, we very much welcome these two positive reports and congratulate the rapporteurs and fully support the vital importance of the MEDA programme.

In this respect it is critically important that the funding should be properly applied.

I would urge the House to support the two amendments tabled to the Piétrasanta report in the name of this group.

As a member of Parliament's delegation to the Mashreq countries and Gulf States, I am concerned that the association agreements with these countries should be ratified as expeditiously as possible; the Jordanian agreement in particular is only slowly proceeding through the ratification process.

Our amendment urges the Member State parliaments which have not yet ratified the agreement to hasten this process.

Our other amendment refers to a degree of hypocrisy in our approach to developing a fully free-trade zone in the Mediterranean area.

As Mr Valdivielso pointed out in his speech, the EU has a large trade surplus with this area.

Yes, we call for a free-trade zone but when it comes to those products which these countries could most readily export into Europe - i.e. agricultural and food products - we maintain trade restrictions.

Our friends in these countries understandably question our sincerity.

I accept that free access to Europe for Mediterranean products poses problems for producers in our southern Member States, but surely this problem could be compensated at least to some extent in the CAP.

So our second amendment calls for the acceleration of progress to free trade for all products including food and agriculture.

I would appreciate the Commission's estimate as to the likely timing for achieving a full free-trade zone in the Mediterranean and how it intends to implement this.

I would urge my colleagues to support these amendments along with the two excellent reports under consideration.

Mr President, firstly, I would also like to congratulate the rapporteurs, Mr Valdivielso and Mr Piétrasanta, and say that I share the views of Mr Piétrasanta and Mr Naïr.

The deep schism that divides the Mediterranean world is obvious.

The Conference of Barcelona was the European Union' s reaction to it.

We should now be working at a steady speed to achieve the aims established there, but that is not the case.

Many reasons have been given for this.

The MEDA programmes have always been surrounded by too much fuss, and they still are.

It is totally pointless to return dwell on this fuss.

The Commission has proposed a new MEDA regulation and in it asks us for speedier decision-making procedures.

My group and Parliament - if we reflect the vote of the relevant committee - proposes to place more trust in the Commission so that it may decide on projects of less than EUR 5 million and we also ask that the Commission be accompanied by a Council advisory committee.

Of course, the Council and Parliament cannot expect the Commission to do things which they do not give it the power to do.

In this regard you have our support, Commissioner.

You also have our support - and this is expressed in the amendments we are tabling - in order to solve any problems relating to staffing and to management ability that you may have.

I would like to remind you, Commissioner, that the Barcelona agreements talk about an area of free trade and economic cooperation and of security and they also talk a great deal about the cultural and human dimension.

Commissioner, I believe that in order to develop these three pillars on an equal footing with one another, we must continue to show our confidence in Mediterranean society and, far from ending decentralised cooperation and small projects, we should implement these effectively and by incorporating all the players: entrepreneurs, unions, cities, NGOs, immigrants - as Mr Naïr pointed out - professionals etc.

I wish to believe that we share the aim of reducing the gulf between the, at least two, Mediterranean worlds.

To this end, Commissioner, we ask, and my group will act in accordance with this request in the budgetary debate, for the restoration in the regulation of the amounts allocated to MEDA, so that these will remain at least equal in real terms to those allocated during the previous period.

While the problems in the Mediterranean remain serious, and there has been considerable delay in implementing the Barcelona decisions that were designed to tackle them, we cannot accept a reduction in investment.

Mr President, I am pleased to announce that the Liberal Group' s vote is favourable to the reports by Mr Valdivielso and Mr Piétrasanta. However, I must admit that there are certain reservations in our group with regard to future budgetary proposals as a result of the difficulties which have arisen up until now in the employment of funds intended for the MEDA programme.

However, this issue would lead us into a discussion of the budget, which is not the main subject of this debate. The main subject of this debate is political and the issue is the fact the Mediterranean is one of the essential elements in ensuring the peace, stability and progress of the European Union itself.

Eliminating tension and promoting balanced development in the Mediterranean third countries leads to greater security, prosperity and prospects for the European Union.

Therefore, Mediterranean policy must be a fundamental pillar of the Union' s external action, which will benefit the European Union itself.

Furthermore, I believe that we must consider that officially, there are at least three Mediterranean candidate countries, and that, with regard to the conflicts which Mr Valdivielso has mentioned, the European Union has made a very significant contribution in recent years to solving them.

We are very close to reaching peace agreements to solve them definitively and this obviously requires a significant economic contribution for which MEDA is the main financial instrument.

The different aspects mentioned in each report must be taken into account because they make a wonderful contribution to achieving this.

Mr President, the imbalance highlighted in the Piétrasanta report regarding the limited participation of decentralised operators and NGOs shows just how difficult it actually is for civil society to take hold of and take over this development instrument.

The report also condemns the fundamental political imbalance between structural adjustment measures and free-trade measures and the other dimensions of the partnership (social, cultural and democratic).

Such obvious imbalances stack up, distancing us from the objectives of peace, democracy and sustainable development contained in the Barcelona Declaration.

The case of Tunisia, signatory to the first association agreement and the first recipient of appropriations, is an edifying one.

In an increasingly overt way, the international partners delight in describing countries involved in harsh repression and widespread corruption, where increasing social instability prevails, as stable and successful.

We should be wondering whether accelerated economic liberalisation, in the guise of free trade, is not an aggravating factor in this deterioration.

Democracy and respect for human rights must not continue to be officially declared theoretical principles which are ignored in practice.

Is respect for these principles compatible with the repatriation of illegal residents even though this represents the very success ...

(The President cut the speaker off.)

Mr President, the MEDA programme is a crucial instrument for enabling us gradually to establish a genuine area of shared prosperity, as stated in the Barcelona Declaration.

The difficulties in setting it up, the impatience and even the disappointments it has caused our southern partners should nevertheless encourage us to look more deeply into the state of the Euro-Mediterranean partnership as a whole.

The southern Mediterranean countries need European aid, aid that demonstrates solidarity and which contributes to the development of their society. This aid must also reduce the disparities between the two sides of the Mediterranean, by putting an end to the existing relationship of economic domination, the most obvious and most unfair example of which is perhaps the system maintaining national debt.

What role does MEDA have to play in this?

With more than EUR 3 billion in commitment appropriations for 1995-1999, MEDA I actually committed just over EUR 2 billion in its first four years and actually paid out EUR 553 million, or scarcely a quarter of the credits committed.

What a discrepancy between the aid promised and the aid actually provided!

This discrepancy is largely due to the fact that, as Mr Patten has often told us, the Commission lacks the human resources to deal with all the tasks that are assigned to it.

I am sure that I will not be the last person to call for further human resources if that will enable the European Union to shoulder its responsibilities.

The Commission proposals, moreover, are aimed at simplifying and speeding up procedures under the new regulation, even though removing from the outset individual States' ability to supervise projects would not necessarily be the best solution to achieve greater transparency.

More credit should be provided for smaller-scale projects.

Too frequently I meet people who have extensive experience of the local association movement, who feel let down by the procedures they have to follow in order to receive subsidies.

The Euro-Mediterranean partnership can only really be built by and for the general public, who themselves wish to achieve a partnership that is of real benefit to all citizens.

The MEDA programme also raises fundamental questions about our Euro-Mediterranean policy in general.

First and foremost, cooperation is concentrated essentially in the economic and financial dimensions and marginalises the social and cultural dimensions.

It is also time that we took greater account of the growing dissatisfaction with the practices of out-and-out free trade.

The social consequences we are seeing in the free trade area are cause for deep concerns, which cannot be ignored.

The social budgets of southern countries risk seeing the budgetary resources raised from customs duties cut to a dangerous level.

The growth in competition could eat away at the industrial fabric of these countries, which in some cases consists of vulnerable small and medium-sized enterprises.

Rather than so-called 'accompanying' measures, the economic systems in the South need real technological support.

The purpose of aid, furthermore, should be not only to convert businesses to comply with the criteria of profitability, but also to respond to the employment needs of the population.

While private sector development is heavily supported by MEDA, the public sector is largely forgotten, even though it responds to genuine needs.

To conclude, I should like to concentrate on two aspects of the reports which I support: really encouraging the participation...

(The President cut the speaker off)

Mr President, whilst appreciating the mental efforts of the two rapporteurs and the draftsmen of the opinions, I would like to emphasise how important it is for the EU to set political priorities.

In concrete terms: the laborious and monumental undertaking of EU enlargement simply does not allow for a similar tour de force within the European-Mediterranean partnership.

That is certainly not to say that there is no room for improvement in the Union' s Mediterranean policy as matters stand.

An evaluation of MEDA I and the wording of MEDA II clearly demonstrate the need for this.

In particular, this programme lacks cohesion and has been insufficiently implemented.

For example, to date, only a quarter of the commitment appropriations has been paid out.

It is right that a streamlining of the programmes and implementation should be proposed with a view to resolving the aforementioned shortcomings.

The sluggish pace of implementation is not the fault of the committees, in any case.

They are responsible for a delay of five months at most.

No, it is the procedures within the Commission that are largely to blame for the delay.

Giving the Commission more financial latitude is not, therefore, the most obvious solution worthy of recommendation.

Transparency and control are important aspects that will enhance the quality of MEDA projects.

And the standard of quality required varies from project to project to this day.

It would appear from the conclusions of the European Council of Feira (19 and 20 June 2000) that the EU' s Mediterranean policy is founded on 'the partnership' .

I will quote in full from this document: "this partnership should be actively supported by both sides" .

Cooperation with a view to becoming good neighbours, increasing prosperity and eliminating poverty, and, not least, promoting good government and the constitutional state.

May these reports and this debate help to realise these lofty ambitions.

Mr President, I too wish to stress how important relations with the southern countries are for Europe, in particular with those in the Mediterranean Basin.

I share the view that enlargement of the Union to the East is causing us to underestimate the South and the crucial nature - crucial for our future, that is - of our relations with these countries.

We have been working in this area for almost ten years and for the last five, the significant MEDA programme has been available to us.

The way this programme has been implemented is far from ideal - to say the least - and that is why I share and approve of the objectives of the Commission reform. That is also why I support the calls made by Mr Valdivielso and Mr Piétrasanta to redress the balance, for regional cooperation, for support for 'micro-projects' and for projects involving civil society.

It must, however, be clearly stated - and also made clear to the general public - that the financial objectives must match up to our speeches and there should be no question of accepting a reduction in credits relative to the previous period. This holds true whatever arguments and quibbles are put forward.

Lastly, looking beyond MEDA, we must not lose sight of the urgency of the problem of cancelling the debts of poor countries, the need to speed up the implementation of bilateral agreements and the need to promote new multilateral agreements.

To conclude, we must therefore improve the systems that are already in place. Above all, however, we must ensure that the proposals that have already been made, the positions that are adopted in our debates and the way we vote tomorrow are not seen and perceived by our Mediterranean partners as just so many negative messages.

There is a serious risk of this, and, if we wish to maintain a political presence, in the region, in conflict management and risk prevention, we must do more and better in the future than we have done in the recent past.

Mr President, in the development of relations with the Mediterranean, Europe cannot fail to give due importance to this geographical area of the world.

The economic boom in Far East Asia has changed all the parameters, and the Mediterranean Sea has become an important element in international trade, assuming major importance.

Trade and cultural relations have to be given priority for economic reasons; a cooperation process needs to be set in motion, but the development of countries which are developing at a slower rate than Western countries also needs to be promoted.

There must be political and commercial dialogue and cultural and financial cooperation.

This is what is important for the development of relations between the European Parliament and the countries of this area of the world.

The Mediterranean Sea is the testing ground for the European Parliament' s capacities to act outside the borders of the Union.

It is a well-known fact that the great Europe which is a dream of so many cannot be achieved without the political and economic involvement of this major, fundamental part of the Union.

Mr President, now that all the honourable members' wishes have been voiced, I feel we must resolve to make urgent changes to the way in which the implementation of the MEDA programmes is organised.

In particular, not only is there a need for transparency and streamlining, there is also a need for efficiency.

This requires ongoing dialogue with the regions that are lagging behind.

These regions must be able to prosper on the basis of their own potential.

That is why it is so important to have local sub-offices that can pursue this dialogue with universities, NGOs and local authorities.

That is preferable to having expensive technical assistance offices, and is also preferable to the divide and rule policy of the governments, who often put their own interests first, whereas we regard MEDA as an instrument for peace and democratisation and not just for economic well-being.

Mr President, while discussing the MEDA programme it might also be important to consider the balance that is supposed to exist throughout the Union.

It is obvious that the main instrument of the MEDA-Euro Mediterranean programme is a programme of tremendous benefit to the whole of the EU.

In the same way, we should recognise that cohesion between the Union' s central and northern regions and the neighbouring regions should be strengthened by means of a comprehensive solution similar to the MEDA Programme.

New initiatives to support cohesion policy, such as the Union' s northern dimension that stepped into the limelight during the Finnish presidential term, must also be seen as important projects for the Union as a whole, especially with regard to the challenges of eastward enlargement.

It is encouraging to see that, after a long period of twisting and turning, appropriations have been set aside in next year' s budget for the northern dimension.

It would be good to move on from here.

We need an enormous amount of additional financing, however, to be able to guarantee, in particular, the future of the small-scale programmes to strengthen cooperation with neighbouring regions.

The objectives of the MEDA programme were unfortunately not realised in the financial period that has just ended.

For various reasons, there have been problems with the implementation of appropriations, and the monitoring arrangements to prevent misappropriation have proven inadequate.

The European Parliament should concentrate on ensuring that the under-use of resources that has gone on for years should come to a stop and the internal monitoring of programmes made more effective.

This cannot be guaranteed merely by swelling administration.

Cooperation between the Commission and the agencies that implement programmes in the Member States must also be able to be made more effective through other means, for example, through water-tight cooperation between the European Investment Bank and the European Anti-Fraud Office, OLAF.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I have two things to say. The first is that I should like to thank both rapporteurs for their reports, which were well worth reading.

Secondly, I should like to say directly to the Commission: stick to your guns, stick to your guns with the Council! Because the real problem is that the Council, that the Member States, are forever wanting to have their say on a matter which the Treaty says is your responsibility.

Just imagine that the Americans had implemented their aid under the Marshall Plan after the war in such a way that for each sub-programme they had asked the Member States of the USA whether they, for example, ought to fund a reforestation project in the south-western part of Bavaria or not!

It would probably have taken until the end of the last century to disburse the Marshall Plan aid.

This is not what I want to happen to you.

Mr Patten, stick to your guns!

Parliament ought to support you on this.

The Council or the Member States have a right to be consulted, but they do not have a right to co-decision.

I suspect that this will also be the decisive issue for the Commission when history judges it one day.

You will be judged on enlargement towards the east, but also on whether you create your own room for manoeuvre in external policy.

Now we are not demanding a voice for the Commission alongside the United Kingdom or France on nuclear capabilities for example.

But where the budget is concerned, the European Union's own budget, you are the executive.

We should secure this position and defend it!

In Parliament you should have an ally here!

Mr President, as someone who lives in the Mediterranean, under the Mediterranean sun and who enjoys Mediterranean traditions and culture, I would like to speak up for the countries of that area.

The MEDA programme, which largely failed in the first stage, perhaps did not appreciate that the situation of the Mediterranean countries, given the direction that European politics are taking, is extremely difficult.

Many Mediterranean countries are less highly developed than other countries, and they face the threat of a single agricultural market, which they will not be able to cope with.

In this respect, I would like to refer to the wonderful article by Mr Riccardi of two or three months ago, in which he spoke specifically of the fact that, for reasons of scale, the Mediterranean countries do not attract investment.

It is extremely difficult in those countries to change the agricultural system and, nevertheless, they have to share their products with other countries of North Africa, of the mare nostrum, which belongs to everyone at the same time.

Meanwhile the greatest migratory impact originates from these countries.

Therefore, we must have a fair policy, and to this end the MEDA programme may be a start, although I believe that, in many cases, it is based on criteria that are important to the northern countries.

Firstly, it is not possible to set up a project without highlighting the great weaknesses of those countries such as, for example, water and desertification.

What European policies do we have to combat desertification?

We have no clear policy on this issue.

Secondly, as far as culture is concerned, more importance is being attached to intermediaries than to the actual beneficiaries and producers of culture.

The same thing is happening with many other industrial projects.

Numerous NGOs have been created, forming networks with no obvious beneficiaries, when what southern Europe really has to do is wake up.

I therefore support a process of industrialisation based on innovation - we must not turn to the old industries but to innovation - and of supporting projects relating to technological innovation and training.

In this respect, I believe it is a mistake to turn to large projects.

They would simply make a few people richer. What Mediterranean Europe needs is to wake up, to leave behind its self-absorption and to exploit its own human resources.

This will only happen if we support multiple initiatives which together create awareness, a critical mass and a basic system so that, on that basis, many other small initiatives and businesses of all types may be created.

Some will be successful and some will fall by the wayside, but if we do not create a policy of multiple initiatives of many types, allowing society to express itself and take advantage of its resources, we will not achieve anything.

Mr President, Commissioner, the two reports in question, particularly Mr Valdivielso' s report, deal with one of Europe' s problems in great detail.

The Mediterranean' s location as a major geographical point in terms of the stability and security of our continent has already been mentioned.

This is all very well, but there is another issue underlying many of the points made in Mr Valdivielso' s report: a gap is forming between the absolute priority status of enlargement and the development of relations with the Mediterranean countries, which gives cause for concern.

The Mediterranean is, in actual fact, an area which is still marked by zones of real poverty, and it is an area where the standard of living and quality of life are such as to require a major European presence.

Whatever we are able to do to boost development of the private sector, to improve the conditions under which small and medium-sized enterprises operate, to modernise infrastructures and encourage the promotion of investments, industrial cooperation and trade, will be gratefully received, for hitherto there has been no support for the economic and production networks of the partner countries and industrial cooperation has played an extremely minor role due to the lack of direct support programmes and joint initiatives between European companies and partner countries.

Therefore, we need simpler administration, a more strategic approach and rapid execution of programmes, for this might actually benefit the small and medium-sized enterprises rather than consultancy firms or financial brokers.

I would like to end with a reference to the agricultural sector.

The establishment of a free-trade area in the Mediterranean is, of course, a goal to strive towards, but first we must analyse carefully the plight of Mediterranean agriculture and Mediterranean farmers, and, before we do anything else, we must use the common agricultural policy to rectify an extremely dangerous drop in the income levels of our farmers in precisely the poorest area of Europe.

I am extremely pleased to be able to comment on these two important reports on one of the most significant programmes for which we are responsible.

It is clearly going to be a considerable political test for the Commission and for our whole partnership to try to ensure that we deliver more successfully on these programmes in the future than we have managed to do so far.

I thought that Mr Linkohr made some extremely pertinent and challenging points.

We will be coming back to that, not least when we have the opportunity of discussing the letter which the Commission will be addressing to the budgetary authority as a letter of rectification to the 2001 Budget, which will go right to the heart of the real resource problem we face, which creates so many political difficulties for us.

Let me comment first on Mr Valdivielso's report before dealing with Mr Piétrasanta's report.

Naturally, I welcome the fact - though I do not think his speech was quite so enthusiastic - that Mr Valdivielso's report is generally supportive of the Commission's efforts to reform the MEDA Regulation, though there are some criticisms.

Mr Piétrasanta's report is also favourable towards the 1998 MEDA Programme report.

I want to stress that the revision of the MEDA Regulation is a key element in the broader efforts we are making to enable us to deliver aid more effectively and to streamline our often excessively onerous procedures.

The Commission's objective in revising the MEDA Regulation is to streamline the decision-making process so that we can deliver assistance promptly, in line with the political priorities of the European Union in the Mediterranean.

The Commission proposes to reduce excessive scrutiny arrangements for individual projects in the Management Committee by introducing strategic programmes through the yearly adoption of national financing plans and a regional financing plan and simplifying decision making.

The simplifications that we have requested would bring MEDA programming procedures in line with those of other financial instruments of EU external relations programmes.

It makes no sense to treat MEDA differently.

I must underline that the Commission cannot hope to improve the implementation of the programme if it remains paralysed by cumbersome procedures.

The approval of the new regulation will allow the Union to lend real support to the Mediterranean countries in their structural reform process.

The economic growth of these countries is of key importance to their political and social stabilisation.

I should also note that the firm commitment of the Mediterranean partners themselves to economic reform would greatly facilitate the implementation of the programme and would trigger a significant rise in its disbursement rate.

We have an absorption problem with some of our partners.

It is difficult to spend the money as fast and as sensibly as we would like if we have not even agreed the Association Agreements, or to justify a situation in which we successfully negotiate an Association Agreement and then cannot get our partner to initial it.

We all have to move faster if we are to make a greater success of the programme.

We agree with the bulk of Parliament's amendments, particularly those which strengthen MEDA's strategic character.

In that spirit, we can fully endorse Amendments Nos 2, 8, 9, 11, 12, 15, 17, 19, 20, 30, 33, 37 and 41 and we can partially accept Amendment Nos 4, 5, 6, 10, 22, 23, 24, 26, 28, 31, 35, 38 and 40 providing some slight verbal modifications.

That may save me a bit of work if I am doing the votes later in the week.

However we cannot support Amendment No 25, which proposes an individual examination of financing proposals by the MED Committee.

We think this is contrary to the spirit of our overall proposal on the revision of the MEDA Regulation, because we want to streamline and simplify procedures.

We cannot accept Amendment No 13, which would seek to include a financial reference amount for the period 2000 to 2006 in the regulation since this would clearly prejudge the results of the budgetary procedure as has been agreed in the context of the Interinstitutional Agreement.

We cannot accept Amendment No 21 which seeks the removal of direct budgetary support, nor Amendment No 27 on direct industrial cooperation and I should point out that the new enterprise policy of the Commission focuses on the improvement of the business climate rather than on direct tools of cooperation.

In addition, the Commission at this stage lacks the necessary resources for proper industrial cooperation.

Nor can we accept Amendment No 35 or part of Amendment No 40 on the expansion of decentralised cooperation so long as we do not have the necessary human resources to do the job in a responsible and effective way, but forms of decentralised cooperation will be pursued where possible within existing regional cooperation programmes.

Now let me comment briefly on Mr Piétrasanta's report.

I congratulate him and the other rapporteur, Mr Vandevielso, for the commitment and dedication which they have shown.

Most of the views expressed in Mr Piétrasanta's report and in the amendments are wholly in line with the Commission's efforts to reform the MEDA programme and our overall objective of streamlining procedures and accelerating delivery of aid.

We support the plea regarding the simplification of MEDA's management procedures and the strengthening of its strategic and integrated approach.

The report's appeal for an increase in Commission staff assigned to management of the MEDA programme is one we wholly support.

Enough staff to do the job is one of the key principles underlying the Commission's efforts to reform its external assistance services.

The increase will be, of course, pursued within the overall staff priorities of the Commission, and I note as well the report's request for the preparation of an annual report on human rights in the Mediterranean.

We believe this is something for the Council and the Commission to consider together.

We support the proposals for reinforced South-South cooperation and for more programmes backing small and medium-sized enterprises.

We are taking action on water management but we are not, I regret to say, in a position to support the micro-project proposals because again we lack the staff to manage them properly.

They are extremely resource-intensive in terms of management.

It will be apparent from what I have said that we are thinking very much along the same lines.

Our programmes in the Mediterranean are at the core of my agenda, along with the reinvigoration of the Barcelona process.

Let me make two final points.

First of all, I hope, the Commission will this week be agreeing a Commission communication on the revitalisation of the Barcelona process, which we will then, of course, wish to discuss with this Parliament.

Our funding of programmes in the Mediterranean between now and 2006 is probably the largest of all our programmes representing over 20% of our efforts externally.

My concern is that we should deliver that assistance more effectively and more rapidly.

I have told Parliament before of my surprise at the discovery that if we were to continue at the present rate of disbursement it would take us almost nine years to get through the backlog of our existing obligations in the Mediterranean.

You cannot explain that to the people you are trying to help and it is very difficult to justify it to Europe's taxpayers.

Instead of our programmes enhancing the reputation of the European Union in the Mediterranean countries and around the world, it damages our reputation even though we are using taxpayers' money to do good.

So, the reform of programmes like MEDA goes right to the heart of what we are trying to do in the Commission.

The other point I wanted to make is this: at the informal meeting we had in Evian at the weekend we spent over three hours talking about external assistance and how effectively we do things as a Union.

I pay great tribute to the French Presidency for giving this issue the priority it has.

The Commission raised the issue in May when I set out our external budget for the General Affairs Council, the first time the General Affairs Council had ever discussed the budget for external relations, and when we put forward our proposals for reforms, so I think the issue now has the political priority it deserves.

But we will be tested by what we do with MEDA and what we do in the Balkans and by how these programmes actually work on the ground.

I cannot keep on coming back to this Parliament and saying we have terrible problems.

Parliament, the Commission and the Council have to be able to show that we are making a difference.

I hope that with the Parliament's understanding we will be able to ensure over the years ahead that our external programmes are as effective and rapid as we all want them to be.

The vote will be taken on Wednesday at 12 noon.

The next item is the report (A5-0210/2000) by Mr Galeote Quecedo, on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy on common Community diplomacy 2000/2006(INI).

Mr President, I believe that we all agree that in 2000, obviously, the Community already enjoys numerous and fundamental competencies in the external field.

The Maastricht reform reflects the aspiration, so often expressed in this House, that Europe should speak with one voice in the international arena.

With the CFSP, the Union' s external activity takes on a new dimension, definitively going beyond the economic field in order to participate actively in external policy.

However, the European Union repeatedly has cause to regret - we have been seeing this recently - that it cannot meet the requirements of external action.

Having said this, I wish to begin by saying that the objective of this report is not to seek a further increase in the competencies of the Union in the external field.

Those who wish to do that have other debates, in the field of institutional reform, in which to find expression for their aspirations.

All that we are proposing is to implement measures which will rationalise and improve the way in which the enormous external action of the Community institutions is carried out.

We propose basically to make decisive progress in three areas.

Firstly, by improving the training of Community officials intended to be involved in carrying out external actions.

The numerous officials in the Commission who deal with external relations, taking on competencies of prime importance, are technical specialists but in general they lack the prior diplomatic training, which is necessary to fulfil their duties.

We therefore believe we need to create a Community diplomatic college, which will provide Community officials intended for external action with a good diplomatic and international training.

To the same end, we believe it is necessary to provide an opportunity to link the national diplomatic corps, whose experience and long tradition are of great value, to our external action, and we therefore propose to implement a 'bridging' system between national external services and the Community external service.

Secondly, we wish to clarify and develop the legal status of the Commission' s current external delegations, their role and their relationship with the various Community institutions.

The Commission delegations have seen a dramatic quantitative and qualitative expansion over recent years.

Nevertheless, they do not function in the same way and their relationship with other institutions is unclear, since it is not regulated.

We therefore propose that the Commission delegations become Community delegations so that their relations with the Council may be closer, through the High Representative of the CFSP, as well as their relations with the European Parliament and its members, thereby guaranteeing greater efficiency and political control of their activities.

Thirdly and lastly, we intend to improve the coordination between the delegations and the external services of the Member States.

We need to promote this type of coordination, in order to prevent confusion and inconsistency, not to mention other deficiencies, which were plain to see at the informal General Affairs Council in Evian last weekend.

To this end we propose various mechanisms and, amongst other things, we envisage the possibility of joining together the missions of those Member States that agree to do so with the current Commission delegations, at the appropriate time.

Furthermore, this would represent a considerable reduction in costs.

Ladies and Gentlemen, Mr President, none of the proposals that have been put forward represent institutional reforms, and even less the ceding of Member States' sovereignty.

We are simply proposing a more effective use of the competencies which have already been granted.

We are not setting out to propose conflicting models of Europeanism, but simply to be more efficient.

Therefore, the rapporteur cannot support those amendments which would represent profound structural changes to the institutional architecture of the Union.

In particular, I would like to express my gratitude for the other contributions which, in committee and with tomorrow' s vote in Parliament, greatly enrich the initial proposal.

I would ask the various groups to vote in favour of this report and the European Commission to reflect the feelings of this House.

Mr President, first of all I would like to extend sincere congratulations to the rapporteur, Mr Galeote Quecedo, for his very important and also interesting report that has come at a very opportune moment.

If we look at how the tasks of the European Commission, and, in fact, those of the European Union in general, have developed, then we see that this relates to the new phenomenon of the candidate countries, the old phenomenon of the existence of trading partners and development regions, and the not so new phenomenon of Bosnia and former Yugoslavia.

These are areas in which the European Union, and the European Commission in particular, have an abundance of tasks before them.

A great deal of criticism of European effectiveness has to do with the way in which these tasks are organised.

The committees we have sent out there appear to echo the call for decentralisation that is often heard in other areas of the European Union too.

Decentralisation is needed to make decision-making more effective and also to ensure that when there is no pressing reason for something to be dealt with in Brussels, it can be decided on locally.

Naturally this will directly affect the way in which these European missions are assessed.

For example, the mandate of the European missions must be widened, which therefore means that they will need more personnel.

There have been some very embarrassing discrepancies between the possibilities open to the European missions, and those of the United States, for example.

Indeed this found expression in the number of people that could be employed locally through the European Union.

The European Union' s profile could be raised by putting Mr Galeote Quecedo' s plans into practice.

We must have real EU embassies that are at least some sort of a match for the United States embassies, especially in areas where it is the European Union that bears most responsibility.

Therefore we cannot tolerate having ineffective diplomats in situ.

I believe it behoves the Commissioner to look closely at who is proving effective and who is failing on that score.

I welcome the fact that there is contact between the European diplomats out there and the European Parliament.

Naturally this must proceed under the supervision of the Commissioner who has responsibility for these affairs.

This contact with diplomats appointed as special envoys by the European Parliament is, of course, also something we would heartily recommend.

We gladly subscribe to those aspects of Mr Galeote Quecedo' s report that could lead to us speaking with one voice.

Mr President, this report on a European Parliament initiative highlights an extremely important issue that we are facing, not only in the field of common foreign and security policy but in the context of enlargement of the European Union itself.

In the field of CFSP, notable progress is already being made, particularly in terms of cooperation in the area of defence.

A common military force is being created.

It would be strange - not to say dangerous - if the European Union did not at the same time strive to improve its common diplomatic instruments.

There is no excuse for lagging behind in this area, even if we take the factor of each Member State' s national interest into account as well as the almost purely economic nature of the history of the Community' s institutions between the Treaty of Rome and the Treaty of Maastricht.

Diplomacy at the beginning of the twenty-first century has indeed been marked by great events and processes that are giving it much greater scope than it has had in the past.

Amongst these I would highlight the globalisation of the international economy and the financial markets.

It is no exaggeration to state with all certainty that diplomatic activity is becoming more and more involved in the economic sphere and to say that, in turn, economic interests cannot be protected without diplomatic activity.

As is also well known, this situation is being played out against a backdrop in which the positions of the main players on the international political stage are being redefined.

The aims that provide the market with additional sensitivity or idealism, however, particularly the fight for a project which is able to reconcile the goals of economic development and those of social and political development cannot be reached unless there is a high degree of cooperation between the Member States at all levels, specifically at the diplomatic level.

What better instrument than diplomacy can there be for promoting objectives of peace and of reconciling national interests?

The European Union must provide itself, as this report recommends, with more and better elements of common diplomacy.

It is quite clear that, amongst other obstacles, organising matters according to pillars and the fact that the European Union has no legal personality both make it more difficult to achieve this aim and forced this report' s proposals to perform some clever balancing tricks.

Nevertheless, we can, at no great financial or organisational cost, contribute to a better use of the diplomatic resources we already have in the European Union, to everyone' s benefit.

The wealth and diversity of diplomatic experience in the various countries of Europe is also recognised throughout the world.

It would be a mistake to think that any of the proposals put forward in this report could harm processes that are under way in the field of CFSP in general, or in the field of diplomacy in particular.

The underlying aim of this report, as we understand it, following on from several discussions held over a period of months, is to bring together all relevant current experiences and processes and to direct them towards a common goal, which is, by and large, to create a genuine common European diplomatic service.

Lastly, I should like to say that although one might criticise certain aspects of the report, I have no hesitation in recommending that you adopt it, and I hope that the proposals it contains are given the reception that they deserve.

Mr President, we in the group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party set great store by the fact that this is not an attempt to set up a single diplomatic corps to replace the Member States' external services.

Rather, it is a question of improving the quality of the external service the Community already has and of improving cooperation between that service and the Member States' external services.

There is no doubt that there is a need for improved training of this kind in the majority of Member States, and especially in the applicant countries which will, of course, soon need a sizeable staff of well-trained people.

We in the Liberal Group attach importance to the fact that what is at issue here is in-service training and not basic training.

By that, I mean providing training to people who are already in service or on the way to joining the service. And we attach great importance to the fact that the training should be open to participants from the national external services so that there is interaction between EU and national diplomats.

We have therefore tabled a number of amendments which we hope Parliament can accept.

It is debatable whether there is a need for a new institution with its own building and board of management, as well as a heated dispute about where the institution is to be located.

We would certainly prefer to support actual activities than just bricks and mortar, but we are able wholeheartedly to support the intention behind the proposal, and we hope that Mr Galeote Quecedo' s reflections will be given careful consideration in the Member States, the Commission and the Council.

Mr President, the majority of my group considers that, unfortunately, the unambitious and technical nature of Mr Galeote Quecedo' s report means that it fails to live up to its fine title of a common Community diplomacy.

In particular, I feel that it is a mistake to deny, as Mr Galeote Quecedo has done, that the political aim of his report is the gradual creation of a common diplomacy as the expression of a common policy.

This is to ignore the reality that what we have at the moment is a discordant, incoherent chorus of European countries and their 14 thousand or so diplomats, compared to the 3 500 diplomats of the United States.

We should simply supplement the 15 diplomatic corps with another, more or less competent corps, made up of European Union officials or, as is the case today precisely in Commissioner Patten' s entourage, national diplomats, possibly including more representatives from some countries than others.

I also feel that the debate on Commissioner Verheugen' s statements indicated extremely clearly that it is not possible for the Union to carry out its external activities in the context of such a lack of cohesion and such frustration caused by the confusion of powers and responsibilities.

Commissioner Patten, you have already spoken on this subject, Commissioner Verheugen will also do so, and then each of the Member States will give their opinion.

This means that the message we send to the European citizens can only be contradictory.

The group of the Greens/European Free Alliance will support Amendments Nos 5 and 6 tabled by Mr Dupuis, which introduce the political agenda of a common diplomacy and the proposal to start establishing European Union embassies in those countries where not all the countries of the Union are represented.

I hope that others will also support these amendments.

Mr President, our group, the Confederal Group of the European United Left/Nordic Green Left, broadly supports Mr Galeote Quecedo' s report, although it is also the case that certain sections of the group disagree with important aspects of it, as we will see later.

We feel that Mr Galeote Quecedo has carried out a profound, serious and ambitious piece of work, although it is also prudent with regard to current prospects.

The joint effort in committee by the various political groups demonstrates that common diplomacy is a concern felt by all of us.

In fact, our experience, acquired through visits to different parts of the world, highlights four worrying issues:

First: the scant and insufficient coordination of the Member States with regard to issues that must be addressed jointly whenever the interests of the European Union are at stake, and the minimal cooperation between the delegations of the European Union.

Also, we sometimes fail to exploit the rich diplomatic experience we possess in Europe and often there are worrying confrontations between these various diplomatic services.

Second: the accidental occurrence of contradictions in interventions by different countries on issues affecting the interests of the European Union.

Third: the insufficient coordination in the defence of points of view, interests and responsibilities of the European Union in international bodies of a political, economic, cultural nature etc., such as the UN, the International Monetary Fund, the World Trade Organisation, the WHO etc.

Fourth: we have also noted that the presence of the European Union is weak in relation to its economic importance and also in relation to the significant presence of the United States.

We therefore believe it is important to proceed with the proposal presented in the report and, furthermore, to take more cohesive action, make a greater impact and make greater progress in that direction.

Hence the usefulness of the proposal to create a Community diplomatic college and also the importance, which appears in Mr Galeote Quecedo' s report, of the European Parliament playing an important role as trustee of the sovereignty and will of the European citizens in order to give content to this Community diplomacy and also give content to this prospect of constructing a European Union which creates peace, respect for international law and solidarity in the world.

Therefore, as I said at the beginning, our group will broadly support Mr Galeote Quecedo' s report.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the Galeote Quecedo report is interesting for two reasons: the first is that Parliament unashamedly reveals its true intentions in it, and the second is that nobody is paying it the slightest attention.

What is the real issue here?

The real issue is nothing less than providing the European Union, which, by the way, is now simply the Commission, with those final attributes of a sovereign State that was lacking, i.e. a diplomatic service and the prerequisite for establishing it, which is legal personality.

Let us be logical about this.

The only reason for this college' s existence is to create a common diplomatic service and to do so in a completely transparent way, as outlined in the Galeote Quecedo report.

If those who back this report achieve their aims, the 'carving up' of our nations will thus have reached its logical conclusion, by once again adopting the old Monnet, Schuman and Delors method, which consists of creating a body in the hope that it will get around to creating its own role and content. The truth is, however, that so many preconditions have been left out that people may have the impression that we do not care what anyone thinks.

We are creating a diplomatic instrument without even thinking about the essential prerequisite of a common diplomatic policy.

This itself presupposes another prerequisite, which is that the common interests of the Member States must be defined. This prerequisite in turn presupposes another, consisting of defining a common link between Europe and the rest of the world.

If we are only talking about the three main powers, Germany, Great Britain and France, it is impossible to see what points would form the basis of our common interests and diplomatic policy, either on Western Europe' s relationship with the United States or on the role of NATO, subjects on which we are definitely not in agreement nor likely to be, or on the East - and here we have the thorny question of Russia and our relations with the Central European countries in general - or on the South, perhaps significantly less where the South is concerned, particularly in the context of the Mediterranean policy.

This is therefore a fraud, and the worst of all kinds of fraud at that, which is intellectual fraud, unless, that is, we accept that the diplomacy of the main power - the central power - can effectively be foisted on everyone else, which would actually amount to solving the problem.

Quite recently, at the UN 'Women 2000' conference, our Polish friends were able to see just how flexible common diplomacy really is when they were ordered to fall into line with the position laid down by the Union, or face delays in their country' s application for Membership.

We feel sure that the experience of our friends in Central Europe in the field of resistance to totalitarianism could prove useful to us some day, and furthermore, an illustration of this form of totalitarianism has been provided recently by the unacceptable quarrel that some people are picking with one of our fellow Members, Daniel Hannan.

Let there be no mistake, the idea of common representation at the United Nations is being used to attack the permanent seats held by certain Member States as well as the idea that there could be dissident voices in this world, such as the voice France tries very often to make heard with regard to the United States.

Ultimately, Europe can speak with one voice only if it has nothing to say.

This has been proved once again and it has also been proved that this Europe is not simply negating nations as individual nations - it is rejecting and annihilating Europe itself.

Mr President, Commissioner, I am sure that it will come as no surprise to our friend and fellow Member, Mr Galeote Quecedo, when I say that I am sorely disappointed by this report.

I feel that this is an over-cautious report, and yet it is already raising some people' s hackles.

It would have been better to address the crux of the matter and I am sorry that the report has not done this.

The issue of diplomacy is not merely a question of training diplomats and the status of delegations. The issue is of fundamental importance and there is a powerful taboo in this Parliament which we are never prepared to confront: that we have fifteen national diplomatic services, which have been strengthened over years of integration by gradually taking over the competencies of all the national ministries and which have become the real powers, the main power blocking any possible reform of foreign affairs and diplomacy, because it is their power that would ultimately be under threat.

They had no trouble delegating and taking the powers of the other ministries to the European level, but when it comes to their own power, it is a different question altogether.

Mrs Frassoni pointed out how ridiculous it is to have a situation in which we have 14 000 diplomats, whilst the United States has 3 000, with the cost/quality ratio of which we are fully aware.

We must address the issue of the diplomatic services and the issue of external affairs policy with the same approach that we used to achieve economic and monetary union, by establishing a gradual process of communitising external policy and the diplomatic services.

Unfortunately, the report does not address these issues.

Unfortunately, we are only proposing slight changes, which will just add a new level to the structures that already exist and we are in danger of ending up with bodies that are even more incapable of making the right decisions quickly.

In my opinion, the questions we must answer are these: do we or do we not want to communitise external affairs policy? Do we want to make the same huge mistake that we made by creating the figure of Mr CFSP and by restoring exclusive Community competence for external policy to the Commission or to a Vice-President of the Commission?

I am rather disappointed that the report does not discuss these issues and somewhat surprised that the EPP has adopted this position given that, tomorrow, in another report on the Union' s political priorities, it will probably adopt a more forthright position on the communitisation of external policy.

I therefore urge our rapporteur and friend, Mr Galeote Quecedo, to perhaps incorporate some of the amendments that have been tabled and to ensure that a process is initiated, that an appeal is made to the Council and that, for once, our Parliament does not fall short of the position of the Council and the Commission, as unfortunately has been the case for the last ten years.

Mr President, wishful thinking sets the tone of this report in my view.

Only occasionally does the rapporteur display any sense of reality.

This is very clearly the case in Recital O, in which he states that "the objective is certainly not to create a single diplomatic service to replace the foreign services of the Member States" .

Yet at the same time, the entire document is suffused with the notion of - it would be safe to say, the passionate desire for - a Community diplomatic service for the Union.

The rapporteur rationalises his intention at the very beginning of his report.

In his words: "since the 1950s the Community' s external activity has expanded continuously" .

Given that the Union' s vacillating behaviour in the Balkans during the recently elapsed decade of the previous century is still fresh in the memory, this robust declaration sounds extremely implausible to my mind.

Another important point raised by Mr Galeote Quecedo is that of "a lack of coordination" in the foreign policy of the EU Member States, which he believes to be essential to the "visibility and effectiveness" of the CFSP.

Does this really amount to nothing more than a coordination problem?

As if the divergent national interests of the Member States had already been consigned to the European past!

The CFSP' s self-same lack of efficiency and visibility, as picked up on by the rapporteur, can be directly attributed to the divergent interests of the Member States.

The tension between fantasy and reality in the report also manifests itself in the proposal to set up a College of European Diplomacy.

Just how realistic is it to ask for "adequate funding to be provided in the General Budget" for this project when the current EU delegations are already having to contend with serious personnel shortages due to a lack of funds?

Mr Galeote Quecedo makes the same point himself in his explanatory statement.

Mr President, the question I am dying to ask is this: to what extent do the Member States themselves actually share the rapporteur' s views?

At the end of the day, there is nothing skilful about spending Community money.

On no account does this typically European custom rule out legitimate and extremely useful prior enquiries as to necessity and effectiveness.

Mr President, I would like to thank the rapporteur for producing this report.

As Mrs Carrilho has pointed out, this is the first own-initiative report which this Parliament is approving in the field of external policy during this parliamentary term.

It is odd to hear the interventions of certain MEPs who say that they find this report very timid, and of others who feel that it will put an end to the last redoubt of Member States' sovereignty.

I believe that this report represents a move in the right direction.

I believe that it limits itself to adhering pragmatically to the Community method and that it clearly demonstrates that joint diplomacy is one of the fundamental aspects of the visibility of the European Union' s external action.

I do not know if we can speak today of the European Union as the main economic power, the main industrial power or the main financial power in the world.

What we can say, without a shadow of a doubt, is that the European Union is today the main provider of development aid, and this means that the European Commission delegates play a very important role when it comes to representing the Community institutions and, in particular, the Commission.

This means that their specific importance in many cases, given the significant quantities they have to distribute, is greater than that of the ambassadors and of the Member States.

Therefore, Mr President, it is clear that anything which helps to improve the preparation and knowledge of the Commission officials will be an important element for the European Union' s external action.

The rapporteur has explained the main initiatives contained in his report: the creation of a common diplomatic college, the establishment of procedures for Commission delegates to be received in third countries - an initiative which Mr Patten has accepted in general terms and which I am pleased to see included in this report - and also the drawing up of an annual report on the activity of European Union delegates.

I hope, Mr President, that these initiatives will contribute effectively to the creation of a more visible and coherent external policy for European Union action.

Mr President, today we are discussing Mr Galeote Quecedo' s excellent report, on which there is a broad consensus.

Clearly, if we are to support the Union' s international activities, we need suitable mechanisms, knowledge and skills.

Equally clearly, these alone are not enough.

In this sense, Mr Galeote Quecedo' s report remains within the limits of procedural rationalisation; it also remains within the framework of certain policies.

We often ask the question: which came first, the chicken or the egg?

Something of the sort hangs over today' s debate.

But we must be clear that there are no vacuums in life.

In this sense, moaning and groaning solves nothing in politics.

Having said which, the framework to which the Galeote Quecedo report belongs will always dictate the conditions both for rationalising procedures and for the prospects of common diplomacy.

In this sense, it moves within the bounds of technocratic rationalisation and goes no further than policy will allow.

However we, the citizens of Europe, who are striving for a better future for the people of Europe and of the world as a whole, have to realise that we need to intervene in these matters transcendently.

We need to move forward, we need to be guided by the logic of a positive dynamic balance, not a static balance which goes nowhere.

In this sense, there have indeed been huge vacuums in the CFSP and we have all acknowledged the fact and seen what is needed in order to put flesh on the bones of this policy, which is instrumental to the political development of Europe.

In this sense, the report translates the initiative of the European Parliament into a framework, into prospects, action and rationalisation.

In any event, if there is anyone here in this House - and I do not think that there is - who believes that Europe has no future, they can express it somewhat differently.

But I believe that the people of Europe and the large majority of parties and factions see Europe as a Europe with prospects, a Europe of peace, a Europe of cooperation, a Europe of social cohesion, a Europe of development.

And this sort of Europe cannot function if it has no prospect of a common foreign policy and defence and security policy, i.e. if it does not have the corresponding mechanisms.

Under these circumstances, the tiny foundation stone of this structure which the European Parliament is laying today represents a serious starting point and I think that it has created new momentum and better prospects.

I would like to speak on behalf of the non-federalists in our group who actually feel that Europe is centralising far too much and more and more powers are being taken away from people at local and national levels, basically without any proper democratic control.

There is quite a lot of double-talk here tonight.

On the one hand, people are saying that we are not talking about or aiming for a single diplomatic corps, but it is quite clear that the aim of this whole project is to have EU embassies abroad and to abolish national ones.

I am not being nationalistic and saying that I want the Irish Embassy, but there is a certain amount of danger in this, particularly because it is geared towards the common foreign and security policy, which is not in the interest of the developing world or of the peoples that have been persecuted and exploited by Member States of this Union.

You only need to look at the number of, for example, British embassies abroad.

Britain has twice as many embassies as either France or Germany.

It has a huge diplomatic corps which reflects its colonial past.

I have grave reservations about the idea of a common European embassy, given that in the past people fleeing persecution in certain countries were able to go into some embassies and seek asylum and get protection.

What happens if you have a single European diplomatic presence abroad?

What would happen then if someone fleeing from persecution were to seek asylum or help from the EU embassy if it did not suit the EU's interests to support him or her?

I believe that there are grave dangers in what we are doing.

It is interesting to hear some people speaking today about the need for a higher profile and EU embassies to compete with the US. This is all about competition.

It is about being able to compete with other superpowers.

I do not approve of the idea that Europe should create another superpower.

To do so would destabilise the global community.

Whereas, we should look for more cooperation and less competition.

The idea of competing with the US is completely unacceptable.

If you look at the report itself, it is geared towards facilitating the common foreign and security policy.

Not all Greens and EFA members in our group - the non-federalists - would support Mr Dupuis' amendments, because we believe that they are moving in the same direction and we would have grave reservations about that.

Mr President, although the European Union barely has a legal basis or status as an international political entity, the report and proposal under discussion suggest creating mechanisms which are suited solely to that sort of entity.

The proposal to create a Community diplomatic corps and a college of diplomacy is not intended to fill a vacuum in Community legislation.

In essence, this proposal, tabled no less as a proposal by the European Parliament, which is supposed to represent the people, is intended to deprive Member States of the facility to exercise an independent foreign policy which differs from the choices made by the dominant circles in the European Union, to the detriment of the people.

It is basically intended to abolish diplomatic representation of the people, of the Member States, and to replace it with diplomatic representation directed by the managing board of the European Union.

This proposal is intended to take all foreign policy matters out of the jurisdiction of national governments, far from any possible democratic control, and away from national parliaments, and is therefore in violation of national constitutions.

The Communist Party of Greece, as you know, is opposed to any further integration of the European Union and to the CFSP and the superpowers of Mr CFSP, the notorious Mr Solana.

We are opposed to measures which seek to convert national governments into powerless county councils, which is why we shall be voting against the proposal.

Outwardly, Mr Galeote Quecedo's report seems very reasonable, but on closer examination, we get a rather different picture.

If the proposals were pursued, we would have another building block in the construction of a European State.

There are many points of detail in the report which are particularly controversial, not least the idea of European Union embassies and the suggestion that the European Union should have "coordinated representation in international bodies such as the UN".

The implication of this is that the United Kingdom and France should give up their seats in the Security Council and make way for an EU representative.

I am alarmed at the anti-United States rhetoric which we have heard from a number of speakers, and at some of the other outbursts from other Members.

This is hardly the moment for the Commission to be encouraged to embark on yet another ambitious development of its role.

The Commission's external assistance programmes account for nearly EUR 10 billion this year, and the priority task of the Community delegations is to administer these programmes properly and efficiently.

Mr Patten has just made reference to this.

In his communication on the reform of external assistance, Mr Patten recognised, and I quote, "acute staff shortages have had a direct and negative impact on the speediness and quality of EC aid delivery".

He said that there is an urgent need to focus activities on core tasks and that additional staff needs will be concentrated in the area of project and programme implementation, in particular within delegations.

The clear conclusion is that the most important role of delegations is the administration of external assistance, not to try and run some additional diplomatic tasks.

Management personnel is what we need in the delegations.

There is no recognition of this in the Galeote Quecedo report.

Yes, the Commission needs to recruit a different sort of personnel.

Yes, it needs to give them improved, specialist training, but not for some new-fangled diplomatic service, but to get the external assistance programmes on the right footing.

Mr President, the informal meeting of Foreign Ministers in Evian has, in fact, already anticipated to some degree the excellent proposals in Mr Galeote Quecedo' s report.

As I understand it, it was agreed that the EU embassies in third countries and the embassies of the Member States should improve their level of cooperation and coordinate their development programmes, and that there should be far more joint action.

Now these are things we have already called for on countless occasions, and so I am delighted that Mr Galeote Quecedo has made a proposal that is very much in line with our wishes.

Mr President, last week, I was in Indonesia on a fact-finding mission and all I can say is that the EU delegation out there provided me with outstanding support.

When I go on foreign trips, I always ask for a meeting to be arranged which will be attended by all the EU ambassadors, i.e. the ambassadors of the 15 Member States.

This occasion was no exception, and a meeting was indeed arranged.

And then there are complaints that the joint policy of the EU Member States is not in the limelight enough, and that although people in Indonesia know full well what Japan and the United States are doing there, they do not have a clear enough idea as to what the 15 Member States of the European Union are doing there.

If I then ask: 'how do you coordinate your work, and how do you harmonise your activities, the answer is: 'that is not something we do' .

And I would go so far as to say that people seem to be in great fear of achieving a degree of coordination and harmonisation.

That is why I think it is so important that these agreements were reached in Evian, and why I welcome with open arms the fact that an EU college of diplomacy has been proposed.

The national diplomats should also be required to attend courses at a college of this kind, so that they understand how to take joint action at European level.

There is an urgent need for this.

It is not a question of wanting to outdo the United States, or Japan, for example, but what we do need to do is give Europe a much higher profile in third countries.

Accordingly, I have a great deal of time for Mr Galeote Quecedo' s report and I truly hope that the Evian proposals come to fruition.

Mr President, over a period of 150 years, missionaries and aid workers have fostered knowledge of international affairs and commitment in my own country amongst broad sections of the population.

It is important for each individual Member State to retain and extend the opportunities it has for asserting, through its government and embassies, the voice and commitment of its own people on international issues.

Embassies constitute one of the most essential and most obvious expressions of national sovereignty.

History shows how, for example, a country such as Norway fought to conduct its own diplomacy in its struggle for independence from Sweden.

By having its own embassy, a country can also provide important services to its citizens when they visit another country.

The embassy can provide them with a service in their own language.

At the same time, embassies constitute indispensable sources of information and centres of analytical work for the various governments of the countries concerned.

Mr Galeote Quecedo has done a very fine job, but I am sceptical about the following points: recital E concerning the establishment of a professional and permanent community diplomatic service; and recital P in which there is talk of setting up EU embassies in the future.

What exactly does this mean, Mr Galeote Quecedo and Commissioner Patten?

Paragraph 1 - the setting up of a College of European Diplomacy.

In which language is it to operate - in Spanish, English, French or in the languages of all the Member States?

Paragraph 12 - in which I think the embassies of the Member States are being told that they are to issue joint statements of their views.

Is this not already clear to them under the framework of the Common Foreign and Security Policy?

Finally, there is talk of guaranteeing coordinated representation in the EU and other international bodies.

Sweden and many other countries have proud traditions in the United Nations.

Let us continue along these lines.

Mr President, I have taken the floor now spontaneously - as spontaneously as it is possible to do so in this Parliament - because a colleague from the group cannot be here.

But I am taking the floor as someone who until last April was a very ordinary civil servant in the German diplomatic service, and so people might perhaps think that I would be certain to be relatively sceptical about an approach of this kind because it will surely tend to erode the powers of national colleagues.

I am not sceptical, and I should like to warmly congratulate Mr Galeote Quecedo on his report.

I am, however, rather surprised at the strange scenarios depicted by some of the honourable members here.

Mr Galeote Quecedo actually made this quite clear: there is a remit for the European Union to be represented in third countries and this is about us being represented there better and more professionally within its terms; it is about our people whom we post there being able to work as effectively as possible within their remit.

I do not wish to offend anybody, but if I imagine let's say a former national civil servant from the Ministry of Agriculture in a Member State coming into the Commission at some point and doing really outstanding work internally, and then being appointed to head perhaps an external delegation or a Commission representation abroad, I think that this person would definitely still gain from learning what national colleagues will have perhaps learnt at a diplomatic college.

And I believe that this would allow the person to do their job even more successfully.

Similarly, however, I should also like to say that this remit will of course grow in conjunction with powers at European level.

In this respect, both the fears expressed by Mr Coûteaux on the one hand, and the hopes expressed by Mr Dupuis on the other, are certainly justified.

As the tasks broaden, so the power devolved to these representations will increase, but this is also what we, as a body, have all wanted.

Seen from this point of view, it is good if we already start making appropriate preparations now.

I believe that the report drafted by Mr Galeote Quecedo is a very good one.

Mr President, I very much welcome the interest that Parliament has shown in the external service, in particular, Mr Galeote Quecedo's report.

I want to assure Parliament that we will consider its recommendations very carefully.

I want to pay particular tribute to Mr Galeote Quecedo.

He deserves considerable respect for the very professional and open-minded way in which he has carried out his work.

I can say without any reservation that the Commission has benefited from the report and it is bound to make a permanent impression on the way we run our external service in the future.

It is already a subject in which we have been taking a keen interest.

I left a special meeting of virtually all our heads of delegation in Brussels early today specifically to be here for this debate.

When apologising for my early departure I was able to inform them of the close interest that Parliament takes in these matters.

The fact that we called all our heads of delegation to Brussels at this time is a sign of our determination to give a firm lead to the external service and to provide it with the career structure and the leadership that it deserves and needs.

Members will have seen the communication on the development of the external service that was adopted by the Commission on 18 July.

It recommends continuing to rebalance delegation staff between officials and local agents and continuing the regionalisation of our representation in a way that will free up 32 official posts immediately to be redeployed to delegations that need reinforcement.

The communication updates the list of priorities for the opening of new delegations and offices.

However, even though some of these are urgent priorities, our first concern must be to use available resources to reinforce some of our existing delegations.

The communication also describes the measures we are taking to devolve authority from Brussels to delegations in the field, known in jargon as "deconcentration".

This is closely linked to our efforts to reform our external assistance programmes.

The communication makes it clear that what it proposes is only a first step.

We intend to continue and to ensure the best use of the resources we have at our disposal on the basis of an evaluation of the workload of each delegation.

I want to make this point very clear because it is the backdrop to Mr Galeote Quecedo's report.

If we get through our reform proposals and if they are supported by the budgetary authority, in the SCR and the Bureau d'assistance technique combined we will have fewer people managing our external programmes, though we will have more than at present in the SCR.

But we will have fewer people in Brussels and more people in the field.

That is the balance we should be striking: to have more of the work done on the ground in our delegations.

We will be preparing a follow-up communication on the external services in the first half of next year.

Let me comment specifically on Mr Galeote Quecedo's report.

It makes recommendations in three main areas: the training of officials assigned to external relations, the legal status of delegations and coordination with Member States.

A number of the points raised by the resolution, for example on regionalisation and on the evaluation of our network of external representations, are already covered in our own communication.

The report stresses the role of the Commission and its delegations in the Community's external activities and it is, of course, essential that the Commission's external service be able to continue to contribute properly.

The first step must be to develop the training of officials in the Commission who deal with external relations.

I am delighted that the report puts so much informed stress on that point.

We have already made good progress but we need to build on it very fast indeed, particularly given the deconcentration that I have talked about.

We should try, as the report suggests, to benefit from the skills and experience of existing training institutions in the Member States.

We are already in contact with many of them and we will seek to deepen that relationship.

Whether it is now time to set up a college of European diplomacy is something that we will have to look at very carefully with Parliament, the Council and others.

We will certainly consider that proposal very carefully and it underlines the importance of training - language training, management training, all the other sorts of training that are essential in order to make our delivery of programmes and our representation overseas more effective.

On the legal status of delegations I should say that although delegations are formally delegations of the Commission they are under clear instructions to give all possible assistance to all the institutions of the European Union and indeed to Member States.

I am not convinced of the need to formalise this state of affairs since it exists already.

I do not want to complicate procedures further, but again I am open-minded on the issue.

We have made it absolutely clear to our delegations that they should regard themselves as working for the High Representative and for the other institutions of the European Union, both when it comes to reporting and when it comes to logistical issues.

On relations with the Member States, I wholeheartedly endorse the proposal for greater cooperation.

This is already our policy and the discussions this weekend at Evian very much concentrated on how best we can achieve that in practice.

In our 1998 communication on the external service, we made it clear that any Member State that wished to keep a presence in a third country without maintaining an embassy was welcome to use the Commission's delegations.

This has already happened on two occasions: in Sierra Leone by Germany and in Burundi by Austria.

There is already a considerable degree of cooperation between Member States' embassies and Commission delegations.

There are regular meetings at all levels.

Joint reports are produced, either at the request of headquarters, or on the initiative of heads of missions.

The Commission also supports and, when appropriate, seeks to participate in co-location projects where more than one Member State and/or the Commission agree to occupy premises jointly.

We have a programme of secondment of Member States officials and diplomats to our delegations.

There are ten in our delegations at the moment, with a few more due in the near future.

The restriction on the development of this programme is not lack of will on our part - I want to make that clear - but to some extent a lack of resources and also a certain reluctance on the part of the Member States to respond to our invitation to second diplomats to the delegations.

I want to underline the importance of coordination.

We have to cooperate better without finding ourselves in a situation in which everything we do is second-guessed, not just in Brussels, but in other countries as well.

All this discussion about coordination and about the future of the external service takes place against the backdrop of a treaty which talks about a common foreign and security policy, not a single foreign and security policy in a Union of fifteen Member States, each with its own foreign minister.

I strongly suspect that we will have fifteen foreign ministers in the European Union for the foreseeable future.

But what we have to do is make coordination and cooperation more effective, more meaningful and more professional.

In welcoming this report and in promising active cooperation in following its recommendations I must stress that if the external service is to carry out the role which Parliament wants for it, it must have the resources to do so; that is, not just resources to place officials in third countries but also to ensure that they are properly trained, that they are equipped with the necessary information technology and that they have secure means of communication.

Last and by no means least, it is very important that they are provided with adequate physical protection in what is an, often, very dangerous world.

Thank you very much, Commissioner Patten.

The vote will take place tomorrow, at 12.30 p.m.

The next item is the report (A5-0202/2000) by Mr Dell'Alba, on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation, on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation regarding the closure and liquidation of projects adopted by the Commission under Council Regulation (EC) No 213/96 on the implementation of the European Communities investment partners financial instrument for the countries of Latin America, Asia, the Mediterranean region and South Africa (COM(1999) 726 - C5­0062/2000 - 2000/0034(COD)).

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I have the great honour of presenting, on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation, this report on the liquidation of one of the projects which appears to have been more successful or which has been more positively appreciated in the field of North/South cooperation: the ECIP (European Community Investment Partners) project. This project is universally considered to have been successful, although, in company with many other projects, it did suffer from the delays which have built up in the external relations sector, delays with which we are all familiar and which Commissioner Patten has recently analysed in great detail.

In this case, we have almost 600 projects which were approved in due time and which are to be financed by the ECIP.

The Commission has therefore proposed - after a delay which we condemn in our report, caused, of course, by the events of 1999 - to extend, not the legal basis itself, but the existence of the technical assistance offices and the means which are essential for the management of the sizeable remainder of the ECIP - 590 projects - and to do so for two years.

I have to say, Commissioner, that the Committee on Development and Cooperation has been faced with the opinions of the other Parliamentary committees - the Committee on Budgets and the Committee on Budgetary Control - on this matter.

As you will have seen, these two committees attempted to fence in the Commission, so to speak, and place greater restrictions on it, calling upon it to conclude the operation six months earlier and to submit progress reports earlier in the process than proposed.

We, the Committee on Development and Cooperation, have understood the Commission' s message, the request to assist the ECIP project - which, I repeat, has contributed, along with other projects, to the creation and growth of thousands of small and medium-sized enterprises in Third World countries and has, in effect, raised the profile of the Union and enabled it to penetrate a new sector, which is therefore important to the Commission - and we have therefore decided not to go along with the more restrictive opinions of the other Committees or to make amendments to the Commission' s principal request to be granted two years to bring this major economic cooperation instrument to the best possible conclusion and to honour the agreements, signed before 31 December 1999.

However, at the same time, Commissioner, we have made a request: we have called upon you to inform Parliament of what the Commission intends to be the future of this instrument and to do so in good time for us to be able to reflect on the matter, together if possible.

We have seen that it is an effective instrument which has responded to real needs and has employed much more in the way of resources than the Community Budget funding.

We therefore call upon you to accept our amendment in order to make the co-decision procedure as rapid as possible and so that, if possible, we will be able to close the procedure in a single reading, so that you will be equipped with the means for action as soon as possible. Our modest request is that you inform us of your intentions before the end of the year.

We are aware of the differences of opinion and the possible conflicts of responsibilities between external relations and development and therefore between the responsibilities of the individual Directorates-General, and possibly even between the responsibilities of the individual Commissioners, but we are also aware that, during restructuring, the responsibility for external relations is extremely carefully reviewed by yourself, in particular, Commissioner, and by the entire Commission.

We have not, therefore, laid down a line of march. We have not laid down that the ECIP has to remain an autonomous instrument or that the ECIP can and must be integrated into a wider-reaching instrument.

We have merely requested that the faith we are placing in the Commission in granting it these extra two years will be repaid: this is our request, and I would ask you, Commissioner, to tell us now whether you accept the amendments which we have tabled.

Mr President, the Committee on Budgetary Control unanimously supports the objectives of the EC Investment Partners programme.

However, we do criticise the way in which it has been implemented.

The first point to note is that the Commission is currently operating in a legal vacuum, because the proposal to continue the programme - which has after all already been extended twice - was only tabled at the end of January, that is, one month after the regulation had expired, and will not be able to be adopted until late autumn.

We endorse the legislative proposal as a stopgap measure until the end of 2001, because we do not deny that, according to the figures published, 34 000 firms have been involved as partners, creating over 1 300 joint ventures and 42 000 jobs.

Nevertheless, the Deloitte & Touche appraisal report highlights a series of grave shortcomings which need to be tackled.

For example, procedures have become increasingly bureaucratic and cumbersome and therefore less business- and user-friendly, which has resulted in the accumulation of a backlog of payments and increasing discontent among financial institutions and enterprises because of delays in decisions and contracts.

Bad management and a lack of coordination between the ECIP Unit and the SCR also mar the Commission's reputation, as does the discrimination between financial institutions.

For example, the state-owned development bank of Denmark receives 38% of funding while Spain's only receives 23%.

As well as further points of criticism and three proposals for amendments, our opinion also contains questions which the Commission ought to take into account when it is deciding whether to continue operating the ECIP beyond 2001 or whether to incorporate it in a single investment facility, as Mr Dell'Alba has already mentioned.

Mr President, as somebody keen on helping countries to create jobs and transfer technology, I have to say that the ECIP programme is extremely good and, in principle, that was the objective.

But as my colleague and friend, Mrs Theato, has mentioned, it is full of worms.

It is almost as if the project was a wonderful, beautifully-wrapped box of chocolates, but inside was absolutely packed with worms.

The reason for that is simple.

If you look at Facility 1, it grants up to EUR 100 000 for simply identifying a potential joint venture.

So, clearly, when you look at Facilities 2, 3, 4 and 1b, you soon realise that the work was not done by somebody who was a banker, but by somebody who perhaps was a bureaucrat and knew nothing about finance and lending to projects which could be viable.

In short, I would say if such an instrument is ever to be invented and devised, it should be done with bankers and industrialists, people who know what they are talking about, not bureaucrats sitting in the European Commission.

Therefore, the sooner this project is wound up and the European Union saves money that is being wasted, the better.

I feel very strongly that such investment projects should be very carefully thought out with input from industry and bankers so that maximum jobs are created where they are needed and where there is wide coverage and public accountability and transparency.

When I was a member of the Budgetary Control Committee and met the people who were managing this project, I was not at all impressed with the knowledge that they had of running such an enterprise, and I come from an industrial and financial background.

Mr President, Commissioner, the report presented by Mr Dell'Alba refers to the winding up of one of the main financial instruments for Community aid to the private sector.

The Socialist Group supports all cooperation measures which, like this one, help to make companies, and economies in general, more dynamic, by means of private initiative.

The ECIP, whose projects are now coming to an end, has been particularly successful, as has been previously pointed out.

According to the external evaluation it has been subjected to, the ECIP has demonstrated a significant multiplier effect, creating jobs and joint ventures.

We now hope, Commissioner, that the future programme that will replace it will add better management to these positive effects.

Nevertheless, we have to say that although we are happy with the successes of this programme, we Socialist members of the Committee on Development and Cooperation suggest that the main objective of any instrument for aid, including those in the private sector, must be to reduce poverty in those countries, which is ultimately the objective of these instruments.

Wealth creation and the generation of jobs by means of companies financed through Community funds must benefit those populations in need.

The application of these instruments must take account of the need to achieve labour, social and environmental standards, otherwise it could be said that these instruments do not aid development but rather constitute subsidies to individuals.

We cannot say that in the evaluations control has always been exercised over the quality of aid via the ECIP.

For example, when a bank is established in a beneficiary country by means of ECIP funds, how can we be sure that these funds are directed towards attracting investment and not simply to subsidising the presence of the bank in that country?

As the rapporteur has said, it is a question of framing Community aid within a broad strategy which includes the private sector, which the Commission does not refer to in its plan for reforming aid policy, despite the fact that attracting private funds is necessary for the development of many countries.

In this respect, we wish once again to repeat the question by Mr Dell'Alba to the Commission about its intentions relating to extending this instrument to the countries of sub-Saharan Africa, whose need for funds is also very great.

In short, we hope that this experience of the ECIP, which has been very important for Latin America, will serve to improve the programme replacing it, which, we have noted, has no clear role in the Commission' s plan for reform.

Coordination within the Commission is essential to improving the effectiveness of aid and, to this end, the different instruments must have one broad aim and one overall strategy.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, to those of us who have closely followed the evolution and development of the ECIP instrument throughout its short but intense history, it seems that the best way to summarise Mr Dell'Alba' s report is to highlight the message contained in the amendments of the Committee on Development and Cooperation, since they recommend the continuation of this financial instrument because it has been the best vehicle for establishing and strengthening Europe' s business fabric in the countries involved and, consequently, for creating employment.

Now that the agreement on free trade, political concertation and cooperation between the European Union and Mexico has just entered into force, it is a good time to remember that we should continue with this type of financial instrument which, in some cases, such as Mexico, has been used intensively and positively, and is ideally suited to strengthening commercial ties between particular blocks, such as the European Union and the countries involved.

Otherwise, the European Union would no longer be acting in accordance with its cooperation and development commitment, not only in the case of the countries of Latin America, but also in the cases of Asia, the Mediterranean and South Africa.

In short, we clearly support Mr Dell' Alba' s report, and we congratulate him on the clarity of his ideas when he deals with the need to continue in the future with the implementation of the ECIP, in my opinion, as a single instrument. We also hope that these ideas will be directed, after more than ten years of positive experience, towards making the bureaucratic process involved in the project' s implementation more flexible and rapid in order to allow for more efficient action.

In my opinion, this requires a strengthening of human resources in the Commission' s offices in the countries involved.

Mr President, the proposed ECIP development programme provides a pretty picture of the European Commission' s mismanagement.

Although this programme is heading in the right direction, i.e. technology transfer to developing countries, the Commission has, perhaps unwittingly, applied a brake.

The programme has been running for twelve years and the Commission has waited right until it is about to end before considering whether to carry on with it.

As with other programmes, the Commission has not looked into the consequences of a possible end to this programme, the implications for the continuity of actions already undertaken or for the situation affecting partner businesses and jobs.

It appears that, last year, the EUR 90 million that were budgeted for this programme were not even used, due to a lack of human resources available to study the dossiers, which are piled up on a desk somewhere in Brussels.

At the same time, the administrative procedures have become more cumbersome with every passing year, yet the personnel running the programme have not seen any increase in their staffing numbers.

Similarly, business partners were not informed of the possible termination of the programme.

Lastly, the criteria for the distribution of funds between the different foci of the programme, particularly the social rights of workers, have remained impenetrably vague.

In light of what I have just said, we ask the Commission to look into the means, firstly, of producing a rapid evaluation of the assessment and, secondly, of re-establishing the programme whilst improving its transparency and maintaining the level of its budget.

Mr President, I shall be voting against the Dell'Alba report, and more generally against the ECIP and MEDA programmes, which were basically designed to finance subsidies and loans to private companies investing in Latin America, Asia, the Mediterranean and in South Africa.

I protest at the fact that public money might be used - in any form at all - to generate private profit.

This project, which is supposed to focus on SMEs in the first instance, in reality often involves subsidiaries of huge multinational companies, such as banks, which take part in these programmes and profit from them.

The stated political aim of these programmes is to encourage the opening up of these countries' markets to European capital.

In the past, these poor countries were plundered and exploited by the capital of the great European powers in competition with one another.

All that has changed is the fact that the programmes now advocate coordinated action for this capital.

Capital that is invested through this programme is no more designed to develop poor countries now than it was in the past, since they are dependent on European capital.

These programmes are not designed to make the lives of the working classes any easier, but to exploit a cheap workforce over there in order to increase the wealth of owners and shareholders over here.

I therefore object to these programmes across the board, because in spite of a few hypocritical phrases about fighting poverty, they all seek to provide the imperialism of the great European powers with additional instruments for getting a foothold in poorer countries and then dominating them.

Mr President, we are holding a debate on an issue which is of relatively modest importance in budgetary terms, ambitious in its objectives, relatively encouraging in its results, inefficient because of its cumbersome management procedures, at times contradictory and, in short, there is clearly room for improvement in the future.

I must express my satisfaction at the frankness and transparency with which the committee has analysed the results that have been obtained.

It does not hide anything and I congratulate the rapporteur, Mr Dell'Alba, because in a co-decision procedure he has rejected demagoguery and easy criticism in favour of the professionalism with which he has approached the drawing up of his report.

I hope that, in a co-decision procedure, the Commission will be sensitive to Parliament' s position so that we can begin the now urgent reform of this important financial instrument.

This instrument for the development of the private sector in developing countries is in accordance with the thinking which inspires the new position of the European Union in its cooperation policy.

We have already talked a lot about this in relation to the ACP countries and we must apply the same criteria in relation to the countries of Latin America and the southern Mediterranean.

The results obtained so far are encouraging.

More than 1 300 new companies have been set up, generating 42 000 jobs, and investment flows to the tune of EUR 3 500 million have been created.

Certain hopes and expectations, however, have been left behind.

We find it contradictory to say that fighting poverty is our priority and, yet we lack the information and indicators necessary to ascertain to what extent the most impoverished sectors have benefited from the aid.

Lastly, Commissioner, it is urgent that we reform the five current cumbersome procedures, none of which is of any real use, since they can clearly be improved.

Let me thank Mr Dell'Alba and the Development and Cooperation Committee very sincerely for their excellent work on the Commission proposal on the future of the European Community Investment Partners.

Let me commence with a bit of background.

The ECIP instrument operated successfully for 12 years, from 1988 to 1999.

More than 2 500 actions were approved in that period for a total amount of over EUR 290 million involving 1 400 joint ventures and EUR 4.3 billion in investment.

From 1991, the Commission sent annual reports on the implementation and on the results of ECIP to Parliament and to the Council, of which the last covered operations in 1999.

Parliament also received the independent evaluation report that was completed in December 1999, but, as honourable Members will know, from 1997 ECIP began to run into trouble.

The lack of sufficient staff to ensure the smooth management of an ever-increasing number of actions resulted in delays in the implementation of the programme, which in turn caused growing discontent among its beneficiaries.

These difficulties were compounded by the introduction of more stringent financial procedures needed to guarantee the proper use of the resources managed by the Commission.

They are typical of the problems we face, namely insufficient resources to do the job wedded to overly restrictive practices and procedures.

The Commission decided not to extend the instrument beyond 31 December 1999. This was a painful decision, but, I am sure, the right one - and to reappraise the instrument in order to prepare a redesigned programme.

This will allow better coordination with other similar European Union instruments and ensure improved management and financial procedures in the light of the new Commission guidelines on development policy and the management of external aid.

Mr Dell'Alba's report contains extremely helpful suggestions in this respect.

The approval of the proposed regulation will make possible the continued sound management of existing ECIP projects and their orderly closure and winding-down as they reach completion.

As far as the suggested amendments are concerned, the Commission agrees with Amendment Nos 1 and 2, which correspond with our views on the need to reassess, improve and redesign the existing financial instruments for the support of private investment.

As regards Amendment No 3, the Commission agrees with the principle behind it but is not in a position to provide the legislative proposals requested by Parliament by the end of this year.

We are presently engaged in a comprehensive review of all our existing financial instruments.

We need more time to present a properly thought through and fundamentally revised programme.

The Commission therefore proposes to evaluate all the options by June of next year and then make proposals.

The honourable gentleman has been generous, courteous and understanding.

He therefore deserves the assurance from me that the timetable I have set out is one we intend to observe, and I hope he will accept our determination to present our proposals within that sort of time-scale in good faith.

I wish we could act more rapidly, but to do the job properly we need a bit more time.

Let me finish by thanking the European Parliament for the support which the House has given to the proposed regulation on ECIP.

It will allow the Commission to bring this programme to an end in a responsible manner and to launch renewed and improved initiatives for promotion of the private sector in developing countries.

I am sure that we will have other future opportunities that will enable me to explain to some honourable Members why I do not equate that with nineteenth century imperialism.

Thank you very much, Commissioner Patten.

The vote will take place tomorrow, at 12.30 p.m.

The next item is the report (A5-0191/2000) by Mr Imbeni, on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation, on the Communication from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament: Assessment and future of Community humanitarian activities (Article 20 of Regulation (EC) 1257/96) (COM(1999) 468 - C5-0044/2000 - 2000/2016 (COS)).

Mr President, I would like to start by thanking all my fellow Members from the various Parliamentary groups who have made a substantial contribution to the preparatory work for this report to express Parliament' s position on the Commission' s Communication on ECHO' s activities, on emergency aid and on humanitarian activities.

The committee' s unanimity regarding the report is evidence of highly profitable cooperation, and I hope that this will be reflected in the final vote in the Chamber tomorrow.

A discussion on ECHO, or humanitarian aid, will include mention of the worst tragedies and the greatest contradictions of our time.

It will touch on war, natural disasters and the damage to the world' s ecology system, on the continued tragic ethnic conflicts and civil and military wars, on the basic injustice underlying the North/South relationship and the suffering, in particular, of the most vulnerable peoples; of women, children and the elderly.

And the truth is that the forecast for the next few years does not indicate an improvement in this situation.

I merely refer to a number of newspaper articles which have appeared during recent months on issues such as the fact that a totally unexpected part of the North Pole has shown signs of melting, the water poisoning in Bangladesh which is endangering safety, health and hygiene conditions for 25 million people, or the drought in many parts of Africa.

We must therefore be responsible and realistic, and, even more than in the past, we must plan action for the future to prevent natural disasters and to respond to the consequences of the tragedies often - almost always - caused by man.

These planning operations require an improvement in coordination at international level between the European Union and all the other parties involved in humanitarian aid, and greater cooperation within the European Union between the Commission and the instruments available to the Member States, in order to avoid the repetition of the frequent past cases - referred to in the Commission document and confirmed by the assessments - of duplication and repetition of action and, thus, wastage of energy and resources.

In this context, I find it unacceptable - and both my report and Parliament' s position are clear on this point - that ECHO should be reduced to a source of funding for initial relief operations and nothing else.

We need to act in a wider perspective. The objective of ECHO and of European Union activities must be, firstly, to increase preventive action and then, secondly, to link emergency and initial relief actions to the operations intended to re-establish minimum living conditions in places affected by natural disasters and wars, thereby providing humanitarian aid during the stage following provision of emergency aid.

The sums in question may well be limited, in terms of more general budgets, but we are talking about EUR 2 500 million which have been allocated over the last four years by the European Commission to non-governmental organisations (56%), United Nations agencies (25%), the Red Cross (11%) and other direct operations carried out by ECHO or specialised Member States agencies.

There we are. In my opinion, the Commission' s analysis compels us to act to further strengthen ECHO and to avoid the prevalence of certain positions present within the Council, which is divided over these issues.

Certain people in the Council are of the opinion that ECHO' s activities should be reduced, but I take the completely opposite view.

One very last point, Mr President: ECHO cannot be treated as an ATM service where international agencies or non-governmental organisations withdraw money and do not even tell the beneficiaries where the funding came from.

The European public and the beneficiaries should be told about this remarkable work by ECHO.

This is why we have proposed - and I hope that Commissioner Patten, who is not listening to me at the moment, will take this proposal on board with due consideration - that an information campaign be mounted to inform the public of our countries how our money is being spent and how our resources are being used, and we propose that this information campaign should not, of course, be financed out of ECHO funds but out of the ad hoc funds.

Mr President, the rapporteur, Mr Imbeni, has done an excellent job.

There is no need to repeat anything.

I should like to expand on two problematic issues.

The first is a question of principle.

Humanitarian aid has to be provided regardless of what has caused the catastrophes concerned and irrespective of any other political objectives.

Its increasing politicisation in recent years is an unacceptable and, ultimately, also inhumane phenomenon.

But at the same time, it should also be noted that the growing number of catastrophes is not only due to natural events over which we have no control.

As it is, this cannot be said of wars, in which humanitarian aid has to be supplied, perhaps by ECHO.

An increasing number of natural disasters are clearly linked to the fact that we are placing ever greater demands on the global ecosphere and biosphere.

The United Nations' Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, IPCC, has reported, for example, that we can already see a, "discernible human influence on global climate".

Our concepts of crisis management ought therefore, in my opinion, also to have a socio-political dimension and be integrated into development policy and, for example, economic policy strategy.

Otherwise we will, in many cases, only be repairing the damage inflicted as a consequence of our own policy, and the people in the countries of the South, in particular, will suffer as a result of the disasters which we have caused.

The second problem is directly linked to the first and yet is of a very practical nature.

I call on the Commission - even if the extensive problem which I have just outlined is not yet resolved - to link the design, organisation and operation of humanitarian aid more closely to development policy.

The Commission has already made attempts to do this, which I feel still need to be stepped up considerably and freed of red tape.

An example of this is, in my opinion, the concept of emergency relief which is geared to development, which the Gesellschaft für Technische Zusammenarbeit (Company for Technical Cooperation) is trying to put into practice.

Mr President, I should first like to salute Mr Imbeni, the author of this report, and express my appreciation of his work.

It is an excellent report which both identifies the main points of criticism and describes ways to ensure that ECHO is able to work effectively in the future.

We have had this office for humanitarian aid in the EU since 1992, and both evaluation reports - which form the main basis of the assessment, together with the Commission's report - contain high praise for ECHO in respect of its work so far, while identifying several very serious weak points.

Although the assessment of ECHO's work in terms of efficiency compared with costs, is very positive, there still remains the problem of the infamous 'grey area' in the time immediately following the events which trigger the provision of relief.

Humanitarian operations in this 'grey area' cannot be assessed on the basis of precise criteria, nor do they provide the information and recommendations required for future ECHO operations in the area.

It is therefore necessary, in my opinion, to improve disaster preparedness and step up the provision of disaster relief as a priority.

It should be noted here that the regional approach adopted by the existing DIPECHO instrument offers a possible solution.

At the same time, however, the lack of sufficiently flexible alternative instruments within the Commission is to be lamented.

The Commission needs to present a clear strategy for the role which the humanitarian aid provided by ECHO has to play as part of foreign and development policy.

ECHO does not have the necessary human resources to do the job of a planning headquarters.

Staffing levels are below those characteristic of other Commission departments and well below those in national administrations, which are known to invest considerably less in crisis prevention.

Here the appropriations, which currently stand at around EUR 7.5 million, therefore need to be at least - wait for it - quadrupled to allow the work to be done effectively.

It is particularly regrettable - and Mr Imbeni has already made this point as well - that when projects are developed and run through partners, around 56% of which are non-governmental organisations, they are not identified strongly enough in the public arena as European Union aid.

I believe that there is a considerable need for action here in the future.

The public has to be informed, but please not with the funds which are directly available to ECHO.

We should continue to pursue the positive initiatives here and use alternative sources of funding to defray the costs of informing the public.

Mr President, Commissioner, I would like to congratulate Mr Imbeni because I believe he has produced a splendid report and, while we were debating it in committee, we were already in complete agreement with his proposals.

The Socialist Group believes that aid policy must be the flagship of the European Union' s external activities insofar as it reflects the ideas which must inspire the construction of the European Union, that is to say, solidarity and cohesion on a global level.

In these times of Commission reform, when many Community policies and procedures are being questioned, humanitarian aid has been evaluated positively by different bodies and, of course, on a political level, by Parliament.

It is true that there has been a lot of criticism of humanitarian aid.

However, we, who have seen and evaluated what ECHO has done, believe that its work has been very positive.

This report therefore serves to ratify the principle of humanitarian aid as a right for people involved in disasters and an obligation on the part of the international community, in which the European Union is a major player, in both quantitative and qualitative terms.

Nevertheless and with a view to the future, we must take some steps forward.

Firstly, we must overcome the so-called 'grey area' which was mentioned earlier, that is to say, the interregnum between the end of emergency aid and the beginning of the rehabilitation and development actions.

While this 'grey area' continues, in which nobody is administratively responsible, there will be people who do not receive assistance for no other reason than a lack of internal coordination within the Commission.

We have seen this in the case of Mozambique and other disasters.

Humanitarian aid did arrive, but during this interregnum it has not continued for rehabilitation and development cooperation.

Coordination within the Commission and complementarity with the Member States and other donors are factors which are fundamental to the efficiency which reform is intended to produce.

Secondly, it is urgent that we increase the number of staff dedicated to humanitarian aid activities.

The number of ECHO' s staff is not proportional to the importance of its work.

Thirdly - and this is closely related to the previous point - the budget for humanitarian aid must be increased proportionally with its political importance and the real objectives we wish to achieve and which can be counted in the most important terms: human lives.

In this respect, the Commission and the Council' s budgetary proposals are far from meeting what we believe to be the humanitarian needs.

Lastly, we must try harder and harder to improve the decentralisation and flexibility of relations with agents for humanitarian aid, fundamentally the NGOs.

An instrument was mentioned earlier, DIPECHO, which provides operative preparation for disaster situations.

We believe that it is essential that, when a humanitarian catastrophe occurs, whether natural or caused by man, instruments are already in place.

In this respect, we wish to highlight the importance of DIPECHO.

The Socialist Group supports the principles which govern humanitarian aid and its future in the terms which I expressed earlier.

We do not believe that this should become a token policy, but rather a flagship, together with development cooperation, of the European Union' s external action.

Mr Imbeni said earlier - I do not know if the Commissioner heard what he said because he was talking at the time, but it seems to me to be very important - that there must be an awareness-raising campaign on the significance of humanitarian aid, on what this humanitarian aid means to us, the European Union. Mr Imbeni also said that the costs of that campaign should not be met with money intended for humanitarian aid.

I believe that this point, the subject of an amendment which has been presented this afternoon, is important and deserves our support.

What could be more important than humanitarian emergency aid?

In other words, saving the lives of numerous human beings by taking swift and effective action, making funds immediately available and ensuring that they are well-spent, whilst eliminating political deliberations and bureaucratic rigmarole.

Needless to say, the European Union has its work cut out in this respect.

More to the point, it can, and must, take a leading role in this field in view of the added value it offers compared with the individual States.

ECHO must become the central coordination platform for all Member States.

It must be equipped to this end, so that it can operate to best advantage, for this is about life and death and so only the very best is good enough.

This will entail extending and improving the staffing capacity, decentralising competences, formulating quantifiable objectives, systematic monitoring of the results, continuing to learn from past mistakes, and above all, improving coordination with the other offices of the Commission and the Member States.

In order to mobilise the necessary public support for emergency aid, it would be a good idea to give greater publicity to what Europe does and why.

Moreover, increased transparency would create an additional incentive to meet the highest demands.

The relationship between emergency aid, reconstruction and development is the same as that between the seed, the stems, and the leaves of a plant; one evolves naturally from the other.

And what this means in terms of ECHO, which is the seed, is that although it does not have to handle all the reconstruction work itself, it does have to make all the necessary preparations.

When it comes to the reconstruction and development phases, the Commission needs to bring its own staffing levels up to standard with all haste, and drastically reduce the procedures.

A number of speakers have already said as much this evening.

Only then will Europe be able to make a virtue of need.

Mr President, throughout the world, development aid is giving way to humanitarian aid.

Even here, the Directorate-General for External Relations is gradually taking charge of the areas that were formerly the responsibility of the Directorate-General for Development, with humanitarian aid compensating for the failures of external policy.

It is not just a question of providing aid, but also of restoring balance in the use of natural resources among all of the world' s inhabitants.

Unfortunately, humanitarian aid cannot play this role and must not serve only to bail out a liberal policy which at the same time murders the populations of the countries in receipt of aid.

Sustainable development is all but absent from the European Union' s humanitarian policy - we are quite unprepared for natural disasters and do little to prevent conflicts.

Systematic training in how to deal with earthquakes and floods as well as in preventing violence would be welcome in many parts of the world.

Instead of this, the European Union always reacts too late - once the disaster has been declared.

This lack of planning can be seen in the programmes of aid for health and nutrition, and gender issues are also ignored.

The connection between humanitarian and development policy, although crucial, is systematically missing.

It is important not to do just what is strictly necessary, but to prevent the effects of these catastrophes, and first of all, the factor that makes them worse, which is poverty.

We hope that cross-sector posts will be created in order to link ECHO and the Directorate-General for Development.

These could also initiate cooperation with other worldwide organisations in the field of humanitarian aid, beginning with those in Member States, since there is a considerable lack of coordination in their actions.

It is equally important that operating and assessment costs do not exceed 20% of ECHO' s budget.

Payments must also be made more rapidly.

Venezuela has been waiting since last December for the aid it was promised.

Even if we are satisfied overall with the European Union' s humanitarian policy, and if we are generally happy with Mr Imbeni' s report, this policy must, to a greater extent, be in keeping with sustainable development.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I too would like to express my thanks and congratulations to Mr Imbeni for his excellent report.

I agree with him that ECHO has in the past been and can continue to be in the future an excellent instrument for humanitarian intervention in the world' s crises, and this aid must be given an increasingly higher profile and become one of the trade marks of European Union action, for so it has been in recent years, I recall, for example when there was an ad hoc Commissioner for ECHO in the Commission.

I therefore feel that this evaluation, which attempts to improve the image of the programme, is right and necessary, and it appears, to a large extent, to be the aim of the excellent Imbeni report. I have tabled two purely technical amendments to the report, on the subject of the visibility of the programme in particular.

We need to strengthen, develop and, I would argue, provide autonomous funding for this opportunity for the European Union to publicise ECHO' s activities, for it is an unknown fact, for example, that it contributes over 50% to the budget of the Commissioner for Refugees.

I therefore call upon the Commission to give very serious consideration to Parliament' s suggestions and to take the Imbeni report carefully into account when carrying out the restructuring which is to take place to make ECHO' s actions increasingly useful and effective in assisting the areas and peoples in the greatest need.

You may be certain, Commissioner Patten, that this report is of the greatest importance to Parliament.

In the Committee on Development and Cooperation we have dedicated a great deal of time to humanitarian aid policies and you know that on this issue, in general, you will always have our support.

Firstly, I must today express my gratitude to the officials in ECHO and the staff of the NGOs who, in extremely precarious circumstances, when everything is failing on the ground, are the first, the most self-sacrificing, and often the only ones to provide essential humanitarian aid.

I must remind you that in Rwanda, in Kosovo, in Mozambique, in Central America, the sacrifices, sometimes of their lives, of those working in cooperation with us, have been some of the most inspiring stories in the history of the European Union.

In the small amount of time I have for this intervention I must add that I agree with the Imbeni report and, in particular, I would like to highlight the following issues.

As has been said, we must clarify the so-called dilemma of the 'grey area' . We must clarify the procedures and, in some cases, the legal basis and the responsibility of each party, in order to make the management of ECHO more efficient.

I have already referred to the problem of human resources, as well as the problem of visibility, and the objectives must be clarified.

In certain cases, in Cuba for example - as you know, Commissioner - in the guise of humanitarian aid, programmes are implemented which are no such thing, but simply a form of concealed cooperation, sometimes for reasons of 'ideological solidarity' with the Castro regime.

For the future, it is necessary to improve management, increase cooperation with our partners, improve complementarity with the actions carried out through the efforts of Member States and, in short, frame the humanitarian aid actions of the European Union within the global strategy of our cooperation policies.

Mr President, I should like to say at the outset that I welcome without reservation Mr Imbeni's extremely constructive report.

It is an excellent piece of work and both my colleague, Commissioner Nielson, and I are delighted by the arguments set out.

We are delighted by the broad welcome which has been given to the Commission's communication on its assessment and future plans for the Community's humanitarian activities.

Many congratulations to the honourable Member.

Humanitarian aid, as a number of honourable Members have said, is an extremely important facet of the European Union's external identity.

I am the first to acknowledge that we have a great deal to do to improve our performance.

But, it is also important that we should acknowledge the enormous amount of good that our help does, day-in day-out, often in extremely difficult circumstances, often in very difficult situations right across the world.

Whatever the faults - and it is our responsibility to try to put them right - let me pay tribute to what has been achieved and is being achieved by European Union aid and by the generous support of Europe's taxpayers.

We are the biggest providers of this humanitarian assistance in the world and it is important, occasionally, that we remember that.

We very much appreciate Parliament's support for the reforms we are seeking.

Much of the strategy which honourable Members urge on us tallies, marches very closely, with what we anyway wanted to do.

I would stress that however much we might all like to do more we have to focus our action, given the very limited human resources at our disposal, on getting right what we are trying to do already.

In this context, the Commission has decided to focus ECHO's interventions based on a definition of the term "humanitarian" which is, in my judgement, generous and flexible but is not infinitely elastic.

We believe it would be wrong to overload ECHO with an ever-growing number of tasks simply for reasons of administrative ease.

Both Commissioner Nielson and I want to help countries and peoples in emergencies.

But we also want to help them out of emergencies so that they can stand on their own feet again as quickly as possible.

We will address this through country strategies which bring together the various types of assistance, emergency, developmental and so on, as quickly as it is feasible to do so.

That in my view is the best kind of assistance and it is the wisest use of our taxpayers' money.

Let me add that we do not intend to make ECHO into an operational department which delivers aid from contingency planning to distribution in the field.

That is not, and never has been, where ECHO's strengths lie.

Such an approach would be ineffective and it would detract from the many advantages of ECHO's partnership approach which allows it, as has been said, to make funds quickly available to those who need them most.

The partnership approach also allows for real involvement of civil society at the outset of aid operations, and the value of that has been proven time and time again.

We will continue to choose partners on the basis of their efficiency and the availability of partners for the task in hand and bearing in mind, of course, their different comparative strengths and the roles they can play.

The NGO sector is an extremely important channel, but the United Nations and the Red Cross movement are also valued partners.

Thanks to this mixed approach to partnership when necessary, we will be able to send specific messages to the different political fora.

Mr Imbeni mentioned the important issue of visibility.

We want Europe's voters and taxpayers to know what is being done with their money and in their name.

We have planned a Eurobarometer survey to gauge the current levels of awareness of ECHO in Member States and on the basis of that survey, which of course we will want to discuss with the honourable Member and others, we will be able to develop appropriate ways of increasing the awareness to which the honourable Member referred.

The humanitarian aid we give will continue to be governed by the principles of impartiality and non-discrimination laid down in our regulation and accepted by the humanitarian community worldwide.

It is an element of our external identity demonstrating that Europe can act worldwide with one voice and that it can make a difference on the ground.

As the biggest single source of humanitarian aid funding worldwide, as I said earlier, the European Union has a responsibility to be not just the biggest in terms of quantity but the best in terms of delivery.

That is our clear and ambitious goal.

I should like to end with just one reflection.

I do not come entirely new to the debate on these issues.

Over ten years ago I was the development minister in the country I know best, as we learn to say, and was responsible among other things for humanitarian assistance.

What has most depressed me about the international scene over the years is that, in practice, our ability to deliver humanitarian relief rapidly in the most unpromising circumstances has increased a great deal more than our ability to prevent that humanitarian assistance being necessary in the first place.

That raises serious political and environmental questions about issues such as humanitarian intervention which are going to dominate much of the foreign policy agenda in the years ahead.

But in the meantime we must make what we do in terms of humanitarian aid more effective.

The honourable Member's report will make a significant contribution to that .

Thank you very much, Commissioner Patten.

The vote will take place tomorrow, at 12.30 p.m.

(The sitting was closed at 9.15 p.m.)

Ladies and gentlemen, it is my great pleasure to welcome a group of municipal councillors from Malaga this morning.

Our visitors include the wife and daughter of José María Martin Carpena, a Popular Party municipal councillor in Malaga, who was assassinated by ETA on 15 July.

Ladies, allow me to say that your presence with us here today illustrates your courage in coping with this horrendous experience, which was made all the more painful by your witnessing this heinous murder.

In all sincerity, I can do no more than offer you our deepest sympathy.

Yesterday, as you know, this House paid its respects to the victims of terrorism in Spain and observed a minute' s silence in their memory.

I would like you to know that you have the full support of the European Parliament in the fight to put an end to terrorism in Spain.

Madam President, we once again have cause to regret the fact that, in Europe, there are still people who murder others because they think differently and who burn down the houses of their political opponents.

There are people who force many others to emigrate in order to save their lives and the lives of their families.

Faced with this, under the rule of law, we democrats can only unite to defend our system of freedom from the tyranny of terror and trust in judicial action.

The most difficult thing is to explain to the widows and to the children who have been orphaned why their loved ones have been taken away.

To you, Elvira, María José, we can only offer our deepest sympathy.

Madam President, once again you have shown yourself, through your words today and yesterday, to be worthy of your duties as a representative and as a human being, and I thank you on behalf of the Socialist Group.

In fact, in an emotional tribute, we have just applauded one of the victims, José María Martín Carpena, whose life has been taken simply for having committed the crime of living and working in a peaceful and democratic country.

Every, or almost every, human being feels emotional and all democrats feel indignation, but I have a special reason to feel emotional in this case.

For sixteen years I had the honour of being mayor of the city to which Martín Carpena dedicated his life and of presiding over the Council in which he worked.

I understand very well what a great job all councillors do.

In return for modest human, political and economic compensation, they give their time generously and dedicate their lives to the public good.

That is how Martín Carpena won the affection of all the people of Malaga.

Madam President, as you know, and as we saw yesterday, there are groups in the Basque Country who support terrorism.

Using Nazi rhetoric, they propose ethnic and political objectives for territories, which are currently Spanish and French, which surpass the Albania of the sixties. They wage their campaigns in the countries of the European Union.

I would like to remind Members that a political union based on democracy and human rights would not have allowed the terrorist totalitarianism of the 20s and 30s to emerge in Europe.

Therefore, when all the social and communication institutions of Europe can react with the courage of this Parliament and when the fifteen different populations have the same attitude to ETA' s attacks, terrorism will be all but finished.

On behalf of the Socialist Group then, Madam President, I would like to pay the warmest of tributes to the memory of Martín Carpena and also offer my best wishes to the family and colleagues of this murdered councillor.

Madam President, the presence of the group of councillors from Malaga and, in particular, the presence of the widow of Martín Carpena can help us to regain that sense of hope which ETA wants to stamp out.

I believe that their presence is without doubt something which will allow us to believe that the Basque people can regain its capacity for dialogue and can return to peace.

It is clearly difficult for words to keep their value, despite the fact that we repeat them and that yesterday and today Parliament has adopted its position.

It is important, however, that they continue to have value.

The presence of these people must be reflected in our words and it is important that we speak out so that our words may be worthy of their courage and so that, in speaking and in adopting our position, we share their pain.

The Group of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party wishes to express its hope that peace may return to the Basque people.

Madam President, on behalf of the Group of the European United Left, I would also like to pay tribute to councillor Martín Carpena and express my admiration and gratitude to him, his family, his wife, his friends and, through them, to all the families of those people who, in the course of their duties, have lost their lives to terrorism.

I would like to say to his family and friends that his sacrifice has not been in vain and that they have been at the front line in the defence of democracy, through their bravery and courage, not only in the Basque Country and in Spain, but also in Europe.

The front line of democracy must be defended democratically.

We must bear in mind the enormous courage required in order, on behalf of the people, as representatives of the people, to defend democratic values every day, in at atmosphere of danger, coercion and threats.

Not only have councillors been killed, but also members of the security forces and of democratic forces, social representatives, union representatives and businesspeople. It is particularly perverse, however, to kill, intimidate and pursue those individuals in whom the people have put their trust.

There can be no greater contradiction.

That is why all the political groups, in unison, are today reaffirming their commitment to the defence of democracy and thanking those friends and families of people like Martín Carpena for the example they set.

This will commit us in the future to the fight for democracy and freedom.

Please be assured that the sacrifice of Martín Carpena has not been in vain.

Madam President, on behalf of the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance, I should like to echo your words of sympathy with, and admiration for, but especially of sympathy with, the relatives of Martin Carpena.

Any assault within Europe involving innocent people is an assault on Europe itself, on its democratic values, on the belief that via democratic means, the necessary changes can yet be made in a peaceful and tolerant manner, thus enabling people to live happier lives in a structured society.

I therefore hope that all countries will join forces even more emphatically than in the past in order to find these paths of peace and dialogue and that nobody will try to seek political gain from such attacks.

Mrs Carpena, relatives, friends and people from Malaga, as well as people from so many other places where the death toll has risen to more than a thousand, we feel for you and we should more than anything like to see an end to these acts of terrorism This is why we are opposed to polarisation.

We invite all those who seek peaceful change to gather around the negotiating table.

The next item is the Council and Commission statements on the Middle East.

As you know, today' s debate is rather special because it will be immediately followed by addresses by the Speakers of the Knesset and the Palestinian Legislative Council who are here in Strasbourg and will be joining us in the gallery shortly.

I shall welcome them once they are here and, as you know, they will be making their official speeches to the House at 11.30 a.m.

Madam President, President of the Commission, ladies and gentlemen, I should like to start by following you, Madam President, and the Speakers from the groups, in expressing the sympathy and sorrow of the Council, which condemns terrorism.

This is an issue which we addressed at our informal meeting of Ministers of Foreign Affairs in Evian on Saturday and Sunday.

I in turn wish to assure the inhabitants of Malaga and Mr Carpena' s widow of the European Union' s intention to fight on their behalf against the scourge of terrorism, which represents a real threat to our democracies.

You quite rightly decided, Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, to address the question of the situation in the Middle East.

This decision was all the more timely given that this region, which has been the scene of a number of particularly striking events over recent months, is approaching what may prove to be an historical watershed.

What we in fact face is a turning point for the people of the region: for the first time there is a real possibility of an end to half a century of conflict between Israel and Palestine; but there is also a risk, if this hope is dashed, of a resurgence of violence.

The fact that the Speakers of the Knesset, Mr Avraham Burg and the Palestinian Legislative Council, Mr Ahmed Qurie, have agreed to come here together and address the European Parliament today at your invitation, Madam President, demonstrates the will for peace and dialogue which now drives both sides.

I also see their, to my knowledge, unprecedented visit as a gesture of recognition of the European Union' s unceasing efforts to promote peace in the region, a recognition which is also accompanied by high expectations of Europe. We must live up to these expectations and this gesture, which I see as a sign of trust and hope, deserves to be welcomed.

I shall now endeavour to explain our analysis of recent developments and of the current state in the region and future prospects of the peace process.

We have witnessed a number of extremely important incidents in the Middle East over recent months, such as the Camp David summit and Israel' s withdrawal from southern Lebanon. The death of the Syrian president, Hafez El Assad, under whom Syria became an important player in the region, occurred at the same time.

This rapid series of developments mainly concerns negotiations between Israel and Palestine.

The accession to power in Israel of Ehud Barak, who was elected on a platform of peace, and Yasser Arafat' s unstinting determination to keep the dialogue alive allowed the peace negotiations to resume, thereby helping to resolve the stalemate which had dogged the peace process for several years.

The Sharm el-Sheikh agreement signed on 4 September 1999 marked the start of a new stage in the peace process and the end of a long period of deadlock, if not retreat.

It specified how the clauses of the Wye River agreement, which had as yet still not been applied, were to be implemented.

It set out a new timetable for concluding Permanent Status negotiations and granted a de facto extension to the one-year interim period by setting new deadlines, which are due to expire shortly, on 13 September 2000.

As this deadline approaches, we are entitled to take initial, albeit provisional stock of the breakthrough in the peace process.

My first comment is that it has been possible to implement the main provisions of the Sharm el-Sheikh agreement, even if somewhat belatedly in relation to the original timetable. The second redeployment was completed on 24 March 2000, i.e. just over two months after the original deadline.

Several hundred prisoners have been released, although the overall outcome is still not completely satisfactory.

Other provisions have not been properly implemented.

For example, the third redeployment has not taken place.

Only one of the two corridors planned between the Gaza Strip and the West Bank has in fact been opened. Land on the West Bank has continued to be colonised and expropriated, in violation of the Sharm el-Sheikh agreement, which prohibits any unilateral action designed to change the situation on the ground.

These difficulties, together with the depressed economic and social climate, have done much to foster tension in the territories which, on several occasions, has degenerated into violence.

As for Permanent Status negotiations, which were to follow an interim framework agreement, they stagnated long ago.

The parties had departed so far from their initial positions as to give the impression that it was still too early to hope for a compromise.

The recent Camp David summit was held in response to this situation and, even though it did not achieve the hoped-for agreement, it did open new prospects on all aspects of Permanent Status and, as such, cannot be considered a failure. On the contrary, it created new momentum.

I for one am certain that this outcome, which seemed unthinkable just a few months ago, would not have been possible without the personal commitment of President Clinton and Mrs Albright. The progress achieved owes a great deal to their determination to bring the positions of both sides closer together and move the negotiations forward.

It is, of course, also - and above all - due to the political courage and sense of responsibility and commitment to peace demonstrated by the President of the Palestinian Authority and the Israeli Prime Minister. It was in fact the first time that they had debated all aspects of Permanent Status without any taboos and neither hesitated in advancing and relaxing the positions of principle which they had hitherto presented as non-negotiable.

As we know, the discussions were broken off and, under the diplomatic rule which dictates that nothing is agreed unless everything is agreed, the progress achieved cannot be considered definitive in the absence of any overall agreement. Peace in the Middle East may be in sight, but that does not make it a fait accompli.

The progress achieved at Camp David needs to be consolidated and final concessions are necessary, especially on the question of Jerusalem, refugees and, above all, the Holy Places.

Camp David opened up new possibilities.

We have no doubt that a solution can be found which takes account of the legitimate expectations of each party and the rest of the world, including for the Holy Places.

We therefore have an historic opportunity and the current situation is still extremely auspicious.

The Israeli Prime Minister, who was elected on a platform of peace, wants an agreement, and an agreement is just as much in his interests as it is in the interests of President Arafat, who has stood by his decision to become involved in the Oslo process.

As for President Clinton, he is more resolved than ever to use all his influence and the influence of his country to bring the negotiations to a successful conclusion before the end of his term of office, i.e. by the end of the year.

This rather exceptional window of opportunity could, however, close again quickly and this is something we must guard against.

The American elections are approaching, as is the new parliamentary term in Israel, and could prove to be a delicate issue.

As for the deadline of 13 September set in the Sharm el-Sheikh agreement for concluding Permanent Status negotiations, it cannot be postponed indefinitely unless the negotiations show some tangible sign of progress and the prospect of an early outcome.

This exceptional opportunity must not be wasted.

If the hope raised by Camp David is to be made reality, the parties must, first and foremost, continue to be involved and to demonstrate the same commitment and will as they have shown hitherto.

Their leaders must make difficult and courageous decisions and everything must therefore be done to encourage the parties to continue unwaveringly along the path which they have taken in a bid to conclude a global and final agreement.

The European Union is prepared in this context to do whatever it can to guarantee that the efforts being made will be successful.

There are several aspects to its role, which it intends to continue to play in an active and constructive manner: encouraging the parties, helping to find solutions, supporting the implementation of agreements.

The Union never misses an opportunity to reiterate the importance of international legitimacy, its concern to see the United Nations resolutions applied, the basic principles which inform the peace process and its determination to encourage the parties to continue with the peace process through close, regular political dialogue with all the parties in the region.

You yourself, Madam President, noted the extent to which European positions are listened to and anticipated, scrutinised, dissected and judged sometimes as too timid, sometimes, on the contrary, as too energetic or ill-timed but, on balance, always as constructive and balanced when you visited the Middle East at the beginning of the year.

You also noticed how just how strong expectations of Europe still were.

It was this concern to affirm the role of Europe and meet the parties' expectations which prevailed when a special European Union envoy was appointed back in 1996.

Ambassador Moratinos - whom I greet and who has held this post for the last four years - has managed to give Europe a profile in the Middle East by cultivating daily contacts with all the leaders in the region.

This role of supporting, facilitating and mediating, which complements that of the United States, is coupled with a contribution to the collective debate to find new ways forward, break certain taboos and propose compromises.

The 1999 Berlin Declaration and the 1980 Venice Declaration are an expression of the remarkably unified views of the European partners and act as reference texts which have, I am sure, opened the way to historic compromises between the Israelis and the Palestinians.

Finally, Europe has developed a cooperation policy with all the countries in the Middle East in a bid to create the right conditions for harmonious economic and social development and, at the same time, strengthen regional integration, which is crucial if peace is to gain a permanent foothold.

As a result, as you all know, Europe has underwritten nearly half the financial commitments to international aid to Palestine since 1993.

It is, of course, and I should like to stress this point, prepared to help with the full implementation of the agreements that have been concluded when the time comes.

It is still, without doubt, too early to discuss what an agreement on the Permanent Status of the Palestinian territories might look like; in any event, it will be solely up to the two sides to define this status through negotiation, which is the only admissible method.

However, the Camp David discussions give us an initial idea of what the outlines of a future agreement may be.

I should like to say in this context that, in our view, a Palestinian state will inevitably emerge, but it must be a viable, peaceful and democratic state.

It is the natural concomitant of the Palestinians' indefeasible right to self-determination and I am convinced that it is also the best guarantee of security for Israel.

This right to a state and, hence, to proclaim statehood must not be subject to any veto.

However, as the European Union has already stated, it would obviously prefer a Palestinian state to emerge from a completed process of negotiation.

But, as you know, it does not stipulate that this is a condition.

Its position on this question is as stated in the Berlin declaration of March 1999.

But all the efforts planned at the present stage, starting of course with the efforts made by both sides, must be geared towards concluding an agreement, an agreement which is, let me repeat, within arm' s reach.

As you may have noticed, even the Palestinians are now questioning the advisability, the conditions and, most importantly, the timing of their proclamation of statehood in the light of current developments.

The exchange of views between the Ministers of Foreign Affairs of the Fifteen during the recent informal meeting in Evian, which I referred to earlier confirmed that the European approach in support of the peace process hitherto is the right one.

The urgent need for a decisive breakthrough on the Israeli-Palestinian front should not, however, distract us from the other aspects of the peace process, and it is this that forms a coherent global issue to which a universal, lasting settlement must be found.

It is vital but it alone cannot guarantee peace and stability in the Middle East.

In addition, it is time, as the President of the French Republic recently stressed, for Syria and Israel to return to the negotiating table, given that the present status quo is in the interests of neither country.

Every effort should therefore be made, as quickly as possible, to broker an agreement between Israel and Syria and between Israel and Lebanon.

In this respect, there are prospects despite the contrasts in the present situation.

Israel' s withdrawal from southern Lebanon on 24 May of this year put an end to 22 years of occupation and, as a result, 're-dealt the cards' , as it were.

This withdrawal, which was certified by the Secretary-General of the United Nations on 16 June, is a positive factor on more than one count.

First, it marks the implementation, the belated but full and unconditional implementation of Security Council Resolution 425 and therefore represents undeniable progress in this respect.

It went through under less inauspicious conditions than might have been feared and, more to the point, was not accompanied by the dreaded outbreaks of fresh violence.

We really must highlight the sense of responsibility which both sides demonstrated here.

So far, the difficulties have been overcome and it has been possible to implement the provisions of Resolution 425.

The question of Israeli incursions along the blue line was settled after two months of wrangling.

On 27 July, the Security Council adopted Resolution 1310 extending the UNIFIL mandate for a further six months.

On 5 August, the Lebanese Government agreed for the force to be redeployed in the former occupied zone and, since then, UNIFIL has set up a number of permanent posts in the zone and taken up its position along the Israeli-Lebanese border.

At the same time, the Lebanese Government went ahead on 9 August and deployed a mixed force of 1 000 men, 500 soldiers and 500 policemen in the former occupied zone whose mission is to maintain public order within Lebanon itself, but not to engage in any kind of border surveillance, despite its responsibility to do so.

The redeployment of UNIFIL and the Lebanese Government' s dispatch of a mixed security force to the south are, in our view, positive developments.

The situation along the border with Israel is, however, still volatile.

Incidents flare up along the blue line blue from time to time but have been relatively minor so far.

It is therefore in the interest of all the parties to avoid any incident which might provoke an escalation.

The Lebanese Government therefore needs to accept all its responsibilities here in order to create the conditions needed so that UNIFIL can exercise its mandate in full.

The situation in southern Lebanon can only be stabilised if this region, which has suffered enormously from the occupation and the war, is rehabilitated and reintegrated into Lebanon' s economic and social fabric.

The European Union is of course more than ready to help reconstruct southern Lebanon as soon as conditions on the ground allow.

It intends to give very precise expression to its aid to Lebanon at the donors' conference for the reconstruction of southern Lebanon which is scheduled for the autumn under our presidency.

Here too, the withdrawal of Israel from southern Lebanon and the gradual restoration of Lebanese sovereignty in the area are steps in the right direction.

In addition, the changes taking place in the region give cause, we hope, to anticipate a gradual change in relations between Syria and Lebanon; here too the situation is no less volatile and we are convinced that only an Israeli-Syrian agreement, in application of Security Council Resolution 242 and the principle of land for peace, will allow fair and lasting peace to be established in the region.

We must admit that circumstances do not appear to augur well for the resumption of negotiations between Israel and Syria, at least not in the short term.

The positions of the two sides, which we are all aware of, are still irreconcilable at this stage, even if the gulf between them does not appear as wide as on numerous aspects of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.

In addition, the internal agendas of the Israeli and Syrian leaders appear for the time being to be monopolised by other political preoccupations, although the strategic choice of both sides is for peace, as was recently reaffirmed at the highest level.

During his investiture address on 7 July, President Bashar al-Assad indicated that he was anxious to conclude an agreement with Israel, reiterating that everything was negotiable except the line of 4 June 1967.

Ehud Barak, for his part, called on Syria to conclude what he called a 'peace of the brave' , an expression with which we concur.

There is therefore cause to hope that they will return to the negotiating table during the months to come.

My reading is that recent developments in the region are not linked solely to developments in the peace process, even if it does play a vital part.

Although still inadequate, regional integration is progressing slowly but surely.

It comes first and foremost within the wider context of the Barcelona Euro-Mediterranean process, which is an expression of the European Union' s wish to develop a global strategy for this region which is so close to and so inextricably bound up with us.

A free trade area is being set up with the Union, to include all the countries of the Middle East and should - in fact we are sure that it will - help these economies to liberalise and modernise and integrate into the world economy.

Association agreements have already been signed with Jordan, Israel and the Palestinian Authority and an agreement should soon be signed with Egypt.

Negotiations are under way with both Lebanon and Syria.

There is no doubt that, in its political dimension, the Euro-Mediterranean process, with the draft charter for peace and stability, not only economic but also social and human stability, will help to construct the 'post-peace' Middle East, the Middle East which we all wish for, because there is no alternative to the peace process which has now entered what we hope and believe to be a decisive stage.

Europe has followed the lead of the rest of the international community, especially the United States - and I shall end here Madam President - and intends to do everything to facilitate the decisions incumbent upon the main players, i.e. the Israelis and the Palestinians, who are answerable to their people and to posterity, and to foster the emergence of peace, a peace which we have waited so long for, wished for so hard and which is now within our grasp.

Madam President, I should like to begin by associating the Commission wholeheartedly with the moving remarks that you made yesterday about terrorism and about the courage of those who have been martyred for democracy and also with the remarks made this morning by Members of this House.

I should also like to say what an honour it is to discuss the question of a peace settlement in the Middle East in the presence of some of those who have it in their hands to bring about this historic development.

Naturally I very much agree with what the President-in-office has just said.

I do not intend to repeat all his arguments save, perhaps, to make one or two personal reflections on some of the comments the President-in-office has made and to add one or two other points, principally on economic issues.

The Camp David summit, whilst it did not manage to achieve a final settlement, did, as the President-in-office said, mark enormous progress.

I am sure we would all want to pay tribute to the skilful and persistent diplomacy of President Clinton and Secretary of State Madeline Albright.

Camp David helped to narrow the gaps between the parties to the dispute.

It helped to address and indeed to remove some long-standing taboos, for example, on the intensely difficult historical issues surrounding the status of Jerusalem.

Having travelled as far as that, it would obviously be a tragedy if the opportunity for peace that now exists more than ever before were to be wasted.

We stand ready, as the President-in-office has indicated, to help move things forward in any way we can and we are ready to do what we can to secure a settlement.

It is a great pleasure to see our own representative, who has done so much to ensure that the European Union's presence in the region is felt.

With time moving relentlessly on, there has inevitably been a growing amount of talk about Palestinian statehood.

The Berlin European Council Declaration remains the position of the European Union.

President Arafat has received wise advice to postpone the planned declaration of an independent Palestinian state on 13 September.

I want to repeat what was said in the Berlin European Council Declaration last March, that the European Union is convinced that the creation of a democratic, viable and peaceful sovereign Palestinian state on the basis of existing agreements and through negotiations would be the best guarantee of Israel's security and Israel's acceptance as an equal partner in the region.

As far as Syria is concerned, everyone recognises that President Bashar al-Assad needs to consolidate his position.

However, here too the differences with Israel are narrow and we think they could be bridged.

We will continue to do all we can to achieve this.

We have a key role to play in Syria in terms of actively encouraging economic reform and modernisation in the interests of Syria and in the interests of regional stability.

I had an extremely good visit to Syria, albeit too brief, earlier in the year, at which we significantly moved forward our dialogue on economic issues and on the assistance we can provide.

We want to respond to further requests from Syria for assistance in the reform process.

We will also be prepared to support strengthening of the rule of law, human rights issues and political pluralism.

As far as South Lebanon is concerned, there remains an enormous amount for Europe to do, not least as part of the Euro-Mediterranean partnership.

The European Union will assist with the reconstruction of southern Lebanon as soon as the Commission conditions permit.

The Lebanese Government must maintain order in the south and in addition it must translate its generic aid requests into concrete and realistic proposals.

We will outline our strategies as soon as these conditions are met and, as many Members know, we have had an assessment mission in the area to see exactly what we can do on the ground as soon as possible.

It will not surprise the House to know that we intend to work in areas like mine clearance where we have so much experience, areas which are vital to the restoration of normal economic life and decent social conditions in South Lebanon.

At the same time as we are preparing for a possible role in implementing any peace agreement, we are also focusing on the regional scenario after a peace settlement.

When conflict is a thing of the past, it is important to recognise that a peace settlement would transform everybody's prospects.

Sustained economic growth and economic stability are the keys to regional peace and consolidation of that peace in the years ahead.

People are more likely to support peace if they feel that their living conditions are improving.

However, at present, economic growth is stagnant, and unemployment is distressingly high, over 15 to 20% overall.

Disparities are growing both within the region and, as was said in the debate that we had yesterday on MEDA, between the region and the European Union.

In addition, the regional labour market will come under strong pressure because of high population growth resulting from the welcome incorporation of more women into the labour market and the future integration of Palestinian refugees into the economies of the region.

Regional prosperity, therefore, depends on serious efforts to promote economic growth.

Private investment will play a central role in that, but public investment will continue to be important, especially regarding economic transition, including harmonisation, internal liberalisation and regional cooperation, stabilisation and regional infrastructures.

I referred to the interesting debate that we had yesterday evening on MEDA and our attempts to speed up and simplify the regulation so that we can deliver our assistance in the region much more rapidly.

It is important to remember what the scale of that assistance is.

The European Union as a whole, the Commission, Member States, and the EIB, are responsible for about 50% of all the economic assistance in the region.

The Commission and the EIB are responsible for about half of that 50%, so we are responsible for about 25%.

Over the last few years our assistance in the region has been averaging about EUR 800 million, that is from the Commission and the EIB, about EUR 450 million from the Commission and the rest from the EIB.

That is a substantial investment in the future prosperity and well-being of the region, but I am still seeking to ensure that the resources available are spent more effectively and more rapidly.

I said yesterday that the Commission would be holding discussions this week, and I hope it is not presuming on its collective wisdom to say that we will be able to publish our proposals later this week.

We are discussing a Commission communication on the revitalisation of the Barcelona process, which everybody recognises to be extremely important.

In that document we will be stressing the vital significance of greater regional cooperation and more trade and cooperation between the countries to the south and not just between Europe and the countries of the South.

I hope that the document and its implementation will help to consolidate political developments in the region.

I repeat: this is clearly a historic opportunity to secure a peace that would bring prosperity as well as stability to our neighbours to the south.

We stand ready to help them in every way we can, politically and economically.

We stand ready to help them both to achieve peace and to build on the foundations that a peace settlement would lay.

Madam President, since the creation of the State of Israel, we have surely never been so close to a lasting and stable peace agreement in the Middle East.

The differences between the parties, however, have probably never been so profound.

The withdrawal of the Israeli troops from southern Lebanon, the will demonstrated by the new Syrian President and the clear progress made at Camp David - as has been mentioned here this morning - seem to offer us a panorama in which peace is actually within reach.

However, there are still potential pitfalls, which remind us that, we are as close to taking advantage of this historic opportunity as we are to the black storm clouds that will descend upon the region should the negotiations fail.

What we can we in the European Union do?

Of course we offer our services by means of the European Union' s special envoy, Ambassador Moratinos, whom I welcome.

We undoubtedly offer a guarantee in terms of the future economic development of the region, which would no doubt result from the peace agreement, through our cooperation and investment, as Commissioner Patten has correctly reminded us.

We encourage the opposing parties to persist courageously with the negotiations, ignoring the most pessimistic, sometimes threatening, voices, which sometimes emerge from their respective countries.

We are grateful for the summary of the facts, the information communicated to us this morning by the Council and the Commission, and their good will.

However, we should ask ourselves whether this is worthy of the responsibility and aspirations of the European Union on an international level.

To speak with one voice, to aspire to a leading role not only economically but also, surely, politically, demands more of us.

No group is offering greater support than the European People' s Party to the governments promoting the peace process, especially to the United States.

No group is forcing itself to act with greater prudence than we are at this critical moment.

From this point of view we propose that next year, when we celebrate the tenth anniversary of the Conference which gave rise to this peace process, the European Union should once again bring together, in a repeat of the Madrid meeting, the leaders who participated in that Conference.

Meanwhile, we should reaffirm the European Union' s full commitment to the peace process and our willingness to honour our historic, economic and also political responsibilities in the region.

Madam President, first of all, I would like, on behalf of my group, to welcome the President of the Knesset, Avraham Burg, and the President of the Palestinian National Council, Mr Abu Ala, who are present in the gallery, and whose interventions we will listen to with great attention.

The presence of these two distinguished persons indicates that the peace process is not purely a process taking place between governments.

It is a process taking place between peoples and between parliaments, which democratically represent those peoples.

I would ask the two Presidents to deliver a message to their people: they have come here and they have seen how the representatives of peoples who have been age-old enemies and who have waged war for centuries, can work together and in peace, and can share values.

I believe that this is the fundamental message we can offer you.

I would also like to point out that, as well as the effort being made in terms of negotiations between the governments, which we must support, my political family, the Socialist International, is also trying to support and promote this process because both the Israeli and Palestinian leaders belong to our family and we feel profoundly committed to them.

We agree with the exhaustive analysis of the situation made by the President of the Council and I would simply like to repeat the message, to our friends from the Middle East, that we are committed to the peace process and to its development since the Sharm-el-Sheikh agreements, which led to the last major debate in the European Parliament.

We Europeans understand the importance of deadlines and the need to pull out all the stops when deadlines approach, but we believe that the important thing at the moment is for both parties to persevere.

We welcome the efforts of President Clinton and Secretary of State Albright.

We consider ourselves to be committed to this process, and we welcome the presence here today of that tireless pilgrim of peace, Ambassador Moratinos.

Above all, I believe that we should point out the importance of what is at stake at the moment because, until now, there had been no real negotiation of the situation of the Palestinian refugees since 1948, the continuation of the Israeli settlements and the establishment of definitive borders.

Those are the very important and thorny issues which must be dealt with.

Another very important issue is the status of Jerusalem, which requires a compromise.

It is not only a political problem. It is a cultural, historical and religious problem.

Therefore, there is no room for a solution based on exclusive claims.

As some experts have said, on religious issues there are no half measures, but, if we are talking about the religions of the Book, which preach the love of God and our fellow man, it must be possible to find a solution between people.

Where Holy Places are concerned, there is no room for solutions based solely on sovereign rights and it is very important to take proper account of the various international formulae: I believe that the mediation of certain Arab countries, who are closely involved, may be of help.

Lastly, Madam President, I believe that, from the point of view of European Union action, we must try to strengthen the Euro-Mediterranean process, bring Syria out of its isolation, strengthen the process in the whole of the region and, above all, send a message to the Middle East which indicates that the European Union, as a union of age-old enemies, wishes to participate fully in the creation of a shared peaceful future in the Middle East.

Madam President, for lack of time, I shall merely focus on the relations between Israel and the Palestinians.

We all very much regret that the Camp David negotiations came to nothing.

This was most probably down to the fact that the time was not quite ripe for an agreement, as a result of which the gap between both parties could not be narrowed or could not be narrowed sufficiently at any rate.

We live in the hope, however, that a new foundation will be laid after a period of contemplation and reflection, so that we can pick up the peace process once again and herald a new era.

Indeed, we now have to ensure that the negotiations are resumed as quickly as possible.

Needless to say, the international community needs to lend a helping hand, together with the Arab States and the Muslim community.

As far as the European Union is concerned, we hope that it will speak with one voice and assume a more pro-active role - and I particularly refer to a more pro-active role in the political field - and will thus contribute to the peace process.

The EU owes this much to both parties and to the international community.

It is evident that, meanwhile, unilateral action from either side is to be discouraged, as this could well harm future negotiations. We cannot tolerate violence in any form.

The negotiations must be resumed by means of an open, direct and genuine dialogue, and Europe has a major part to play in this!

Madam President, I have been present in Jerusalem as a provisional member of Parliament' s delegation for relations with Israel.

We met reasonable representatives of the Israeli Government but also, among the members of the Knesset, a dismaying number of implacable fanatics who maintain that Israel has all the rights and the Palestinians none at all.

It was therefore good that the Council' s representatives made it clear that the EU backs all current UN decisions.

What, then, do these decisions imply?

Well, they say that there should be Jewish and Palestinian States in the area, that the whole of Jerusalem should be an international area, that all Palestinian refugees should be allowed to return home and that Israel should leave those areas which it has occupied.

It may therefore be noted that Israel is right in one respect, namely that there is to be a Jewish State.

That is what no-one now questions but, when it comes to all the important questions in the peace negotiations - that is to say, Jerusalem, the refugees and territorial considerations - the Palestinians in fact have international law on their side.

At the same time, everyone appreciates that the UN decisions cannot directly be implemented by peaceful means.

The Palestinians are prepared to compromise.

They are not demanding west Jerusalem.

They appreciate that Israel cannot receive between five and six million Palestinian refugees.

The Palestinians are prepared to make concessions over territory.

They are making concessions, which is splendid and necessary, but the Palestinians and Arafat cannot make large concessions of any kind without a revolt in their own ranks.

It is therefore important that the EU should stick by the Berlin decision to recognise a Palestinian State without conditions as soon as the Palestinians see fit to declare such a State, to which they are entitled.

Israel has the military power and US backing. The Palestinians do in fact have international law on their side.

Let them also have the European Union' s full support, in the same way and to the same degree that the United States supports Israel.

Let the EU act as a sponsor for the Palestinian State, that is to say the democratic Palestinian State.

This would also raise the EU' s standing in the world.

Madam President, my group asked for a major debate on the situation in the Middle East to be included in this part-session.

It also suggested that high-ranking Israeli and Palestinian leaders be invited jointly to the European Parliament.

We are therefore delighted by the initiatives taken in this direction and warmly welcome the speakers of the two assemblies who have honoured us with their presence.

At a time which everyone senses is decisive, what useful message can we Europeans send out to the peace process today?

I tend to agree with what the President-in-Office said on the subject.

The first message, to my mind, concerns the issue around which the entire process turns, i.e. the Palestinian State.

I think the time is right to clearly reiterate the terms of the unequivocal declaration adopted by the Berlin European Council in March 1999, in which the Fifteen stated that they were ready to recognise a Palestinian State.

Did Europe' s recognition of this inalienable right lead the Palestinians to proclaim statehood without further ado? On the contrary.

It fostered the sovereign and responsible decision on the part of the Palestinian leadership to postpone the deadline and I am convinced that it is prepared to postpone it by a few more weeks to give negotiation a chance if it feels, between now and 13 September, that we are on the brink of an overall peace agreement.

So let the European Union clearly reaffirm the position which it took in Berlin and encourage the Palestinians to make precisely this gesture.

In the same spirit, Europe' s second message, in my view, should consist of a reminder of the basic principles from which negotiations can and should develop, i.e. the relevant resolutions of the United Nations, especially those relating to the withdrawal of Israel from all the occupied territories, including East Jerusalem, or the right of refugees to return or receive compensation.

This sort of reminder would not in any way close the door to the compromises needed.

On the contrary, it would make the sovereign Palestinians responsible for seeking original, mutually acceptable legal formulae, together with the sovereign Israeli negotiators, on the basis of the principles recognised by the entire international community.

I think that Europe' s third message should contain a guarantee that the future global agreement will be implemented to the end, unlike - alas - all the partial agreements which have succeeded each other since Oslo.

The United States alone cannot provide this guarantee.

No one today knows the intentions of the future leaders of the Israelis and the Palestinians.

The European Union is therefore a unique guarantor, alongside the United States and Egypt, as the representative of the Arab world, that the commitments made will be honoured faithfully and to the letter.

These are the three wishes of my group with the hope that, as a result, Yerushalaim, which means in Hebrew: peace will appear.

Madam President, thank you very much indeed for arranging this very important debate at this particular time.

I also wish to warmly welcome to our Parliament the Speaker of the Knesset, Mr Avraham Burg, and the President of the Palestinian Legislative Council, Mr Ahmed Qurie.

Like many people, I too, Madam President, was disappointed that the recent Middle East peace talks in Camp David did not culminate in a peace settlement between the Palestinians and the Israeli Government.

However, I do not believe that these peace talks were a complete failure either.

We should fully recognise that the Palestinians and the Israeli Government are now negotiating on bottom line issues, including the status of Jerusalem, the borders of the Palestinian State, the fate of Jewish settlements and the right of return of Palestinian refugees.

I very much hope that the Middle East will resume peace talks in the near future.

I appeal to the key parties involved to strive in good faith to lay down a negotiated settlement based on existing agreements.

Permanent status negotiations resumed in September 1999.

It was always going to take time to tease through what were very difficult, delicate and sensitive political matters.

EU Heads of State have affirmed on a number of occasions that the security of the Israeli and Palestinian people both collectively and individually must always be protected.

I support the principle of exchanging land for peace and the continuing and unqualified Palestinian right to self-determination.

I believe that the best way to address this latter issue is through negotiation.

I am calling on the Israeli Government and the Palestinian leadership to take the necessary steps to re-establish mutual confidence, accept the need to make concessions and focus on the overriding goal of achieving lasting peace and stability in the region.

The peace talks between Israel and the Palestinians are not the only matter up for discussion within the Middle East.

It is important that negotiations between Israel and Syria should resume quickly and that the Lebanese track of the Middle East peace process should also be addressed.

In this latter regard, I welcome the fact that since the Israeli forces left southern Lebanon, the region has been very peaceful.

There has been peaceful progress on the Lebanese-Israeli border since the Lebanese Government gained authority within the region, and we all must certainly welcome the fact that southern Lebanon is now at peace.

In the overall context, securing peace in the Middle East is always going to take time.

The first step in the current peace process was taken when Israel and Egypt concluded the Camp David peace treaty in 1979.

It took another twelve years before a comprehensive peace process got under way with the Madrid conference, which enshrined the land for peace principle.

We can all take solace from the fact that the key protagonists in this difficult political equation are now addressing the most vexed and thorny bottom line issues that have to be resolved if a permanent peace agreement is to be put in place in the Middle East.

Madam President, I have very mixed feelings about the peace talks that have been broken down at Camp David.

In any case, the extreme time pressure which the participants were under did not serve any immediate purpose.

In fact, I wonder what use this "diplomatic pressure cooker" approach has in terms of the final stage of the peace process in the Middle East?

It is a tough peace process that needs to provide a lasting solution to the lengthy and complex conflict between the Israelis and Palestinians and between the Israelis and Arabs respectively.

Public opinions on the Israeli and Palestinian sides - invisible yet very tangible - were also very much a player within Camp David.

It is exactly because of this key factor on the home front that third parties, whether they are referred to as peace brokers, such as President Clinton, or very committed subsidiary parties to the peace process, such as the European Union, need to guard against exercising excessive pressure in the shape of a punishing time schedule.

Is there not a task here for the EU, namely to urge all parties involved to keep the so-called "windows of opportunity" open for as long as possible?

However, my mixed feelings about the failure of Camp David are mainly generated by the uncompromising attitude adopted by the President of the Palestinian Authority, Mr Yasser Arafat, and the enthusiastic response he received to this at home.

The home front hailed him in the Gaza Strip as the 'Palestinian Saladin' , complete with flags and banners.

In popular speech, Arafat has inherited this dubious Arab title of honour from Saddam Hussein.

It is exactly this Palestinian homage after Camp David 2000 which shocked Amos Oz, a recognised Israeli champion of peace and noted author.

He put his bleak state of mind into words this summer in a probing newspaper article. "I am sitting in my front room in front of the television and am watching the tremendous reception which Yasser Arafat is being given in Gaza just because he said 'no' to peace with Israel.

I watch in silence and amazement and I am reminded that the real Saladin made a solemn pledge to the Arabs never to make a pact with non-believers.

He would kill them en masse and throw them into the sea.

I can see Arafat in his grey-green military outfit.

An Arafat, dressed as Che Guevara and greeted as a Saladin: it breaks my heart" .

The author moved on to a crucial topic within the Israeli-Palestinian peace negotiation: "the right to return" .

Earlier this week, Arafat reiterated this Palestinian political claim in the context of the meeting of the Arab League in Cairo: "We will not accept an agreement without obtaining all the rights we are entitled to pursuant to international resolutions" .

So this includes UN Resolution 194 which stipulates the right to return on the part of Palestinian refugees.

Madam President, I am also keen to give you Amos Oz' view of this increasingly poignant historical burden.

In his opinion, this "right to return" is nothing more than an "Arab euphemism" for the liquidation of Israel.

In the same breath, Oz adds that he is more than happy to grant the Palestinians the "right to their free and independent Palestine" but that this should not be at the expense of the existence of the Jewish State.

This is a view which will hopefully give Western politicians food for thought.

In the foregoing, my aim was certainly not to trivialise the suffering of the Palestinian people.

I wish them a life in peace and freedom with all my heart.

However, this peace and freedom cannot be brought about if it is at the expense of other peoples' safety.

Madam President, as a representative of a Christian political party, I am not an unquestioning defender of Israel' s political interests.

This is a task which Israel' s leaders and citizens are more than capable of handling themselves.

In accordance with the Bible, God' s word, I consider the Jews as His chosen people, upon which lies the divine duty to be a "beacon for all peoples" .

Only in religious compliance with this requirement is a true Israeli-Palestinian settlement possible, on the basis of justice from Above.

Madam President, Europe has a special historical responsibility for the peace process in the Middle East.

This means proceeding with great sensitivity and not taking a schoolmasterly line or apportioning blame to one side alone.

The fact that the Foreign Minister himself responded to the last peace negotiations by stepping down, serves as a reminder to us that above all in Israel, which is the stable democracy in the region, every step taken by the politicians must have the backing of the majority of the Israeli people.

Nevertheless, we would do well not to forget that for all the fine words uttered, the crucial negotiations for peace in the Middle East take place in the USA and not in Europe.

Perhaps those EU politicians whose brief it is, have so far been unable to find the right way to act as genuinely neutral and productive mediators in this conflict.

Madam President, Mr President-in-Office, Commissioner, this is not the first time that the House has concluded that the situation in the Middle East is critical.

It is critical both for the Middle East itself and for the European Union because, apart from all the important issues which the peace process encompasses, it represents a new challenge for the common European foreign policy.

In other words, the European Union must play a more active, more systematic and more intensive role in projects in the region and, of course, in the peace process.

Let us not forget that the highly important UN Resolution 242 was devised mainly by Europe.

So, to pick up on something very important which Mr Patten said, peace is not enough, we also need to monitor what happens, to see what the scenario is once an agreement has been reached, I think that the European Union should review its presence and involvement in the region.

Thus, as well as the special envoy, I think that the time has come for the European Union to set up a task force consisting of representatives from the Commission, the Council and, yes why not, the European Parliament - after all we have two eminent parliamentary representatives from countries in the region here today - to work out detailed proposals and positions on specific issues being addressed during the current peace process and on any issues which we need to bear in mind in the period following the agreement.

Mr President, I too would like to welcome the Speaker of the Knesset, Mr Burg, and the Speaker of the Palestinian Legislative Council, Mr Abu Ala.

I feel that this debate, from the Council statement to the speeches made by Mr Moscovici and Commissioner Patten and the majority of the other speeches, has shown that Europe is of one mind regarding this extremely sensitive period following Camp David.

I am sure that we all see that phase, or in any case a change in the situation as very important, and I am sure that the situation has not been compromised, although we realise that, if change does not come about, there is currently a serious risk on both sides that the extremist tendencies present in the two camps may prevail.

My opinion is that if we analyse the situation in the region thoroughly - and we have, indeed, talked about the withdrawal of Israel from the Lebanon, the situation in southern Lebanon and developments in Syria - we find that we are in agreement on this matter as well: I feel that this debate is evidence of the convergence of our views - of the agreement of Parliament, the Commission and the Council on the matter - and that Europe has already made a contribution.

The quality of its performance is debatable, but Ambassador Moratinos' role in the region and the Council resolutions have certainly been effective.

I have to give credit to Commissioner Patten, for his presence in the area and also in Syria - we were able to go to Syria when his mission was finished - had a lasting influence on the development of the situation in Syria.

We can draw encouragement from all this and from the continuing work of the Clinton government on this initiative.

Nevertheless, I do feel that, today, without professing to be telling anybody what to do and in respect for the two interlocutors and their positions, we should be asking ourselves what we can contribute.

I would like to end by suggesting that we could use regional cooperation as a solution to make a European contribution right now before the peace process comes to an end.

Mr President, will the United Nations Millennium Summit which took place this week be the last chance summit?

I see it rather as yet one more chance for peace in the Middle East.

Six weeks after talks broke down at Camp David, Bill Clinton is due to meet Ehud Barak and Yasser Arafat in New York tomorrow, after a month of intensive, albeit less media-attracting negotiation.

So hope of saving the peace process is not lost, even if it means setting aside the original timetable and, hence, avoiding at all costs any unilateral provocation which would ruin months of effort.

Everyone has his or her own interpretation of the outcome of Camp David and of the responsibilities incumbent upon either side.

Discussions have certainly never progressed this far before.

The gulf is still wide, although certain historical taboos have been broken.

We must now accept in our hearts what our heads have known and been dictating for a long time.

This is the price for peace.

To rely on the strength of symbols, on either side, is to hold on to a myth.

As for Europe, which intends to support the process, not to take sides, it hopes to be more, much more, than the region' s banker.

It is our historical and moral duty as well as our desire to become a full political partner very quickly, tomorrow if possible, and the simultaneous presence here of Avraham Burg, the Speaker of the Knesset, and Ahmed Qurie, the Speaker of the Palestinian Legislative Council, both of whom I welcome, cannot but augur well in this respect.

I fully endorse the statements by the President-in-Office and Commissioner Patten. I cannot understand how they have ignored in their contribution the conditions in which the people of Iraq now find themselves.

The reasons for this are twofold: the continued dictatorship of Saddam Hussein and his oppression of Iraq's citizens and the continued imposition of sanctions of the most Draconian kind.

The war has always been about controlling oil and in my view little or nothing to do with Kuwait.

As for weapons of mass destruction, I agree that somebody like Saddam Hussein should not have control of them, but there are others in the region who should not either.

Look around the Middle East, and indeed the rest of the world, and what confronts us is an array of weapons of mass destruction, mostly supplied by the developed world, including the European Union.

The market in weapons is now so competitive that some of the most horrific despots are getting bargain basement deals for weapons of mass destruction.

It is a lesson to the Middle East that it is unwise to nationalise the oil industry.

It must be asked where did Saddam Hussein get the weapons from before the Gulf War and where is he supposed to be getting them from now?

I suggest that we should consider appointing a political envoy from the European Union to Iraq to see if we can broker some sort of peace, between the United Nations and Iraq, because the sanctions are genocidal in their effect.

Mr Moscovici, Commissioner Patten, I also would like to be associated with the words of welcome to our honoured guests, Mr Ahmed Qurie and Mr Avraham Burg.

It is understandable that Palestinians feel that right would have been on their side in formerly declaring an independent Palestinian state on 13 September.

They believe that the Oslo negotiations and the various Camp David discussions would have conferred legitimacy on such a step.

However, it has to be recognised that even if negotiations had progressed so far that the declaration of statehood was non-controversial, the future of Jerusalem was always going to re-ignite controversy once again.

Jerusalem is the key issue and it needs to be looked at in a new light.

It is a unique problem which requires a unique response.

Jerusalem should not be regarded as an Arab city or a Jewish city, a Christian city or a Muslim city.

Progress will only be made if it is agreed that it is a truly international city to which all traditions have a valid claim.

The governance of this historic city must be removed from any nationalistic or sectarian, in the best sense of that word, spirit and this governance must provide for equal access and rule for all.

Just as we were delighted to remove Berlin walls in Europe, we do not want to see similar walls erected in Jerusalem.

People from the furthest ends of the Earth have an affinity with Jerusalem and this must be recognised and honoured and not overlooked in the current negotiations.

With these few words, I would like to wish the discussions, if they do take place, all success and genuinely hope that they lay the basis for permanent peace in the Middle East.

Mr President, as far as the Middle East and the Israeli-Palestinian peace process is concerned, I have always counted myself among those in the House who say that it is up to the people of the region and their leaders to define the terms of their peaceful coexistence, just as it is up to them to make the efforts and sacrifices needed on both sides in order to do so.

As a European, I set great store by the Euro-Mediterranean balance and if, like many others, I have somewhat regretted the European Union' s lack of political clout in this process, I have likewise always refused to sit here in Parliament and play at being teacher, to coin a phrase.

Today, just a few days away from a peace agreement or a major crisis which could erupt in dramatic scenes of violence, we must give peace every chance to succeed by helping those on both sides who are taking huge collective and individual risks to bring about peace.

That is why I am in total agreement with the position stated by Pierre Moscovici and what I would say today is that we shall not help to bring about peace by taking sides in the debate and in the difficult negotiations under way.

As I see it, therefore, in the short time left to us, our message to the Israelis and Palestinians should be simple and straightforward.

It can be summarised in three points: we want a peace agreement in the Middle East, we shall support and guarantee a peace agreement once it has been signed and we shall use every possible means, including but not only financial means, to help ensure that it is implemented.

To conclude, we know full well that peace is always a difficult process.

Europe, torn apart over the centuries, knows that better than most.

Overcoming divisions and eradicating terrorism is easier to talk about than to achieve as we know only too well from the Balkans, the division of Nicosia and the bombs in the Basque country.

And yet, peace is the only way forward, as the Israeli-Palestinian negotiators are well aware.

So all we can say is, good luck, agree to peace and we shall be at your side, as we are now.

Mr President, I would like to welcome the Speaker of the Knesset - whose acquaintance I made during a visit to Israel a very short while ago - and the representatives of the Palestinian Legislative Council.

We all deeply regret the partial failure of the Camp David discussions, although we would like to thank President Clinton and Mrs Albright as well, who put so much work and brainpower into the talks.

However, we feel - and here we agree with the report - that this peace agreement which is being drawn up has increased the possibilities and that there is a way forward.

We feel that everything that can be possibly be done now and in the future, including in terms of equal opportunities, must be done and followed up: the Palestinian people has the right to self-determination, without prejudice to the rights of the State of Israel.

There is one more point which deserves our attention, Mr President, which concerns the city of Jerusalem, which is one of the most sensitive elements in the issue.

We must endeavour to preserve the religious, cultural and universal character of this holy city, and it must certainly not become the subject of haggling or the property of any one side.

It has been proposed that it become the capital of both States.

I would also like to touch on a personal, political consideration. Europe must make an additional effort, it must take further steps to gain and perform a political as well as an economic role.

We cannot limit our concern to economic issues or matters of water, the sovereignty of Lake Tiberias and so on and so forth.

We must not forget our political responsibility to history: the European Union has a responsibility as well as the Heads of the States of Israel and Palestine.

Europe must become a political body and negotiate to achieve peace in this case as well, doing everything in its power to ensure that lasting peace is established in the Mediterranean.

Mr President, I would like to reinforce Mrs Sbarbati's warning: right now we need more boldness. The European institutions need to be more courageous.

Together with the United States, the European Union now has the difficult and vital task of preventing either party from reverting to its past position and of assessing the possibility of finding a solution to the problems of the Palestinians and the Israelis.

With a view to this, I support Mr Galeote's proposal to hold a conference along the same lines as the Madrid Conference.

I will illustrate the importance of this with a historical reference: in the 1980 Venice Declaration, proposed by Ministers Genscher and Colombo, the Community first of all established the need for a solution to be found to the Palestinian question through negotiations.

At that time, Arafat was still regarded as a terrorist, he was barred from obtaining a visa to go to the United Nations headquarters in America and there was no general consensus regarding the diplomatic strategies to be adopted.

Following his visit to Rome in 1982 for the Conference of the Interparliamentary Union, things at last started to move and not only did Arafat obtain his visa but - following the preparatory work carried out in Oslo - the United States started to play an active part in the Palestinian question.

Today, there is no question about the fact that the United States' activity is vital, but I do feel that the European Union also has a part to play and that it must not forget the past, not in order to claim any right to rule, but to regain its essential role which, as Minister Moscovici pointed out, complements the activities of the United States in the search for a solution to the matter, a solution which is still a long way off.

I would like to end with a reference to what is known as the International Statute of Jerusalem.

By an International Statute I do not mean that the city would have an international administration, but merely that, as an international community, we must direct this initiative so that the statutory instrument - irrespective of who has territorial sovereignty over Jerusalem - commits all parties to a system of international control, so that every believer - whether Christian, Jew or Muslim - is, at last, guaranteed access to the holy sites.

Mr President, Arabs and Palestinians have committed terrible historical errors and injustices, but they have also paid the price for them.

For some time now, it is not the Palestinians who have been the most intransigence in the negotiations. Indeed, they have even given ground in the supposedly neutral area of basic concepts.

Given the cultural and religious importance of Jerusalem for the Islamic world, I believe that the Palestinian renunciation of all rights over that city - East Jerusalem - could lead not only to a backlash from broad sections of the Palestinian population against their own leaders, but also an international Muslim mobilisation against them.

Media and political circles are warning that the Palestinians could waste the historic opportunity of being able to negotiate with a Prime Minister such as Ehud Barak, who has dared to put the issue of Jerusalem on the table openly.

Nevertheless, it is also the case, in my opinion, that Barak and the right-thinking political and social sectors in Israel could lose the excellent opportunity to negotiate with a leader such as President Arafat if they do not fulfil the minimum necessary requirements.

In my view it is now necessary to adopt a formula which allows for this right thinking and I believe that the European Union is in a good position to contribute to this.

Mr President, I should like to thank the various speakers for their interventions and I should also like to welcome Avraham Burg and Ahmed Qurie, whom I have already had occasion to meet in Israel and Palestine.

You have all naturally focused in your interventions on the peace process and the negotiations, which are without doubt the key to progress in this region of the Middle East.

Allow me to repeat our point of view: Camp David created new momentum which clearly broke down the barriers.

We are, in fact, facing an historic watershed, an unprecedented opportunity, because the present climate, this combination of circumstances, is exceptional.

Each of the parties - and the American mediator, who is playing his part to the full - has an interest in reaching an agreement and is determined, I have no doubt, to do everything to bring one about.

And so, I repeat, we have an historic opportunity to put an end to this conflict which has lasted so very long.

Having said which, every historic opportunity has its historic risk.

Clearly, nothing is a foregone conclusion and additional efforts, imagination and courage are still vital.

Equally clearly, time is running out.

President Mubarak was in Paris at the end of last week and I think he used an excellent phrase which sums up the situation perfectly: 'peace is now or never' .

What role, therefore, can the European Union play?

Several speakers welcomed the role of the European Union; at the same time, I rather had the impression from their interventions that they regretted that it was not a more active role, which is perfectly logical.

We can always wish for a more active Europe.

I too wish for a more active Europe.

The French Presidency has vowed to have a highly active Europe.

It is in keeping with our historical approach and the way in which we intend to conduct the mission incumbent upon us today.

At the same time, however, you cannot rewrite history.

Nor can you act against the wishes of the players themselves.

In this respect, I note that it is the two sides themselves who have come to see us, who are requesting our help, our advice, our intervention and our assistance, and not just and not predominantly financial assistance.

Obviously they feel that we are playing a useful part although I am also aware of the extent to which they are sometimes able to show us the limits of our role.

So find ourselves between these two sides.

It is exercised at three levels, as I have said.

The European Union intervenes in support of the negotiations.

It is in contact with both sides, through our intermediary, Mr Moratinos.

It reiterates the principles of international law, which all of us, especially we Europeans, live by.

Secondly, the European Union makes a contribution to the debate on issues connected with the negotiations.

But here too, and this brings me back to the same point, both sides must want and ask for our contribution and sometimes we witness the sort of role-playing here with which we are all familiar.

And thirdly, we help to implement the agreements that have been concluded, as and when this occurs.

I think that we should already start to think about the Middle East which will emerge once there is peace, peace which we hope for and believe possible for tomorrow.

Whether or not this peace will last will also depend on how we go about strengthening ties between the countries in the region and developing their ties with us.

What can the European Union do in this context?

There is all the action which Commissioner Patten summarised.

There is also the Barcelona process, which offers us a particularly suitable framework, provided that we make full use of its potential.

It is this Barcelona process - and this brings me to the end of what I have to say - which the presidency wishes to leave its mark on and to start on at the forthcoming Barcelona IV meeting.

I heard a call for a summit meeting here.

What we are planning at the moment is a ministerial-level meeting.

We sincerely hope, however, that developments in the peace process will make it possible to hold a meeting not just at ministerial level, but also at Head of State and Government level in order to set the seal, as it were, on the emergence of a new era in the Middle East.

This is where the presidency, with the Commission and, I am sure, with Parliament' s support, will be concentrating its efforts in the weeks and months to come.

The next item is the Council and Commission statements on the European Union's external action priorities.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, the European Union, as our debate has just demonstrated, is perfectly qualified to take on the role of a full, influential and respected actor on the international political stage.

Our democratic values, our common will to foster peace and security in the world and our history guide us towards such a role.

The Community' s economic clout, its primary role in promoting development, and its privileged links with numerous countries or groups of countries also allow us to take on such a role.

Finally, the instability of a fast-changing world, sometimes at the Union' s very door, actively encourages us to take on such a role.

That is why the French Presidency of the Council intends to continue the efforts made over recent years and help to promote the Union' s international profile.

I should like to explain briefly the four main objectives which we have set ourselves.

First, needless to say, to press ahead with the process of enlargement, the main task facing us in coming years; secondly, to promote the development of a European security and defence policy, which should help to put the European Union firmly on the international map.

We also want to promote the development of strategic partnerships with our neighbours and with the main regional blocs. This should allow the European Union to help create a multipolar world, which is one of the fundamental long-term factors to the stability of international relations.

Our fourth and final objective is to improve the efficiency of EU instruments on the basis of the debate held by the ministers of foreign affairs at the informal meeting in Evian on 2 and 3 September, i.e. last Saturday and Sunday, at the Commission' s proposal and in the presence of Mr Patten.

The French Presidency' s first objective is to give new momentum to the accession negotiations.

The prospect of enlargement is the basic question which we Europeans have to answer, the huge challenge which faces us over coming years.

That is why the French Presidency is determined to ensure that the IGC is a success and conclude 'a nice treaty in Nice' , in order to prevent any delays to enlargement and ensure that we can welcome the first candidate countries to a Union with more efficient institutions.

I should like to make a brief aside here to tell you that our attitude today is one of slight concern. We feel that it is time to move from somewhat static declarations of position to real negotiation culminating in compromise; otherwise we shall have trouble both starting and concluding the negotiations.

Again on the question of accession negotiations, allow me to say that we shall push as far ahead as possible with negotiations with the Luxembourg six, of course. These are the countries with which we expect to make progress in negotiations on the most difficult chapters of the Community acquis.

And we shall do likewise with the Helsinki six, maintaining the pace of negotiation and, depending on the level of preparation of each country, opening up a whole series of new chapters, 42 in all, ranging from four to nine, depending on the country.

All in all, our objective, in close consultation with the Commission and Commissioner Verheugen, is to arrive in Nice at an overall vision of the state of negotiations, thereby efficiently guiding the work of the following presidencies and preparing the way for the completion of negotiations.

The various reports currently being examined in our committees and the debate on enlargement planned for October will give us further food for thought.

Hence the main deadlines during our presidency will be as follows:

A ministerial negotiating session will be held with each of the 12 candidates either on 21 November, for some of the candidates, or on 5 December, preceded by two meetings at ambassadorial level in the autumn.

As far as the Fifteen are concerned, we shall be organising a politically-orientated debate at the General Affairs Council on 20 November on the basis of the overall report and the individual progress reports on each candidate country which the Commission is due to submit to the Council at the beginning of November.

The purpose of this debate, in the run up to the Nice European Council, is to identify the main difficulties which need resolving, chapter by chapter, country by country and, on the basis of this, to discuss how the accession process should continue.

Finally, we shall be convening the European Conference twice, once in Sochaux on 23 November for the ministers of European affairs of the Fifteen and ministers from the candidate countries, and once in Nice on 7 December for the Heads of State and Government, at the opening of the Biarritz Summit.

As you will see, we hope to give a strong new impetus to the enlargement process.

The Union indicated in Helsinki that it would be ready to welcome the first new members on 1 January 2003, as soon as the procedure for ratifying what we hope will be the future Nice Treaty has been completed but, as the Heads of State and Government stressed at the Feira Summit, the countries in question must not only transpose the Community acquis, but more important still, they must be able to implement and really apply it.

This is naturally a very complicated and, as we well know, a difficult task for the candidate countries, but the Community is already helping by supporting the efforts of each country.

These efforts are vital in order to complete the enlargement process under way in a serious and controlled manner and thus enable the most advanced countries to accede as quickly as possible.

As far as Turkey is concerned, I would just like to say briefly that recognition of its candidate status in Helsinki marked an important step which my country, France, supported.

The presidency will work in the Council to have the accession partnership for this country adopted and will continue to conduct a detailed analysis of the acquis.

It will also ensure that the Union honours its financial aid commitments with a view to setting up a single framework covering all aid instruments to Turkey.

It will work especially hard to have the regulation on the economic and social development of Turkey adopted.

It goes without saying, however, that accession negotiations will be quite out of the question until such time as Turkey complies with the Copenhagen criteria, especially the democratic criteria, although any progress in this direction will of course encourage us to adopt the measures which I have just mentioned.

We are waiting with interest for the House to adopt Mr Morillon' s reports on these important issues.

The French Presidency' s second objective is to push ahead with the European common security and defence policy by implementing the decisions taken in Helsinki and Feira.

The Union now has the instruments which it needs in order to apply a common foreign policy.

It had been missing one instrument which was vital to the credibility of its commitment, i.e. the capacity to mobilise sufficient military resources to allow it to decide and act autonomously within the context of the so-called Petersberg tasks.

Our objective, which the crises in Bosnia and, more recently, in Kosovo have taught us, is to provide a global response to the manifold and extraordinarily complex dimensions of today' s crises: not just ethnic crises, but also sociological, administrative, judicial, security-related and military crises.

What is special about the European response, compared with other instruments, is that it can offer a global response to all these dimensions.

In other words, the French Presidency hopes to take part in an extremely ambitious project which will of necessity take several years to complete.

It therefore intends to keep up the pace of work so that the Feira commitments can be kept by the time the European Council meets in Nice - a particularly heavy agenda.

The three main issues are as follows: as regards countries' abilities to meet the objectives, the commitment conference which we shall be holding on 20 November will give each Member State the chance to state how it intends to help achieve the overall objective defined in Helsinki; as regards the permanent political and military institutions, our presidency has to prepare for the transition to the final, operational stage which will allow the Union to manage a crisis in all its dimensions as quickly as possible.

Finally, we need to implement the Feira decisions on relations with NATO and with third counties in connection with military crisis management and the continuing work to strengthen civil crisis management instruments.

The French Presidency' s third priority will be to develop strategic partnerships between the Union and its neighbours and the main regional blocs.

The priority within this priority is to strengthen relations with the Union' s neighbours, especially the Balkans where, as we all know, the situation is still giving cause for concern.

As a sign of the importance which the Union attaches to developing relations with the Balkans region, which we wish to see enjoying peace and democracy, France has proposed that Croatia host a summit on 24 November with the countries of the former Yugoslavia which, although at varying stages, have made the most progress with their democratic development.

The idea is to support recent positive developments in several of these countries and to remind the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia that the door will also be opened to it once it joins the movement or, to be more precise, when the conditions are right for it to join the movement.

Developing the strategic partnership with Russia and the Ukraine is another priority of the French Presidency, which is due to host the EU/Ukraine Summit in Paris in 10 days' time and the EU/Russia Summit on 30 October.

The framework for action by the French Presidency of the Union vis-à-vis Russia is defined by the conclusions adopted by the Feira European Council, which offered to support the efforts being made by President Putin and the new Russian Government to modernise and reform Russia.

At the same time, the presidency will, of course, continue to monitor the issue of Chechnya closely.

The Council reiterated in July that only a political solution would bring about a lasting settlement of this conflict.

Finally, despite the uncertainty hanging over the future of the peace process in the Middle East, which we have just debated, developing our Euro-Mediterranean relations is one of the French Presidency' s main concerns.

We hope to take general stock of the Barcelona process and assess cooperation under the MEDA programme during the ministerial meeting in Marseilles on 16 November and, if circumstances allow, at the summit which may then be organised for the following day in order to define guidelines to give new impetus to Euro-Mediterranean cooperation.

The presidency also intends to complete work on the peace and stability charter.

During this meeting, as far as the peace process is concerned, the European Union should play a major role in supporting the two sides and the agreements which they conclude.

Finally, the presidency is keen to implement the Common Strategy on the Mediterranean adopted in Feira and ensure that the new MEDA regulation is adopted.

As far as the association agreements are concerned, let me repeat that it hopes to sign the agreement with Egypt and achieve substantial progress in negotiations with Lebanon, Syria and Algeria.

Beyond its immediate environment, the French Presidency will ensure that it develops political dialogue with the main regional blocs.

I am thinking here of Asia.

In Asia, priority will be given to resuming political dialogue between Europe and Asia and to strengthening economic and financial cooperation within ASEAN.

A summit will be held in Seoul on 20 and 21 October and we also hope to resume the dialogue between the EU and ASEAN.

History will record two important summits with key countries in the region during the French Presidency.

The summit with Japan on 19 July decided to start revising the 1991 declaration and preparing an action plan for adoption at the summit in 2001.

The other summit, with China, will be held in Beijing on 23 October.

As regards Africa, the presidency will be organising an initial follow-up meeting to the Cairo Summit and working to develop relations with sub-regional organisations in accordance with the provisions of the Cotonou Convention.

It will be organising the fourth ministerial meeting between the EU and SADC in Gaborone on 29 and 30 November and a ministerial meeting between the EU and the Community of West African States in Abuja on 16 October.

The trans-Atlantic dialogue will focus on three foreign policy issues: the Balkans, Russia and the peace process in the Middle East.

This framework will also be turned to good account during the summits with the United States and Canada on 18 and 19 December, in order to bring our main partners up to date with recent developments in the European foreign, security and defence policy.

Dialogue with Latin America will be furthered during the course of regular meetings with the regional groups next week on the fringe of the general assembly of the United Nations.

France has also suggested that its partners consider the future of relations with Cuba.

Finally, the French Presidency will ensure that Europe is able to do all it can, in a coherent and responsible manner, to help open a new round of negotiations, which we hope will be global and balanced negotiations, within the World Trade Organisation.

In the longer term - and this is the fourth priority of the French Presidency - the Presidency again opened a debate during the informal meeting in Evian, in the presence of Mr Patten, on improving the efficiency of Union instruments.

The Union - as I have said - has numerous instruments at its disposal which allow it to influence developments in international relations.

Thus, its diplomatic presence in the world, both that of the Fifteen and of the Commission, is unique both in terms of staff numbers and geographical coverage.

Similarly, the Union now constitutes an active and coherent group in the United Nations, where its points of view are represented in every forum.

Finally, its financial resources, our financial resources, are considerable.

However, we all know the weaknesses in the Union' s external action: lack of visibility, inadequate coordination on occasions, flexibility which leaves much to be desired, too little influence in international institutions, especially Bretton Woods.

Efforts have already been made to rectify these shortcomings, mainly by adopting the first common strategies, but this does not alter the fact that the impact and credibility of European action fall well short of the resources implemented.

The ministers of foreign affairs of the Fifteen therefore opened a debate at the instigation of Hubert Védrine during the recent informal meeting at Evian, based on the excellent work presented by Mr Patten on behalf of the Commission and by the Secretary-General of the Council to the High Representative for the CFSP, Javier Solana, who was also present in Evian.

Several items were entered on the agenda.

First, we need to improve coordination between the various actors in the European Union - in situ, in the third countries, through more decentralised management of Community programmes and through improved coordination between Community action and action by Member States.

At central level, this must be done by reaffirming the coordinating role of the General Affairs Council in order to improve the coherence of external action in all its aspects.

I am thinking here about political dialogue, financial cooperation and commercial franchises.

Then we need to turn the overall efforts of the Union to better account and make them more efficient.

That presupposes establishing the measure of this global effort vis-à-vis the outside world and, hence, having synthetic tools which integrate all aspects of external aid.

We also need to enhance Community aid management by improving the planning and implementation of Community instruments, taking account of the finding made by the Commission and endorsed by the Member States, that there is an unacceptable divide between commitments and Community appropriations disbursed and the increasing criticism, legitimate criticism, by third countries of slow, unwieldy processes.

Finally, and this is my last point, Mr President, the partners, i.e. the Council and the Commission both agree that we need better monitoring of the implementation and efficiency of Community aid, especially by the General Affairs Council, which needs to play a more important role in steering the Union' s external action.

I can tell you, in this respect, that the ministers will refer to this point at the Council session on 18 September in order to define a monitoring framework and modus operandi, together with the Commission and the Secretary-General or his representative.

Those, Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, are the priorities of the French Presidency as regards external action.

We intend to cooperate in this and many other areas with both the Commission, which will be the main driving force in this area, as it is in every other area, and with the European Parliament.

I very much welcome this opportunity to speak to the European Parliament just a couple of days after the informal meeting of foreign ministers in Evian, at which there was a serious discussion on the effectiveness and efficiency of the European Union's external activities and the budgetary consequences, the first time to my knowledge that such a discussion has taken place.

I want to congratulate the French Presidency without reservation on the priority that they have given to this extremely important practical issue.

I want to respond to the motion for a resolution, not least since I suspect that in it are the bones of the discussion that we will be having between the Union's institutions on CFSP over the coming years.

Just before the summer break, as some Members may have read in the newspapers, we discussed in the Commission the demands, the constraints and priorities of the European Union's external relations, our understanding of what should be the Commission's external role and some of the problems we encounter in performing it.

Any such discussion should of course begin with the Treaty.

One of the five objectives of the European Union, as set out in Article 2 of the Treaty, is that it should assert its identity on the international scene.

That objective reflects a number of things.

It reflects first of all the European Union's political interests, including a growing role in the area of security, which the President-in-Office referred to in his interesting remarks.

It reflects our economic interests, trade and the external dimension of the single market, including our agricultural policy. The Euro would also come under this heading.

It reflects our responsibilities for external assistance which have grown exponentially in recent years.

The European Union and its Member States now provide 55% of total international aid and two thirds of global non-refundable aid.

It reflects our defensive external interests, issues such as drug trafficking, nuclear safety issues, environmental concerns and migration and last but not least relations with our near neighbours, including the whole process of enlargement, which in my view is the most important and challenging issue facing this generation of European politicians.

It is worth remembering that less than 20 years ago relations with Greece, Spain and Portugal were external affairs for the European Community as it then was.

Our prime task in the European Union's external relations is surely the projection of stability, both in our immediate neighbourhood and beyond.

A more stable neighbourhood and a more stable world guarantee a more stable European Union.

The skills that the European Union has brought to its own development are skills which offer an example and a model elsewhere in the world.

We need to be more imaginative in drawing on our experience and using it beyond our shores.

In discussing how the European Commission can concentrate on this task, I want to be clear about the limits of our role.

Foreign policy is and will remain fundamentally a matter for national governments, in other words for Member States.

There are 15 foreign ministers in the European Union today and there will be 15 for the foreseeable future. But it is equally important that the Member States should acknowledge what you in European Parliament and those working on the CFSP have long understood: that mere intergovernmentalism can be a recipe for weakness and mediocrity, for a European foreign policy of the lowest-common denominator.

That is why the Union chose to move on from political cooperation, why the Treaty of Amsterdam created the new high representative for CFSP and why there is an important role for the Commission and for the European Parliament in trying to make a Common - I stress common not single - Foreign and Security Policy more effective.

The new structures, procedures and instruments of CFSP recognise the need to harness the strengths of the European Community in the service of European foreign policy.

It would be absurd to divorce European foreign policy from the institutions which have been given responsibility for most of the instruments for its accomplishment, for external trade, external assistance, many of the external aspects of justice and home affairs and so on. That is why the Commission participates fully in the decision-making process in the Council, that is why we have a shared right of initiative - not a sole but a shared right of initiative - in these issues.

There needs to be a sensible and sensitive partnership in the external field between the institutions of the Union, including the European Parliament, and its Member States.

We should be engaged in a common effort to make sure that world's largest trading group also makes its presence felt politically.

We have a real contribution to make and we must not be afraid to make it.

Another point I want to emphasise is that the Commission is not seeking new powers or a new role, but we do want to be able to exercise the powers we already have under the Treaty more effectively.

I have every sympathy for European Parliament's desire to do exactly the same.

I am determined that the Commission should make a coherent contribution to the external relations agenda.

It is very easy in the external field, perhaps more than any other, to make grandiloquent statements about Great Issues such as peace in the Middle East, a stable and productive relationship with Russia, international development.

But if these are to be transformed from aspiration into reality, we have to pull our collective European weight.

What does that mean in practice for the Commission?

Firstly it means better coordination between Commissioners and Directorates-General encouraging a habit of working together.

I think we are starting to improve things.

I chair the group of RELEX Commissioners which meets regularly both formally and informally.

We try to frame a single agenda to discuss the impact of what we are doing on other Commissioners' areas of responsibility.

I think it is fair to say that this has so far been successful and that we intend to continue in this spirit.

We have managed to avoid the turf wars which I am told occasionally disfigured the harmony of previous Commissions.

Secondly, we are feeling our way towards a new and more productive working relationship with the Council and I hope with the European Parliament.

It was evident at Evian with ministers this weekend.

Apart from the detailed foreign policy issues on our agenda like the situation in the Middle East, we were looking at how we decide our overall annual priorities in external relations and how we apportion the budget.

As I said before, when I made a presentation to the Council on the budget and on our priorities in May it was the first time this had ever happened.

Earlier this year, as well as that presentation to foreign ministers, I hope that I gave the European Parliament exactly the same candid presentation on our external relations budget.

In the past commitments have simply built up from one budget exercise to the next, with almost no effort to pull things together into a coherent whole.

We are now trying to create a more rational system in which we can all have a proper political discussion early in the process on what our priorities should actually be.

That is important in the Council and it is important in the Parliament because you are the budgetary authority.

We cannot spend more than you allow us to but in that case you should not ask us to do more than is possible and criticise us when we have to make judgments about priorities.

However, I think we are in a much better position to make those judgments with political guidance from the Council and Parliament.

Thirdly, I am working with Javier Solana to create sensible structures and the right division of responsibilities between the Commission and the High Representative for the CFSP.

The institutional relationship between the Commission and the High Representative is evolving, as is the precise role of the European Parliament in the CFSP.

But we have in this last year managed to develop a strong and sensible partnership and I think we can honestly claim that, whatever the difficulties, it is starting to make a difference, for instance, in the Balkans where the challenge to the credibility of Europe's foreign policy remains formidable.

Fourthly I am working to respond to new demands on the Commission arising from the new security agenda.

We have set up a new crisis management unit to help pull together the Commission's contribution in that area, but I also want to adapt our structures so that we can have a greater input into aspects of external relations where traditional bilateral diplomacy has been less effective and where the Commission has particular expertise which it should be able to deploy more effectively.

One example is conflict prevention, which may involve issues that are not part of the normal diplomatic agenda.

Other examples are climate change, control of drug-trafficking, control of the other death industries, the creation of new civil structures including independent media and so on. These are the sort of issues on which I want to see the Commission contributing its experience and resources.

In the discussions we had in the G8 foreign ministers' meetings I was struck by the extent to which the foreign and security policy agenda is changing and bringing together disparate issues in which the Community has almost unique competence, for example in the environmental field.

We discussed yesterday Mr Galeote's excellent report on our external services and the importance of enhancing the effectiveness of what the European Union does around the world.

There was a lot of discussion about better coordination, better coordination between Member States and all the institutions of the European Union, which I know is a serious priority of the French presidency and one which I totally share.

We have perhaps talked more openly about these issues in the last few months than ever before but now we have to put our rhetoric into practice and discharge our responsibilities.

Mr President, a great deal is expected of the European Union, particularly if it is to do justice to the challenges it faces in the sphere of foreign and security policy.

There has been a considerable amount of progress over the last few years, especially considering the Cologne and Helsinki Decisions, and the development of a European defence identity.

We must see - indeed Mr Patten made this very point - that we contribute a large proportion of the world' s international aid.

But are we really well-equipped to do justice to these challenges?

Do we really allow excellent individuals such as Mr Patten and Mr Solana to represent us overseas or are we increasingly forcing them to compete against each other owing to inappropriate structures?

The fact is that the Council wants to operate as the executive in the foreign, security and defence policy, but how is this to be accomplished with 27 Foreign Ministers at the same time, when the Council thinks of itself as an executive authority in collective terms?

All this is bound to lead to a situation that will be untenable in the long run.

The European Union may have put the instruments for external assistance and trade policy on a Community footing to a large extent, but unfortunately we do not have the chance to allow the institution to push this Community policy through, the intention being to avoid any competition with the Foreign Ministers, who are not prepared to give up a little bit of their jurisdiction in de facto terms.

If you keep appointing new special representatives then, in the end, this will detract from the competences of the Community bodies, notably the Commission, without really bringing about coordination.

Kosovo is a case in point: it was absolute chaos.

We provide the most money but nothing is actually being resolved out there, despite the best efforts of all concerned, because the structures are inappropriate.

That is the real problem and it is increasingly bringing us into disrepute.

We must ensure - and Mr Patten has the right approach in proposing the reorganisation of external assistance - that we strengthen the power to act of our Community bodies, and that we improve the way in which work is carried out there and make it more effective.

But at the same time, the structures must fit together, or else we will fail to make headway in this area.

Of course that also means, for example, that - as Parliament said before Amsterdam - the two-fold construct of High Representative/Commissioner for Foreign Affairs will not work.

We have had our first taste of this only a year on. We have had our first taste of this only a year on.

It would have been much better to have a Vice-President of the Commission for Foreign Affairs attached by means of a special bond of legitimation to the Council.

If we are to fulfil the expectations people have of the European Union then we must organise the structures accordingly, but not in line with the traditionally held ideas of EU Foreign Ministers, who are not prepared to relinquish responsibilities in de facto terms.

The new troika must be made better use of under the circumstances, and the question of parliamentary control must be resolved too.

According to the Treaty, the European Parliament is responsible for the area of civil crisis management, trade policy and the like, and that is clearly the case.

The national parliaments are responsible for financing and supervising their armed forces and the orders to go into action, and there can be no doubt on that score either. Only, we must have the good sense to bring about a certain amount of coordination between them.

But here too, control must clearly be in evidence, because we cannot have a situation where European foreign, security and defence policy means less transparency and democracy.

For this reason, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, we must work closely together over the next few days in order to guarantee and secure the necessary secrecy of certain documents.

On the other hand though, we must also guarantee the same level of transparency and control that the public expects from national governments and national parliaments.

I believe we will find the right moment to make a start on this.

I see that the French Council Presidency is extremely well disposed in this matter and so we should work on it over the next few days.

We shall now suspend the sitting.

Formal sitting on the occasion of the address by Mr Avraham Burg, Speaker of the Knesset and Mr Ahmed Qurie, Speaker of the Palestinian Legislative Council.

Mr President, as you know I currently chair Parliament's delegation for the United States of America and I should like to raise a point of order under Parliament's rules concerning parliamentary delegations.

It has come to my attention that a group of parliamentarians from the EPP Group visited the USA in July.

Normally I would regard this as a private matter and not my concern.

However, in the programme connected with this visit the group is described as a delegation and in particular Mr Goodwill, MEP, is described as leader of the delegation.

I can make this programme available to you.

This puts the whole visit in an entirely different context.

There was a formal delegation which I chaired from Parliament to the USA in June and there is an understandable confusion when another group of MEPs some three weeks later arrive in the USA, to all intents and purposes also a European Parliament delegation.

I have reports that the comments of these parliamentarians were from the wilder shores of the EPP Group and were notable for their anti-European content.

I understand what you are saying, Mrs Read, and the presidency takes note of your comment.

We shall correct this mistake and keep you informed of the situation.

Mr Goodwill, I believe that what you wish to say echoes Mrs Read' s comments.

Mr President, on a point of order I can inform the House that in no way did the visit by Members from the UK, Sweden and Germany wish to be described as a delegation.

We were merely visiting the United States as a group organised from within our own national groups.

We did not represent the EPP Group, we certainly did not wish to usurp the role of the official delegation.

I contest the point made about the views expressed during that visit as being particularly extreme.

We represented the views of our national parties over there as well as the views expressed within the European Parliament.

I am very sorry, Mrs Read, but I cannot allow you to speak again, as we are already running late.

We all know what the problem is.

The Bureau and Parliament have already made a commitment to resolving this issue and you really cannot speak again.

Let us proceed to the vote.

Mr President, I voted for Mr Dell'Alba's report, and I would like to explain this decision here since it relates to the financial concerns of pensioners in general.

Since they have very little money, they are, in effect, very careful how they spend it.

Sadly, the Dell'Alba report does not take into consideration the proposals of the Chair of the Committee on Budgetary Control, Mrs Theato, who levelled severe criticisms at the report, which proposes to honour the outstanding expenditure laid down in a previous regulation on aid for certain European activities in Latin America, Asia, the Mediterranean and South Africa.

In my opinion, much more should have been done, and this should have rung genuine alarm bells for the Commission's activities.

Mr President, I could not pass over the chance to give an explanation of my vote for the MEDA report, seeing as, this summer, after I had been to Spain, I had a holiday in Tunisia.

While I was there, a Tunisian pensioner came up to me - goodness knows how he had found out that I represent the Italian pensioners in the European Parliament - and he said to me: "I know that there is an aid programme for Tunisia as there is for all the Mediterranean countries, but what good has it done me, a pensioner in Tunisia?

What are you doing to help us?"

I have, in effect, read Mr Piétrasanta's report in its entirety and I regret to say that certain actions are missing.

In addition to the various initiatives laid down in the MEDA programme - which, I hope, will be given much more funding than the EUR 3 475 million which were appropriated to it between 1995 and 1999 - I hope that measures will also be adopted to keep a check on how European Union funding is used and that a large proportion will go to the peoples of the African countries which border on the Mediterranean, including their elderly citizens.

The MEDA programme is the mainstay of financial cooperation under the Euro-Mediterranean partnership set up in 1995.

But the procedures are unwieldy and not transparent enough, the specification for the implementation of projects, which are too long...

Reform is urgently needed because these problems are throwing the entire process into disrepute and are seen as bad signs by the people of the Mediterranean, who did, in fact, originally welcome the Barcelona process with a certain degree of enthusiasm.

The Commission text is a good text because its purpose is to help simplify current regulations.

But we need more if we want to give our Mediterranean policy a new lease of life: we need to involve the people more by supporting decentralised cooperation, we need to improve the way in which the cultural and human dimensions are integrated, open the free trade zone to agricultural produce and monitor and support fundamental freedoms.

I fully support the rapporteur' s proposal that an annual report be drafted on human rights in the Mediterranean countries.

Mr President, I voted for the report on a common Community diplomacy.

I have to say that my daughter, who was extremely happy to see European driving licences introduced and remarked at the time: "So Europe is making progress!" , asked me on this occasion: "But when will European embassies be set up in the countries we visit as tourists?"

Well, I would have liked the Committee's report to have been more decided, more resolute, and to have, at last, established single European embassies to replace the 15 national embassies in the 15 Member States and the other States throughout the world.

Sadly, this did not happen, but I hope that it will come about with the next Commission communication.

The Liberal Party' s five Members of the European Parliament support the efforts in this report to give better diplomatic training to those EC officials who work in the Commission' s delegations.

We have proposed - and had accepted - an amendment which emphasises that it is simply a question of in-service training and that the courses are to be open to diplomats from the national foreign services.

The Liberals do not, however, support the idea of setting up a new institution in the form of an EC College of Diplomacy. Nor do we want the present delegations to develop into EU embassies.

Therefore, the Liberals have today voted in favour of the report as a whole but abstained from voting on the above-mentioned points.

The Danish Social Democrats in the European Parliament welcome, and have voted in favour of, the initiative to improve the Community' s common foreign service.

We also support the initiative to give further training to EC officials engaged in external activities.

We are opposed, however, to setting up a college of diplomacy for training the staff.

It must be possible for such training to take place as, for example, in-service or on the job training.

We also make reservations about the Commission' s delegations developing into proper embassies.

That would create an unclear picture of which problems are to be solved by the national embassies.

We have abstained from voting because the aims of the report are unclear.

On the one hand, it contains a large number of proposals for improving operations in the EU' s present offices abroad.

It is also established (in paragraph O) that the purpose is not to create a single diplomatic service for the EU to replace the foreign services of the Member States.

On the other hand, the whole enterprise smacks of efforts progressively to do precisely that, namely to create veritable EU embassies as a stage in the process of transforming the EU into a superstate.

This impression is powerfully reinforced by paragraphs P, 13 and 15, in which the talk is precisely of EU embassies, of coordinated EU representation in, for example, the UN and of Member States which so desire arranging for their diplomatic missions to be combined with the EU' s delegations.

Because we are in favour of practical improvements to the existing foreign operation, but absolutely opposed to the EU' s beginning to behave like a superstate in the world around, especially by stealth, we have no option but to abstain from voting.

Mr President, the creation of a College of European Diplomacy within the European Union seems a minor technical matter.

This draft initiative, however, forms part of a creeping and continuing change in the nature of the European Union.

The Union is increasingly threatening to develop into a superstate akin to the United States of America.

Such a superstate is typified by a single currency, a common army and a uniform foreign policy, and functions as a fortress vis-à-vis the outside world.

In the 1950s, the existence of the forerunners of the European Union was justified in terms of voluntary cooperation between European states and peoples in order to regulate a number of cross-border issues of mutual interest.

If however, in those days, the aim had been to build a large-scale superstate, subordinating many peoples, this would have met with huge resistance.

Such multi-people states dominated Europe before 1918 but, thanks to their fall, most European peoples were given the opportunity of governing themselves in a democratic manner.

My party, the Socialist Party in the Netherlands, considers the return of such a superstate as a threat to democracy, public services, peace and refugees.

I am voting against this new step in the wrong direction.

Our countries have a special responsibility, being among the few democracies in the world.

In the same way as the United States, we must be in a position to take independent initiatives and intervene in those parts of the world where there is a need to defend human rights and to propagate democratic values.

Interventions of this kind should primarily take place with the help of economic sanctions but, depending upon the circumstances, military intervention may be necessary.

The prerequisite of the EU' s being able to assemble the required drive to complete these tasks is close cooperation, both economic and political, within the EU, including closer cooperation between the foreign services.

At present, statements from the Commission' s delegations are too dissimilar because of the divergent positions held by the Member States.

If the EU is to assert itself on the political stage, it requires a better coordinated foreign policy in which the EU countries are obliged to combine forces and to speak with one voice.

(FR) Mr Galeote' s report has the strange merit of indicating its real objective and logic fairly clearly, i.e. the creation of a single Community diplomatic service, while formally claiming the opposite.

The entire proposed arrangement in fact contradicts recital O, which states that the objective is not to create a single diplomatic service to replace the diplomatic services of the Member States.

I welcome Mr Dupuis' frank and coherent amendments, which at least have the merit of calling a spade a spade.

The subtle internal balances of the PPE probably explain the baroque nature of the structure being proposed to us.

This clearly pathetic ducking and diving is directly inspired by the Monnet-Delors method and all Mr Galeote has done is to propose a new variation on that theme, this time on diplomacy.

With this method, the institution creates the function, the container hides the content, the technique gives rise to the policy.

But now we have the key and know how to decipher.

When Mr Galeote proposes setting up a training college to mould Community super-diplomats and recycle national diplomats, giving the European Union an international legal personality and 'coordinating' representations, especially to the UN, we know full well that the sub-text reads: merge embassies, create a single Community diplomatic corps and communitise France' s and Britain' s permanent membership of the United Nations Security Council.

And of course, as always, the question of purpose, the question of content, the only question worth asking, is omitted.

What are we creating with this new institution?

In this particular case, what foreign policy will this Community diplomatic corps serve?

What common interests is it supposed to defend?

This is a typically Marxist approach.

We are waiting for the 'critical qualitative mass' which, we hope, will change the quantitative into qualitative at a certain threshold.

The common instrument is supposed to produce the common conscience, the common will, the common responsibility.

This cult of the quantitative culminates in a grotesque comparison between the number of American and 'European' diplomats, the number of 'European' diplomats having been obtained by adding up the numbers of professional diplomats attached to the foreign services of our various countries.

Must we reiterate that the United States are one and the same nation and the Member States of the European Union each have privileged links in the world, different and sometimes diverging experiences and affinities, and that it is this which so enriches European diplomacy?

It is the complementarity of this individual expertise which can be used for a clearly-defined common objective which really serves European interests.

It is precisely these advantages which the single diplomacy being proposed to us will devalue.

In fact, we are eroding national will, despite the fact that it is the diplomatic driving force behind Europe and, at the same time, we express surprise when the increasing number of instruments and declarations is reflected merely by an absence of content and a general lack of interest.

The only positive aspect of this report might be its desire to rationalise the organisation and improve the professionalism of the European Commission delegations in third countries.

Experience has shown that these delegations are not always up to their real job, which is to implement Community programmes and agreements and monitor them on the ground.

It would appear that this job has now taken second place to other considerations, with Commission representatives too busy trying to obtain officially the usurped title of ambassador to oversee the proper implementation of the programmes which they are responsible for applying.

This last point apart, you will understand that we obviously did not vote in favour of the other, totally surrealist proposals in this initiative report.

Today we are admitting the absurdity and intrinsic weaknesses of a single currency which is not supported by any sovereignty.

And now we expect single diplomacy, conceived in the same back to front manner, to work or rather, not to work.

I welcome the initiative to improve training for EU officials working on foreign issues, but I cannot support the creation of a single diplomatic corps.

The Member States are responsible for foreign diplomacy, and I think there is a danger that transforming the Commission' s delegations into Community delegations with legal standing might lead to conflicts of interest with the Member States' national diplomatic delegations.

I cannot therefore vote in favour of Mr Galeote Quecedo' s report.

Mr President, I voted for Mr Imbeni's report as well, for the European Union is certainly doing something extremely important in organising humanitarian aid for areas which have been struck by natural disasters or the effects of war.

Pensioners, whom I have the honour and the pleasure of representing, are among those who are most willing on these occasions to go and help the less fortunate victims of disasters.

But what benefit has Europe drawn from this initiative which, among other things, cost EUR 813 million in 1999 alone?

Moreover, I would call upon the Commission to increase its expenditure, for it is extremely important for Europe to maintain a presence in the world and to give a high profile to its presence through, among other things, a symbol and greater publicity of this important activity.

Mr President, a single example, taken from the explanatory statement, illustrates just how laughable the report on the humanitarian activities of the European Union is.

The report cites the absence of operational tools, especially helicopters, as the reason for the lack of international aid in general and the lack of aid from the European institutions in particular, in dealing with the floods in Mozambique, whereas - and who could forget? - there was no lack of helicopters, aeroplanes, every type of transportation equipment and even means of destruction when it came to intervening in Yugoslavia or Iraq.

The only conclusion to be drawn from this is that the major powers, which are capable of mobilising huge resources in order to impose their hegemony on the rest of the world, are not prepared to make the slightest effort when it comes to saving human lives.

Under these circumstances, the pacifying declarations on humanitarian aid by the European institutions are shamefully hypocritical and we have no intention of backing them, which is why we abstained from the vote.

I wish to start by congratulating Mr Imbeni on the quality of his report.

This report is fully in keeping with the philosophy of our institution, which has always made its voice heard in the least well off countries, through its opinions, its resolutions or specific action to improve and develop humanitarian aid.

Since the European Community Humanitarian Office (ECHO) was created at the beginning of the 1990s, Europe has taken its place as the biggest donor in the world.

However, despite legitimate efforts driven by historical links between certain European countries and developing countries, we are forced to admit that poverty is increasing throughout the world.

Today, half the world lives on less than two dollars a day.

Has the money released been squandered?

Without the emergency aid provided by ECHO in order to deal with the natural disasters or serious crises which regularly hit the most vulnerable people on our planet, I hardly dare imagine the situation which we would have to deal with today.

Nonetheless, humanitarian aid needs to be rationalised.

In this respect, I welcome the fact that the House is calling for more coherent, more coordinated help and for greater collaboration between the various partners, such as the executive Commission, the Member States, the various associations or even the United Nations.

In addition, apart from humanitarian aid proper, we need to find ways of improving conflict prevention because 25% of the African continent is still being torn apart by war.

Finally, even if the problem of development is a multi-dimensional problem and the European Union does not have all the answers, we still need to continue and step up our action in order to lay the foundations for sustainable world development and help eradicate poverty.

In any event, this was the concept which inspired the work of the Committee on Development and Cooperation, which is why I voted in favour of the report presented today by Mr Imbeni.

Mr President, I would like, on my own account and also on behalf of my colleagues, to protest in the strongest terms, and have it put on record, about the article that Madam President had published in today' s edition of the Strasbourg daily newspaper.

In it, she voices her belief that it would have come to riots in Austria had the 14 EU States not imposed sanctions against Austria.

In making this comment, not only has the President done the Austrian people an injustice, she has also abused her office, and thereby caused this House, an EU institution, a great deal of harm.

Vice-President, thank you for giving me the floor.

With your permission I would like to re-raise the point of order that I tried to make just before the votes this morning.

I will re-read the point that I wanted to make.

I currently chair the European Parliament's delegation for relations with the United States of America and would like to raise a point of order under Parliament's rules concerning parliamentary delegations.

It has come to my attention that a group of EPP Members visited the USA in July.

Normally I would regard this as a private matter, but in the programme for the visit, which I can supply to you, the group is described as a delegation and in particular Mr Robert Goodwill, MEP, is described as leader of the delegation.

This of course puts the visit in an entirely different context.

An official delegation from Parliament, which I headed, visited the United States of America in June.

I think that you will understand that confusion may well arise when another group of MEPs arrives in the USA some three weeks later as, to all intents and purposes, a second European Parliament delegation.

I know that there was a strong anti-European tone to their reports, and this, of course, is a matter for the EPP, but when damaging and derogatory remarks about the European Union stem from what is purported to be an official visit from the European Parliament, I feel that the matter should be raised here.

I would ask you as a matter of urgency to investigate whether Parliament's rules have been broken.

Could you also ascertain whether the Members concerned had a formal invitation from relevant bodies in the USA and intend to declare their visit in the Members' register of interests?

I will of course pass on the other documentation that I have received.

Approval of the Minutes of the previous sitting

The Minutes of yesterday' s sitting have been distributed.

Mr President, in the Minutes, in point 2, you can see at the end, after Parliament observed a minute's silence in memory of those who had died, the Minutes said: "Mr Gorostiaga Atxalandabaso spoke."

Actually there is no mention of what I said. But if you look at the verbatim report you can see that there is a very important error which could mislead people.

The verbatim report says, at the end of my words: "The action of ETA is a righteous expression of the struggle for recognition" ... etc. My words were: "The action of ETA is the enraged expression of the struggle for recognition of something quite elementary."

The right to exist as Basque.

You can understand that the difference is a very substantial one.

I would like to amend it.

I would ask for responsibility to be taken for that because if you look at the Spanish press today, everybody has taken these words as the real ones.

That is at least based on a reference but then some mass media in Spain, whereas I cited Hegel as a quotation, have put in Nietzsche and this is no coincidence at all.

I am afraid I am faced with a determination to put words into my mouth which I did not say.

I would like to amend what is in the verbatim report.

To say in the Minutes that I spoke is not sufficient.

You must record the sense of what I said yesterday.

Mr Gorostiaga, if you feel that you have been misquoted, you have hereby been given the opportunity to report this.

This too will be included in the Verbatim Report.

We will of course examine how this has happened.

I am taking note of this now.

As you are aware, Parliament decided this morning to add a communication by Mr Verheugen on enlargement to tomorrow' s agenda at 5.00 p.m.

Mr Prodi, President of the Commission, has also expressed the wish to make a communication on this subject matter.

Since Mr Prodi is to leave Strasbourg by 5.00 p.m. at the very latest, I suggest bringing the Commission communication forward to 4.00 p.m.

The debates will consequently be resumed after the Commission communication until Question Time (Commission) which commences at 5.30 p.m..

Are there any objections to this?

Mr President, I wholeheartedly agree with what you have said, and also welcome with open arms the fact that President Prodi himself is to make a statement.

All I would ask - and the group chairmen in attendance will support me in this - is that the group chairmen are also given the opportunity tomorrow to make a brief statement of their position.

This has not been scheduled yet, but I would ask if it could be attended to, so that we too are able to make our positions clear.

There is no need for it to be a long statement, but the group chairmen must be given this opportunity.

I would urge you to arrange this accordingly.

If, therefore, you express this wish and I feel that you do so on behalf of many, especially your own colleagues, then I have no objections to granting you this wish, and this means that the group chairmen will also be taking the floor.

Then the decision is as stated.

The next item is the continuation of the debate on the declarations of the Council and the Commission on EU external action priorities.

Mr President, many thanks for allowing me to continue this morning' s debate.

The Socialist Group has a need to recognise for itself that Europe' s position on the world stage has undergone a dramatic change since the fall of the Berlin Wall, when traditionally, foreign policy was adopted by national states which continue to play a major role, of course.

We also noticed that our own governments often thwarted each other in their efforts to adopt effective external policy.

We are now in a position where we can gradually see these governments taking joint steps and the European Union setting up a growing common foreign policy.

And in our view, and this was also explained very clearly by Mr Patten, with regard to those external actions, "foreign policy" involves more than traditional foreign diplomacy as we knew it but also touches upon concepts such as security - and embraces a much wider concept of security - the environment, conflict prevention, trade and relations in all kinds of areas. It encompasses development cooperation and naturally the traditional tools of foreign policy.

This has culminated in an enriched foreign policy for the EU and has also resulted in the integration of the Commissioner for External Relations, Mr CFSP, Mr Solana, and the Council who all have a particular role to fulfil.

It is unfortunate that Mr Solana was unable to be here to make a contribution of this kind.

We would actually like to emphasise that there are three priorities for which we need to find a balance simultaneously. Firstly, of direct concern are our neighbours, in other words eastward enlargement.

Our second priority is the strategic aspect within MEDA. This is the second area which touches upon traditional relations within NATO, the G7 and the other contexts within which we cooperate with America and the other traditional partners.

The third priority is easily forgotten but in our eyes essential, namely that of Europe as the bearer of values in the world, or, in other words 'a global player in a global village' . In this respect, it is essential to regard the fight against poverty as a key contribution in our policy, rather than according it a minor position within foreign policy.

Mr Patten, Mr Nielson, ladies and gentlemen, and the Commissioner for External Relations, you could, in fact, extract new value, new quality and effectiveness from this, working in tandem with Parliament.

We very much regret the fact that heading 4, the role of our Parliament and the tasks which we actually have to fulfil in the process are still being sidelined to such a degree. All too often, we find that the Council follows its own line of thought and this is no longer the way in which we can market modern foreign policy which covers a wide range of issues.

We therefore hope that we can once again drive our message home. We hope that this new policy takes account of the budget and can be accompanied by an involved and powerful European Parliament that can have its say and is taken entirely seriously.

We would welcome a positive response from the Council and Commission with regard to this new policy in these matters too.

Mr President, I welcome the resolve that was shown here today by the French Presidency and the Commission in placing emphasis on enlargement as the key priority for the external action of the Union.

I hope that when we come to deal with the matter in the House tomorrow the Verheugen incident will have simply served as a timely reminder that we must get our signals clear and avoid giving mixed messages with regard to this strategic priority.

With regard to the matter in hand, I should like to pick up on a point made by the Commissioner earlier today when he talked about the attempt to make foreign policy more effective and to warmly welcome and subscribe to his view on the indivisibility of the Union's foreign policy.

If we take the Barcelona process, the Middle East peace process, our relations with the Western Balkans, our relations with Russia, clearly there is a vast area of policy to be covered and a wide variety of instruments.

It is clear that a successful foreign policy cannot stand on one pillar alone.

Even if the conduct of foreign policy - and in particular, the security and defence dimension of foreign policy - is essentially for government, it follows that because of the nature of the policy terrain and the instruments available it cannot be government's exclusive concern.

The Commission is right to demand its right of association under the Treaty and, through that, for this Parliament to demand its right of accountability and scrutiny.

A second general point I should like to refer to is in respect of the efficiency of policy.

Here too the new Commission - and in particular, Commissioner Patten - deserve to be congratulated, first of all for revealing to us the extent of the horror that much of the policy had become.

Let me recall one of the results of these inquiries: in the past five years the average delay in the disbursement of committed funds has increased from three years to four-and-a-half years.

For certain programmes the backlog of outstanding commitments is equivalent to more than eight-and-a-half years of payments.

That clearly is a farce in anyone's analysis.

It has to be said in fairness that the former Commission led by Jacques Santer was as much a victim as an author of this process.

This is an accumulation of an ineffective and inefficient system over years.

We welcome the commitment to an urgent review of that process.

On behalf of the Liberal Democrat Group I should like to lay particular emphasis on our distress at the code of secrecy rather than the code of transparency normally promoted by the Council.

Blanket secrecy is not the way to legitimise an evolving Community policy.

My group deplores the fact that this code of secrecy was slipped in during the Parliamentary summer recess, with no Parliamentary consultation and by written procedure.

It amounts to a form of intergovernmental conspiracy against citizens' right to know.

I want to hear from the Council today what role it feels it is prepared to accord to this House in terms of the scrutiny and accountability of issues which may be intergovernmental but which cannot stand on one pillar alone?

Mr President, as the European Union assumes new powers we might expect that transparency in this matter and parliamentarian monitoring would increase at the same rate.

Now, it would seem that the European security and defence identity is making dramatic progress in the wake of the Helsinki summit.

It appears, however, that the Council has been resorting more and more to the intergovernmental process in this, so much so that it has threatened even to bypass the Commission, something quite unheard of, as far as I am concerned.

The Commission must have a strong role to play in this process.

Just like my colleague, Mr Cox, I too strongly condemn the fact that, during the summer recess, the Council produced very significant restrictions on the public' s right to gain access to documents relating to matters of security and defence.

Obviously, nobody is claiming that confidentiality and even secrecy are not necessary from time to time, when it is a question, for example, of operational matters in defence policy.

But the Council' s decision seems to be leading to a situation now where the whole development of the security and defence policy in the political sphere can no longer be properly monitored, being, as it were, beyond that.

The public can no longer follow the development of security and defence policy, and neither can Parliament monitor it properly.

We here in Parliament have discussed this situation, and the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market, in which I am involved in the discussion of the issue, is looking into whether Parliament should possibly take the Council to court on account of this decision, which is a clear violation of Parliament' s rights, and weakens our citizens' already barely attainable rights of access to documents.

I demand a clear explanation from the representative of the Council, and I would be very grateful if the Commission were also to comment on the situation.

I shall be very brief, Mr President, as I only wish to discuss one very specific aspect of the European Union' s external actions. I feel that, although this is a very specific issue, it nevertheless deserves our utmost consideration and is of great concern to us.

I am referring to the obvious trend towards placing less and less value, in terms of both our attention and resources, on cooperation with developing countries.

I realise, of course, that we have other objectives and that these too must be given the appropriate consideration.

Nevertheless, I think that, because of the expectations that are created, because of the European Union' s responsibilities and even because of the new problems facing developing countries, for all these reasons, taking account of these very important parts of the world must be a major factor in determining our actions.

I would emphasise one aspect in particular: we need, in this context, to have our own independent strategies that confirm the European Union' s position in this field.

This concern has arisen mainly as a result of the successive budgetary cuts in the field of cooperation which, to a certain extent, illustrate and endorse the fears I have just mentioned, which I feel we must lay to rest once and for all.

Mr President, Mr President-in-Office, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I should like to start by addressing a brief remark to Mr Patten.

The document on which we are preparing to vote deplores the slide towards intergovernmentalism which is creeping into our common foreign and security policy and that this somewhat contradicts the Commissioner' s speech this morning, in which he said that foreign policy would remain a matter for national governments.

I therefore feel that the question should perhaps be broached with greater flexibility.

In politics, we never use the word "never" .

I think that the European Parliament is fairly reticent on this question, but Mr Brok' s intervention demonstrated that no one here in this House continued to feel that it was still possible and absolutely vital to communitise foreign policy.

I should like quickly to ask the President-in-Office two questions.

I was interested to read of a recent Franco-German initiative to unite consulates.

Does the Presidency-in-Office entertain the idea of rapidly communitising foreign policy and, more importantly, of giving a Union embassy the task of representing all the Member States of the Union in the fifty countries in which no Member State of the Union is represented?

I was interested to note, Mr President-in-Office, your obvious lack of enthusiasm for the European Union/China summit, which pleases me greatly.

Does that mean that the so-called policy of critical dialogue with China is dead and buried and would you be prepared, as the President-in-Office, to address the question of the recognition of the Tibetan Government in exile at your next meeting with the Chinese if no agreement on the new status of Tibet is reached within a reasonable period of time?

Mr President, I believe it is important not to lose sight of the objectives pursued in the course of this debate. In my opinion, there are two:

Firstly, to guarantee more effective, coherent and visible external action on the part of the European Union.

What would be the point of having more than 40 000 officials in more than 1 500 diplomatic missions between the Commission and the Member States - twice the number the United States has - if our activity really is not sufficiently efficient, coherent or visible?

I believe that Mr Patten expressed this very well in his intervention when he demonstrated that he had at least read the joint motion for a resolution which we have negotiated in Parliament.

Secondly, to take note of the fact that the days when the European Parliament simply rubber-stamped the priorities established by other Community institutions have finally been assigned to history.

Mr Moscovici, in the coming months we will have to make important decisions in the field of the nascent, embryonic defence policy. During the Balkan crisis the inadequacies of the European Union were made blatantly clear.

In the United States there is currently a great debate taking place concerning defence expenditure.

We will soon have to hold this debate here in Europe. We in Europe will not only have to consider this expenditure but also the structure of this spending.

The incompatibility and heterogeneity of the Member States' investments in this field - the national views - make this such a difficult debate that we will have to consider other added problems such as interinstitutional disputes.

This Parliament would clearly have preferred the figure of the High Representative to be answerable to the Commission.

Instead, it has been answerable to the Council , and this is something we have to accept, as we also have to accept that the Commission must play a role.

Mr Patten is right when he says that we have to clarify and resolve a series of tensions between the intergovernmental realm and the Community realm.

This dispute between the institutions must be resolved, and the European Parliament must not simply be serving at the table, but it also wishes to take its place in the kitchen.

Mr President-in-Office, Commissioner, with my French colleagues in the Group of the Party of European Socialists, I naturally follow the external actions of the European Union with great interest.

In general we favour a strong European Union presence on the international scene.

That implies firm and unswerving commitment from the Council itself first of all.

You spoke of high ambition, Minister, and I was pleased to hear it.

But that also presupposes a Commission genuinely capable of action.

That is what the Commissioner wants and I hope he is getting, and will get, the political, administrative and financial resources he needs to put his ideas into practice and make the CFSP really effective and efficient.

But in this short speech, I want to focus on enlargement.

A recent interview with a German newspaper stirred up some turmoil.

For us, however, it is clear: there is no question of slowing down the enlargement process by introducing new requirements or a variety of delaying tactics.

On the contrary, we must do everything we can to move it forward, as you just reaffirmed, Minister, and of course that does not exclude either rigour or vigilance. A slapdash enlargement would obviously be a great mistake.

Having said that, we are conscious of the problems due to public opinion both within the fifteen Member States and in the candidate countries.

Public opinion is very ill informed and can veer from irrational enthusiasm to a sense of discouragement to outright hostility.

A great deal of work undoubtedly needs to be done if the long and difficult process of enlargement is to have solid, clear-sighted and determined popular support.

Mr President, the foreign policy of the European Union can only be successful if it satisfies three main criteria: clarity, credibility and transparency.

Mr Patten, we will continue to push for this, even though you believe that we should at last put an end to the game of ping pong.

As far as I am concerned, it has started and can only finish if a constructive solution is found.

Otherwise this will lead to further competition between the institutions.

I believe the speech you gave in Paris was significant in this respect.

It is true that there should at last be open discussion on how to pursue a truly coherent foreign policy.

The European Parliament will play an important part in this.

You said yourself that it will only be possible to achieve credibility - your second point - if the European Union employs all its capabilities, i.e. all three pillars, and particularly the first with its financial and economic means, in preventive conflict management, and if the EU promotes stability overseas by making proper use of its economic instruments and using its political means to achieve real cooperation.

After all, we know that we must take a considerably broader view of the issue of protection.

Protection of the environment, the individual and human rights cannot be secured through one pillar alone.

In the same way, preventive conflict management is not just about the deployment of a police force; it involves all three pillars.

As far as the last point, that of transparency, is concerned, my group has made it quite clear today that we do not accept, nor will we accept, that access to these documents should be restricted.

Transparency is Parliament' s watchword, and we will continue to demand it from the Council and the Commission alike.

We will revisit this theme at a later stage.

Mr President, I was interested to hear the President-in-Office mention the four priorities which the Presidency-in-Office envisages for the future in the field of foreign affairs and defence.

Two of these priorities also concern the resolutions, namely the selection of tools which are needed to achieve this and the development of the common foreign and security and defence policy itself.

Commissioner Patten, the Vice-President of the Commission, reacted to this in his own way and remarked that the European Union is in fact extremely resourceful.

The lion' s share of aid - two-thirds in fact - originates from our European Union.

Enlargement is on the agenda and he also mentioned the promotion of stability, at which point I started to have my doubts.

When he then mentioned the fact that the EU should have its own identity on the world stage, I thought: I would love to share this objective with him but in a way which would take account of European responsibilities.

Needless to say, this identity can only find expression in true European policy.

European responsibilities can certainly not be divided among fifteen to thirty or perhaps more Member States.

This does not mean that there will be no Foreign Affairs Ministers in the Member States. They will certainly be kept on, just like the Ministers for Economic Affairs or certainly those for Education.

Once European responsibilities are identified, they should in any event not be divided up and they should also be truly based on a European vision and European values which we share here in this Parliament.

This is not about a simple bureaucratic division of powers between institutions or a power-crazed Parliament or such like.

This is about a practical solution: how can we solve the problems we have encountered?

This is about the fact that our policy was unable to prevent the suffering in Bosnia, which claimed hundreds of thousands of victims.

That is what this is all about!

We need to ask ourselves how we can prevent this.

This is when we say as a Parliament: we need European policy; otherwise we will not succeed.

Mr President, first of all, I want to say thank you both to the French Presidency and to Commissioner Patten for their excellent contributions this morning.

The priorities established deserve all our support.

Time permits only a couple of remarks on my part.

I choose to concentrate on the deficiencies in the implementation of the Union' s development cooperation.

Commissioner Patten deserves praise for the openness with which he describes and has described the problems.

My own experience when, in a responsible post within the UN' s development programme, I sought cooperation with the Union at national level with a view to assembling and coordinating forces in different areas was that, as a rule, it did not work, either because almost every decision in the EU' s case needed to be taken in Brussels and also because of the lack of qualified staff within the area concerned.

All this made cooperation with the EU difficult and incredibly time-consuming.

The UN has its problems with bureaucracy and dilatoriness - I am the first to admit that - but, where development work and development cooperation are concerned, the EU was lagging far behind, in any case a few years ago.

The conclusion I draw is, first of all, that the Commission must radically decentralise the right of decision-making to national level.

"Brussels" , with all its administrative levels, must relinquish a large degree of control.

Secondly, it is important to ensure that the Commission has an adequate number of qualified staff to carry out the operations about which decisions are being made.

I know, Commissioner Patten, that this is the direction your politics are taking right now.

I would just emphasise that it is a matter of urgency.

If there are no rapid improvements, I fear that the Commission' s support for development cooperation will gradually disappear.

That would be a pity, given that well-developed multilateral cooperation has many advantages and that the Union needs such an instrument in order to be able to play a proactive role on the international stage.

Mr President, the President-in-Office's speech seemed to me to be rather on the biased and general side, but I found that Commissioner Patten's speech was realistic and focused well on the different problem areas.

We therefore now need to discuss the different issues.

Firstly, tomorrow marks the start of a major UN session where 159 Heads of State will be present.

In what form will the European Union be present and at what level?

I feel that it is extremely important for us to establish ourselves at the very highest level and to make our presence felt.

A discussion on priorities should include economic policy, but our economic policies are all inward-looking and only concern the interior of Europe.

It is also just as important not to let go of development policy, for that creates stability and peace and has to target Russia and China as well as developing countries.

In my opinion, it is not right to ask us to choose between the Balkans and developing countries.

The Member States need to take these factors on board.

Working towards constitutionalisation of the European Union, one benefit of which would be institutional citizenship in international bodies, the creation of a European diplomacy as per the Galeote report, the cultural concern which we must take on board in order to avoid fresh incidents of colonialism, the support and valuing of democratic processes which have also been established in certain countries such as Iran, and the regulation of relations with NGOs, which could become the operational arm of the European Union - these options could all contribute to an effective political initiative for developing countries, an initiative which would assert the supremacy of European civilisation in terms of a quest for solidarity to improve quality of life and bear witness to respect for human dignity, celebrating it in every corner of the world.

Mr President-in-Office, this morning you mentioned the report Parliament has asked me to present on Turkey' s accession process.

I think I can announce the body of the conclusions today.

Like the Commission, Parliament salutes Turkey' s endeavours in drawing up a programme for developing its legal arsenal to comply more closely with the requirements of the European Union, especially in terms of respect for human rights.

At the same time we understand the stir caused among the various political parties and public opinion as it recognises the magnitude of the reforms that country must agree to introduce before it joins the Union.

We want our partners to know that the European Union has no intention of interfering in their domestic affairs, but is offering them a contract under terms now redefined under the accession partnership and the agreement on the Charter of Fundamental Rights. It is up to them to accept or refuse that contract.

In that connection, I believe we must have the courage to tell the Turkish people that there are at least two prior conditions governing its accession to Europe. First, respect for the need for identity.

This is being demonstrated across Europe by our fellow citizens all the more clearly because they have the greatest desire to protect their roots in the face of the ineluctable progress of globalisation.

Europe is resolute in recognising that need for identity, aware that its diversity is the source of its wealth.

That is why it insists on the rights, but also the duties, of minorities. That is the spirit in which the Union proposes to help Turkey find a solution to the Kurdish problem.

There must also be a solution to the Cyprus problem as soon as possible, because nobody in Europe would accept a wall continuing to divide it, like those of Berlin, Beirut and Sarajevo (amongst others), which have now, fortunately, come down.

Mr President, our debate today reveals a continuing difficulty at the heart of the European Union's approach on foreign policy.

Is the intention to give an enlarging group of European nations a stronger voice on the world stage and improve the coordination and effectiveness of their policies on a range of issues?

If so, I can support this.

Or is the ambition to move towards a European state, with its own foreign and security policy backed by its own diplomatic service and army?

It is certainly not wanted by the British people, nor, I believe, is it wanted by many of the citizens in the rest of Europe.

They have never been asked in honest terms.

Mr Patten today reiterated his view that for the indefinite future there will be national foreign ministers. But this is only half the problem.

What will be the content of their jobs in ten years' time if the EU continues on its present course?

After all, once EMU is fully established there will still be finance ministers in the euroland countries.

But how much real responsibility will they have?

Clearly there are many in this House who are quite open in their advocacy of a single foreign ministry for Europe and the Galeote Quecedo report which was voted on today with its proposals for a permanent Community diplomatic service is, I am afraid, a step in this direction.

I am also concerned by the extent to which many want to define European foreign policy in terms of its distinctiveness from the United States policies, sometimes even deliberate hostility to the United States positions.

A priority for the European Union must surely be to break out of this antagonistic mindset and instead seek, as a primary aim, to contribute to western solidarity.

The best forum for dealing with security policy issues is NATO rather than the European Union and the danger is that the common European security and defence policy, with its emphasis on an autonomous capability, will undermine the alliance which served us so well during more threatening times.

Mr President, some of us have asked the President-in-Office and Commissioner Patten specific questions.

I realise the debate has been particularly badly organised, being split into two halves, but could we at least have written responses?

This is certainly an option, and I assume that the Commissioner as well as the Minister would be prepared to reply to the Parliament in writing.

Unfortunately, I have to say that we have no time left today to continue the debate and allow responses.

At the end of these explanations, I have received six motions for resolutions in accordance with Article 37 (2) of the Rules of Procedure

The vote will take place tomorrow, Wednesday, at 12 noon.

The next item is the submission by the Council of the draft budget for the financial year 2001.

I would also like to thank Commissioner Patten for being here.

Ladies and gentlemen, today, on behalf of the Council Presidency, it is my honour to present the draft budget of the European Communities, as drawn up by the Council on 20 July.

As you know, my colleague Florence Parly chaired that Council, but unfortunately she cannot be here today, so please accept her apologies.

First of all, I would like to pay tribute to the excellent work done by the Portuguese Presidency ahead of the Council' s adoption, at first reading, of the draft budget for 2001.

I would also like to highlight the excellent climate in which this budgetary procedure has opened.

This year, the provisions of the new interinstitutional agreement of 6 May 1999 have taken full effect.

The first session under the trialogue procedure bringing together the European Parliament, the Council and the Commission was held on 6 July, here in Strasbourg, and demonstrated its usefulness in terms of better mutual understanding of our respective positions and priorities.

The conciliation meeting between the European Parliament and the Council, which took place on 20 July, was, I think, very positive.

In particular, it became possible to find a great many points of agreement between institutions and make good progress on potential sources of disagreement.

I hope we can continue to work in the same spirit and produce a budget for the European Communities for the financial year 2001 which gives us the resources to meet the priorities and challenges the European Union is about to face.

Firstly, I want to set out the major guidelines which have determined the way the Council has drawn up this draft budget before going into more detail - though not at length - on the various categories.

In the first place, the Council has ensured proper funding, after identifying clear priorities and real needs, for the European Union' s various actions, especially those in the area of external relations, which we were talking about just now - albeit with a gap.

So the evaluation of the likely implementation of the appropriations has been taken into account for commitment appropriations.

The Council has also paid special attention to the development of payment appropriations, setting their increase compared with 2000 at a maximum rate of 3.5%, which in particular takes account of the capacity for implementation and the probable rate of payments entailed by the balances to be settled.

That growth, which is much higher than the Member States authorise for their national budgets, plus the forecast inflation for 2001, is a mark of the Council' s determination to ensure satisfactory financing of all European Union policies.

Finally, this draft budget remains totally in keeping with the interinstitutional agreement of 6 May 1999on budgetary discipline and improvement of the budgetary procedure.

In particular the Council felt it was absolutely essential to respect - and I stress this - each of the annual expenditure ceilings set by the financial perspectives which our three institutions, Parliament, the Council and the Commission, signed up to a year ago.

Those are the bases for the draft budget for the financial year 2001, drawn up by the Council on 20 July, to provide for EUR 95.9 billion in commitment appropriations, an increase of 2.7% over the budget for 2000, and EUR 92.5 billion in payment appropriations, an increase of 3.5% over the budget for 2000.

Particular importance has been accorded to the increase in the importance of appropriations for aid to the Western Balkans, a repeatedly affirmed priority and one I reaffirm here, because I do not accept the comment earlier about 'chaos' .

The situation is sensitive, but not chaotic.

There is work to be done, and work is being done.

The Council hopes to convert this priority into figures with a total appropriation 30% higher than in 2000.

The EUR 614 million adopted by the Council will ensure funding of all foreseeable needs.

I would add - and of course this is important in our discussions - that it has been possible to earmark such a significant amount without having to revise the financial perspectives aimed at strengthening category 4, as proposed by the Commission.

The Council has also ensured the funding of all the European Union' s other policy priorities.

Without launching into an exhaustive description of the Council' s draft budget, which is in any case the subject of the detailed explanatory statement circulated to you, I would now like to present the Council' s 2001 draft budget decisions in a rather more specific way, that is, by category of expenditure.

First, as regards category 1 of the financial perspectives relating to agricultural expenditure, the draft budget provides for an increase in commitment appropriations of 6.3% in relation to 2000 in order to fund the CAP reform agreed by the European Council in Berlin in March 1999.

Nevertheless, for sub-category 1a of the financial perspectives, covering CAP market expenditure, the Council decided on figures some EUR 330 million lower in total than those proposed by the Commission in its preliminary draft.

In fact, there is under-implementation of these appropriations every year.

The Council therefore felt that it could achieve a reduction by targeting some traditionally underspent budget lines.

By doing so, it is also demonstrating the will to make special efforts to achieve significant savings in the compulsory expenditure and not just in non-compulsory expenditure.

The savings made, in comparison with the Commission' s preliminary draft budget, do not prevent the Council providing for an increase, which also responds to Parliament' s concerns, in two budgetary lines: for the distribution of milk to schoolchildren, which I know has been the subject of massive correspondence for more than a year now, and promotion of product quality.

For expenditure related to rural development, taking account of the delays which have built up in the approval and implementation of national rural development plans, the Council felt that a margin of EUR 225 million, under the ceiling of sub-category 1b of the financial perspectives, could be earmarked.

The development of these appropriations, however, shows an increase of 4.6% compared with 2000, an increase which reflects the priority the Council accords the appropriations allocated to what now constitutes a second pillar of the CAP.

So the draft budget drawn up by the Council includes margins available under the ceilings of sub-categories 1a and 1b of the financial perspectives.

However, I want to specify that the Council is, of course, prepared to re-examine agricultural expenditure this autumn in the light of the content of the letter of amendment the Commission will be presenting and to reconsider, at that time, developments in market and rural development expenditure.

As regards structural actions, covered by category 2 of the financial perspectives, the Council has budgeted this whole category as commitment appropriations in line with the conclusions of the Berlin European Council of March 1999 and, in addition, it has renewed all the payment appropriations entered in 2000.

But it hoped to increase the Cohesion Fund allocations by some EUR 360 million over provision in the Commission' s preliminary draft, to take account of the forecasts for implementation of these credits in the Member States.

On category 3 of the financial perspectives relating to the funding of internal policies, the Council was primarily intent on ensuring the appropriate funding for the multiannual programmes while respecting, where applicable, the programming decided jointly with Parliament.

That is why it has accepted the amounts requested by the Commission in its preliminary draft budget for the framework programme for research and development as well as for the trans-European networks.

It has done the same with regard to the appropriations requested to improve the financial environment of SMEs and the start up of the LIFE 3 programme.

The Council believes the right amount has been identified to get the LIFE 3 programme off to a good start.

As regards the extension of the 'Employment' initiative, agreed by Parliament to strengthen the employment dynamic begun by the Amsterdam European Council, the conciliation meeting between the European Parliament and the Council held on 20 July demonstrated that this subject represents a priority for both our institutions for the 2001 budget, especially in terms of building on the conclusions of the Feira European Council.

However, the Council is waiting for the assessment of the previous initiative soon to be delivered by the Commission with a view to seeking agreement with Parliament about its funding in the context of a global agreement during the second reading.

Furthermore, it has identified a precautionary margin of EUR 208 million more than the one in the Commission' s preliminary draft budget, the objective being to have enough room for manoeuvre over and above a necessary margin under the ceiling of category 3 to deal with the new priorities shared by the Council and by Parliament, such as the 'employment' initiative I mentioned earlier.

I now come to the financing of the European Union external actions covered by category 4 of the financial perspectives.

I do not need to remind you, after the debate we had just now, of the high priority the Council accords to aid to the Western Balkans. Here, as I have already indicated, the draft budget provides for an increase of 30% in comparison with 2000.

The EUR 614 million adopted by the Council will be enough to finance all the foreseeable needs.

This figure is based on the only evaluation of needs currently available, set out in the 1999 World Bank report on rebuilding Kosovo.

Wishing to be pragmatic, the Council is renewing but not increasing the appropriations intended for Serbia, as it is not yet eligible for Community assistance beyond the aid for democracy and civil society included in this envelope.

In general, the Council would like to see the implementation of effective and credible intervention in the region, based on an analysis of needs, adaptation of levels and types of aid to the nature of those needs, and distribution of effort between all the bilateral and multilateral donors.

As regards the other budget titles, although the Council has maintained the major allocations, for a limited number of budgetary lines it has not retained all the appropriations the Commission asked for in its preliminary draft budget. I am thinking in particular of the TACIS programme, the funding of KEDO, the international fisheries agreements, the rapid reaction arrangements and the MEDA programme.

On the other hand, the Council has kept to the Commission' s preliminary draft for the vast majority of the other cooperation programmes.

However I want to emphasise, as regards the MEDA programme, that the draft budget provides for an amount of EUR 701 million which is higher than the annual average allocation over the period 1995-1999.

The reduction of EUR 150 million made by the Council in comparison with what the Commission is asking for, takes account of the stock of still unpaid commitments still on this programme, and that represents several years of implementation.

I take this opportunity to remind you of the Council' s determination to contribute to better management of the programme, an indispensable prior condition, in our view, to enhancing our efforts.

Despite this reduction - motivated by the need to reabsorb the outstanding balance - the MEDA programme naturally remains very important to the Council.

The French Presidency' s objective is to achieve the adoption of the new multiannual regulation for MEDA soon and it will in particular be listening to the European Parliament on this subject.

I would also like to reaffirm the Council' s commitment to the accession process for Cyprus and Malta, and here I want to congratulate Mr Morillon on the conclusions of his report, which he outlined earlier.

We look forward to reading the report with interest, not to say impatience.

Consequently we have followed the Commission by grouping the appropriations asked for together under the heading of 'pre-accession strategy' .

However we have not followed up the Commission' s proposal for a revision of the financial perspectives, transferring these appropriations to category 7, and we have kept them in category 4.

Finally, I want to express my satisfaction that agreement was reached at the conciliation meeting between the European Parliament and the Council on 20 July on the amount of the appropriations to be included for the CFSP, as well as the transfer of the administrative expenses for CFSP special representatives, to the Council' s budget, in accordance with the institutional agreement of 1999.

This agreement has given rise to the drafting of two joint declarations, one of which specifies that the sums included in the Council' s budget under the heading of CFSP administrative expenses should take account of their impact on the general position for category 5, while the other commits the Council to ensuring that the estimates for administrative costs anticipated for each new CFSP decision are transmitted in good time to the other branch of the budgetary authority.

As you can appreciate, the Council has therefore tried to fund the various priorities in the field of European Union external actions appropriately and in doing so it has earmarked a margin of EUR 184 million under the ceiling of category 4 of the financial perspectives.

In drawing up its draft budget for the administrative expenditure covered by category 5 of the financial perspectives, the Council has been concerned to stabilise current expenditure, while taking account of the exceptional needs of the institutions, especially as regards staff for the Anti-fraud Office and the Court of Justice.

As regards the Commission' s budget, the Council did not make any decision in July, as it was awaiting the letter of amendment from the Commission which has just been presented, so the Council will now be examining that proposal and applying the lessons from the reorganisation work headed up by Neil Kinnock.

The Council is ready to do whatever is necessary to examine this letter of amendment so that its incidence can be taken into account as from first reading by the European Parliament.

To that end, there is a margin of EUR 113 million under the ceiling of category 5 of the financial perspectives.

I wish to conclude this overview of the various categories of expenditure with the expenditure on pre-accession aid.

For these the Council has kept the Commission' s figure for commitment appropriations.

For payment appropriations, the Council has adjusted the Commission' s preliminary draft budget figure downward by EUR 300 million.

In line with the logic prevailing for the other categories, the Council has taken maximum account of the substantial underspend of these appropriations in 2000.

Despite this reduction compared with the Commission' s preliminary draft, the pre-accession payment appropriations recorded a strong increase of 10.8% compared with 2000, which again reflects the importance accorded this expenditure as absolutely vital to the proper preparation of our major political aim, the enlargement, a priority shared by the Council, the European Parliament and the Commission.

Naturally, I wish to take this opportunity to say that I am sure the discussion between Mr Verheugen and the European Parliament, tomorrow, will make it possible to eliminate a number of misunderstandings.

I know Günther Verheugen well, I know how committed he is to enlargement and how hard he is working for its success.

Before I end, I would like to take this opportunity to say how pleased I am about the agreement reached, at the conciliation meeting between the European Parliament and the Council on 20 July, on a statement on financial programming.

Under the terms of this joint declaration, the Commission will now be obliged to evaluate the financial consequences of each of its new proposals, in particular for categories 3 and 4 of the financial perspectives.

I am sure that will be a fundamental factor in clarifying the decisions of the budgetary authority.

Anyway it will undoubtedly mean better budgetary forecasting and should be extremely useful during future budgetary procedures.

To conclude this overview, which I think has been as brief as it could be, I think, the draft budget being forwarded to you offers a balanced compromise whereby the European Union' s priorities can be funded while absolutely fundamentally respecting the Berlin financial perspectives - and we all know that it was not easy task to define them.

The 1999 interinstitutional agreement established conciliation between the institutions in the course of the budgetary procedure, and we are all bound to benefit this year and in the future.

In this connection, I am pleased with the progress we were already able to make, even before adoption of the draft budget at first reading by the Council, in bringing together the points of view of the institutions.

It seems to me that the draft I have just presented to you draws a number of lessons from that conciliation.

In any case I hope it gives you a good foundation for starting your work on the budget and that it will contribute to the establishment of a budget for 2001 which respects the priorities of each of the institutions, one which is satisfactory in terms of our joint mission, fulfilling our responsibilities towards Europe and its peoples.

Mr President, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, ladies and gentlemen, you will shortly be adopting two regulations that are highly significant in budgetary terms, one being the regulation on budgetary discipline in the agricultural sector, and the other being the regulation on own resources, that is to say, the financing of the budget.

On behalf of the Commission, I am able to tell you that we are most satisfied with the outcome of the discussions, and are delighted that these two difficult matters will soon be resolved.

However, the Commission takes a dim view of the outcome of the Council' s discussions on Budget 2001.

Accordingly, I am bound to contradict the assessment of the President-in-Office.

At first reading, the Council concentrated largely on cutting payment appropriations right across the board.

The end result was the lowest draft budget of the past ten years, when considering the budget in relation to the EU' s Gross National Product.

Now I have already made it clear to this august Chamber on numerous occasions that the Commission considers budgetary discipline to be an extremely important guiding principle, but the Council' s approach, i.e. to cut payment appropriations irrespective of the level of commitments entered into in the past which are due for payment, does not constitute sound budgetary policy.

The Council' s draft budget would cause the following to happen: the payment of arrears, i.e. the arrears of commitments entered into which have not yet been paid, would continue to mount up.

The Commission, on the other hand, supported by Parliament, would like to achieve the reverse, that is to reduce the arrears.

I believe that since we are in the happy position in the European Union of having an economy with high growth rates, now is the time to cut the arrears back, not add to them.

The Council has cut payment appropriations in the agricultural policy sphere by more than half a billion euro compared with the Commission' s draft.

This beggars belief considering the fierce criticism that certain of the larger Member States have levelled at the Commission, because we proposed to release EUR 300 million from agricultural policy in order to make the necessary payments in the Balkans available.

Obviously the Council now considers there to be far greater scope for making cuts in agricultural expenditure, but it is not prepared to make the funds available for the new external policy priorities for the Balkans.

As happened last year, there was a very heated discussion on how much aid should be made available for the Balkans, and I would remind you that during the discussions on Budget 2000, the Council took the line that it would not be possible to release the appropriations for Kosovo in any case.

Indeed, all the appropriations for Kosovo have in fact been tied up already.

The Kosovo agency for reconstruction is proving highly successful in its work, and that is surely something we should all support.

I would like briefly to take up the matter of Serbia, which you also mentioned in your speech.

The fact that no provision has been made for Serbia in the draft budget, or only to a very limited extent, sends out the wrong message in my view.

We find ourselves in a situation where we are competing in political terms with the dictator Milosevic, and we must convince the people that the European Union is willing to provide assistance.

I am standing firm on this: by the end of 2001 we should have EUR 800 million more at our disposal for the Western Balkans than we do at present.

Part of this could perhaps be made additionally available before the end of this year.

I hope to enlist your support in this matter.

Another word on foreign policy: the Budget Council has cut the funding for the Mediterranean programme - which is also something you mentioned - by EUR 150 million.

Putting these cuts into effect would no longer just be a budgetary policy measure though, it would also constitute a change in the foreign policy in this field, a renunciation of the Barcelona process.

The Commission believes this to be unacceptable.

Turning now to administrative expenditure, i.e. staffing expenditure: I would point out that the Commission did not request any new posts in its draft preliminary budget, apart from those for OLAF, the European anti-fraud agency.

We have now submitted a letter of amendment containing two key points: firstly a request for 400 new posts for the Commission with effect from the year 2001, and secondly, budgetary measures which will enable us to do without the vast majority of Technical Assistance Offices, as per Parliament' s request, and, in particular, that of the Committee on Budgets.

I have just this to say about the requests for more posts: at the beginning of this year, the Commission set up a working group under the leadership of the President of the Commission, at my recommendation, which examined the tasks performed by all departments and completed a critical examination of the staffing situation.

We ascertained where there was scope for reallocation of staff within and between the departments, with a view to improving the availability of resources for the key areas and for the political priorities, and in order to ascertain where we need to create new posts.

Our findings are now available to you.

The Commission has estimated that we need 1254 new posts for key activities and political priorities.

We can create a vast number of these 1254 new posts through reallocation, which will mean requesting a total of 717 new posts - 400 in the year 2001 and 317 in the year 2002 - particularly if we are to strengthen the areas of external assistance, health and consumer protection and environmental policy, as well as justice and internal affairs.

In addition, we have proposed a one-off early retirement scheme for 600 posts, organised in such a way as to have no impact on the budget, which would drastically reduce the need for new posts.

As an interim solution - particularly for the purposes of external assistance - we would ask the budgetary authority to allow us, until such time as a new administrative structure is created, to use the funding that has been available hitherto for the Technical Assistance Offices, for contract staff within the Commission.

We would also like to increase funding for the delegations, which are to be more actively involved in the administration of external assistance in future.

The Commission has learnt from past mistakes, which boils down to making clear the fact that the Commission cannot perform miracles; all it can do is make it its business to perform to a high standard. And if we are to acquit ourselves well of our tasks, we need the necessary resources, including the necessary staffing resources.

On a final note, it is fair to say that there are very testing times ahead again for all those involved in the budgetary discussions.

I hope we all find the energy and patience we need during this period to meet each other halfway and bring these discussions to a satisfactory conclusion.

We will certainly need energy and patience.

Mr President, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I am the rapporteur for the so-called remaining sections of the Budget.

This subject matter will seem somewhat dry after the eloquent presentation delivered by the Chairman of our Committee on Budgets.

I believe that whilst the small budgets may not be quite as fascinating in terms of policy areas, they are not without interest when it comes to the question as to how organisational and staffing resources can be used to guarantee the effectiveness of the institutions of the European Union.

I have a few comments to make on the Council' s first reading in this respect, which I have already submitted to the Committee on Budgets in the form of a discussion paper.

I will start with the European Court of Justice.

The Council has recognised the difficult situation facing the Court in relation to the translations backlog, and has proposed that 47 new posts be created.

At the same time, however, the across-the-board cut was increased from 2.5% to 5.1%, which means that these newly created posts cannot be filled.

I believe this is a contradiction-in-terms which has still to be resolved.

As rapporteur, I will duly prepare proposals to this end.

The situation is further exacerbated by the fact that the funding for the freelance translator reserves, which we need so badly in order to clear the backlog, have also been cut.

In other words, for all the Council may have recognised the problem, this is not reflected in the budget in concrete figures.

I have taken a very detailed look at the promotion systems of all the institutions, and I have noticed that the Court of Justice has now followed suit and established a promotion model based on demonstrable merit.

Switching over to a new system at the European Court of Justice will necessitate creating a large number of higher grades, which is something we have no hope of achieving within a year.

However, we must tackle this over the next few years.

This is another issue that the Council failed to take into account at first reading.

Turning now to the European Court of Auditors.

The only question that remains to be answered here, relates to the financing of the Court of Auditor' s new building in Luxembourg.

For reasons that are beyond me, the Council has cut the funding for 2001 from EUR 7 million to EUR 5 million.

During discussions at the Court of Auditors, I was assured that the total cost requirement of EUR 25 million at 1998 prices will not be exceeded.

I therefore think it would be of more benefit to the European tax payer if the payments were to be made once the respective invoices have been received.

I will propose to the Committee on Budgets that we redeploy the Court of Auditors' proposal.

I shall now move on to the Economic and Social Committee.

My guiding principle for the budgetary procedure for 2001 can be summed up by the following new High German expression: value for money.

Needless to say, the same holds true for the Economic and Social Committee.

The ECSC' s working method and public image are extremely dubious.

Hence my proposals are geared towards raising the productivity of the Economic and Social Committee.

In particular, the promotion policy of the Economic and Social Committee requires careful scrutiny.

I hope that, as budgetary authorities, we will be able to put our heads together and come up with ideas that will lend the necessary weight to the ECSC' s endeavours in this field.

We should also reflect on the role of the Secretariat of the Economic and Social Committee.

The ECSC currently derives all its expertise from outside experts.

However, I ask myself whether that should be the aim of such an institution' s work.

That is something else we need to discuss.

The same applies to the Committee of the Regions.

Here too it is my goal, under the 'value for money' maxim, to promote the overall productivity of the committee through a variety of measures.

I am only able to mention one interesting aspect.

The committee has asked for an increase in the funding required to cover the travel and subsistence costs incurred by regional representatives of candidate countries attending plenary sittings as observers.

We have placed part of this money for the financial year 2000 in reserve.

To date, there has been no application for us to release these funds.

At the same time, however, the Committee of the Regions has declared that it has need of more funds for the year 2001.

My response will be to propose that these funds should also be placed in reserve, because the need for funding allocations is evidently by no means as pressing as we are always given to believe during budgetary negotiations.

I only have a very brief comment to make in respect of the Ombudsman.

There is not a great deal to add here.

The Council has grasped the nettle and we support them in this.

I will not submit any further proposals on this matter.

To sum up: overall, we are being very sparing with the European tax payer' s money in performing our role as part of the budgetary authority.

It is imperative that we take the same line for the administrative budget. There are major tasks in store for us over the next few years.

We are in a position to create financial leeway for 2001, which we will hopefully be able to turn to good account when it comes to dealing with the administrative side of enlargement.

Mr President-in-Office of the Council, Mr President, Commissioner, honourable members, as the last person to speak on this agenda item, all I can do of course is make a few points and reiterate a few things that have already been said.

But as you are all yourselves aware, repetition is the only way to learn.

First of all, I would like to thank the Council for the constructive cooperation it has provided throughout the year' s trialogues and in all the conciliation meetings.

However, it is not just the current Council Presidency that I should like to thank, but also the previous one, the Portuguese Presidency, for creating a thoroughly cordial atmosphere despite all the differences of opinion.

I shall therefore deliver the good news first: compared with this year' s budget, both the Commission and the Council - albeit only temporarily - have proposed a total reduction of EUR 144 million in the budgetary lines for employment.

But Parliament has already made it clear in its guidelines that the issue of job creation is very close to our hearts, and that one of our first priorities in internal policy is to fight unemployment in Europe.

This is our determined aim, our goal, and we gave renewed expression to it in our resolution of July.

We have always found the Council ready to listen, both under the Portuguese and now under the French Presidency.

Accordingly, not only did the Council declare, in the course of the conciliation procedure, that it was willing to support our job creation initiative through suitable instruments for small and medium-sized enterprises, we have also agreed to come to an understanding, in the course of the budgetary procedure, on an amount within the meaning of number 33 of the Interinstitutional Agreement, which we intend to use to achieve our goal.

So what exactly are the problematic areas?

Where do Parliament and the Council differ?

In view of the limited amount of time available to us all, allow me to mention just two.

Firstly there is the manner in which the Council seeks to finance those policies where there is fundamental agreement.

As Parliament made clear last year, we believe it is necessary to undertake a multiannual revision of Category 4 in order to meet the requirements for reconstruction aid in the Balkans in a stable and secure manner.

The Council flatly refuses to countenance such a revision of the Financial Perspective.

It obviously prefers a hand-to-mouth existence.

That is the name of the game.

The Council has obviously made this its guiding principle, for how else are we to interpret the fact that it persists in refusing to commit the funds for the pre-accession countries Cyprus and Malta to Chapter 7 of the pre-accession strategy?

After all, that is where they belong logically, and in terms of content.

But the Council does not want there to be a revision, even if it is not bound up with a financial amendment.

As a Parliament, we now have an extremely difficult decision before us with respect to Category 4.

The second major bone of contention is the Council' s tendency to focus time and again, in the course of its budgetary readings, on payment appropriations alone.

The Commissioner made the same point.

I cannot say whether it is because of our institutional view, or whether it also says something about our personally held views, that we both majored on this in our criticism.

The Council' s declared aim was an increase in expenditure for 2001 of only 3.5% in comparison with the figures for the current budget.

The outcome is a draft budget in which the ratio of commitments to payments is no longer sound.

For example, on closer inspection, it is possible to discern that the commitments for 2001 are not matched with adequate payment appropriations.

In category 2, for example, the commitments are covered to a mere 2.1%.

In categories 3, 4 and 7 the situation looks better, but still not good.

In many lines of the draft budget, the payments do not even cover a quarter of the commitments.

In quite a few lines, no payments whatsoever have been earmarked for the commitments for 2001.

This no longer has a great deal to do with serious budgetary management.

I need hardly emphasise again that the Interinstitutional Agreement - which, incidentally, we concluded only 1¼ years ago - sets out as a matter of course, at various points, that there should be an orderly working out of the European Union' s expenditure, which should be regarded as being closely linked with the working out of the commitments.

In fact it means that a strict relationship should be preserved between commitment appropriations and payment appropriations.

The Council is neglecting this close relationship in the most criminal way.

Its aim is to reduce expenditure.

It argues that, at the end of the day, the Member States have to put their national budgets in order too.

That is all well and good, but it must not be allowed to bring our own common European budget into disorder from the very outset.

The next item is the statements by the Council and the Commission on Aids.

The Commission attended the 13th International Aids Conference, which took place in Durban, South Africa, from 7 to14 July 2000.

The theme of the conference, 'Breaking the Silence', provided a framework which helped to strengthen national and international action against HIV/Aids.

The conference welcomed scientific progress in addressing Aids, especially news of the first efficacy trials for an Aids vaccine and the evidence that transmission of HIV from mother to infant could be largely prevented by cost-effective use of anti-retroviral drugs.

Also welcome was information on the many small-scale condom and safe sex empowerment education programmes that have proved their worth in stemming the spread of HIV/Aids.

I believe that the conference could have given more attention to the lessons of success stories as regards improving and expanding these prevention strategies because information and prevention is in fact the most important ways of fighting Aids.

Prevention is central to a successful long-term national, international and global response to Aids.

At the same time a full spectrum of care from basic treatment of opportunistic infections to entry retroviral therapy for HIV infection can no longer be denied to the vast majority of the millions of people infected with the virus.

The Commission welcomes the new initiatives being taken against HIV/Aids by some countries to produce cheaper generic drugs and would like to offer its support to help such countries provide technical assistance to other developing countries to enable them to pursue such initiatives.

Possibilities will be further discussed with the countries involved.

We recognise that the production of generic drugs could greatly improve access to care and treatment for HIV/Aids.

The statistics of the epidemic are frightening and still getting worse.

For example, one in four Zimbabweans will die from HIV/Aids, including one in three in the capital, Harare.

More than a million children are already orphaned by HIV/Aids in Zimbabwe, almost 10% of the population.

More than half the pregnant women in some areas in Botswana are infected with HIV, and a third of them transmit HIV to their new-born babies during delivery.

The conference opened up exciting new opportunities and partnerships that will enable people who are vulnerable to HIV infection to gain access to technologies and procedures to make care more affordable for HIV/Aids sufferers and invest in new technologies and products to prevent and treat HIV/Aids.

These opportunities must be exploited immediately, and the Commission intends to play its part.

It is accordingly discussing innovative approaches with its developing country partners as well as with other donors.

We can and must be doing all that we should do about HIV/Aids.

We can and must also do everything possible to combat other major killer diseases affecting poor people.

Malaria and tuberculosis, both of which kill more than a million people a year, must assume new importance in our work to reduce poverty and ill-health.

Accelerated action on the three key communicable diseases - HIV/Aids, malaria and tuberculosis - has been addressed this year by a number of high-level meetings.

The Commission will shortly submit a communication to the Council and Parliament outlining proposals for accelerated action to improve access to proven key measures and commodities to develop active and effective delivery structures and systems for drugs and increase investment in research into and development of priority drugs and vaccines.

The communication points especially to the value of bringing condoms, bed nets and other preventive procedures to the poorest and most vulnerable more rapidly and on a sufficiently large scale.

The European Union accounted for 55% of global development aid in the social sectors in 1997 and has increased its support for health, Aids and population programmes from 1% of our total assistance in 1986 to over 8% at the present time, compared to an OECD average of 5.5%.

We are therefore focusing more and more on this field.

Total commitments of EUR 3.4 billion were earmarked for health, Aids and population between 1990 and 1998, none of which was offered as loans.

This is in clear contrast to the recent offer from the United States to southern Africa.

The Commission is holding wide-ranging consultations on options for accelerated national and international action and innovative approaches to address these diseases.

On 28 September, in collaboration with the WHO and UN Aids, it will be hosting an international round table.

The meeting will consider how a comprehensive approach at national and international level might tackle these three diseases and how we can make a difference.

Madam President, I should like to express my thanks to the President of the Council and Commissioner Nielson for the statement they gave today with regard to the huge issue of Aids, especially in Africa.

When, in the early 80s, the full extent of the problem of Aids became clear, the Western world adopted a large number of policies in order to curb the illness and provide sound treatment to those who had contracted the disease.

A great deal of consideration was also given to prevention and consequently, in most Western countries, the illness failed to develop into the pandemic which was predicted in the 80s.

Each Aids victim, in Europe too, is one too many, but thank God there are not as many as was feared twenty years ago and survival rates have gradually increased.

How different is the situation in many Third World countries, especially in Africa!

There the tragedy has now exceeded everyone' s expectations.

Out of the 18 million casualties this illness has claimed worldwide, the majority lived in sub-Saharan Africa, where the average life-span has fallen to under 50 years and will fall still further to 45 years.

Millions of African children are already having to go through life without parents, millions of families have broken up, millions of children and elderly people are having to manage without the support and care of an ever dwindling part of the generation in between.

And this is only the humanitarian tragedy.

Then there is the socio-economic tragedy.

Economic development is faced with more and more difficulties, investments are not being made because staffing levels are insufficient, schools are losing their teachers and hospitals can no longer cope with the problems.

In fact, we have to conclude that much of what has been achieved over the past 25 or 30 years in terms of development has been cancelled out by the Aids tragedy, and this is something which should alarm us all the more as the largest provider of aid to Africa.

What could Europe, the Commission, the European Union do to help Africa?

I believe it is not helpful to try to copy European policy in Africa.

The situation in many African countries does not lend itself to European solutions.

Instead, we should start with a few positive examples, such that those in Uganda and Senegal, where there are opportunities to stabilise the extent of the illness to some degree.

And in our opinion, three key concepts apply: information and prevention, affordable treatment, and care of those left behind.

Information and prevention are essential, and the use of condoms is extremely important in this context.

As far as treatment is concerned, I believe it is important for the pharmaceutical industry to find affordable alternatives to the medication which is of some help in our Western countries, also where transmission of the illness from mother to child is concerned.

And as for the care for those left behind, I would draw your attention to the many orphans this illness has already created.

Finally, the Commission has announced that it will produce a memorandum to solve the problems but, to my mind, we have done too little so far, and the unit which is responsible for this care is too small.

I therefore hope with all my heart that the memorandum which Commissioner Nielson has announced will offer us a new perspective, with more people at the European Commission who are prepared to tackle this issue, with more coordination at European level and, more than anything, with more funding, because that is what is needed to help Africa leave this misery behind.

Madam President, I am not going to repeat what has already been said, and said very well, and with very laudable intentions.

Rather, I am going to try to talk about facts.

I think the facts, today, are simple.

The facts are access to treatment and patient care.

UNAIDS itself acknowledges the ineffectiveness of the programme announced by the pharmaceutical laboratories, which were only trying to improve their image, in fact, and are now withdrawing when it comes to genuine negotiation of a reduction in the price of treatment.

The issue is no longer donations of medication, necessarily limited in time and subject to the selective interests of the laboratories, but adapting treatment price to purchasing power in the developing countries.

The European Union must urge the pharmaceutical multinationals to grant voluntary licences, a first step towards access to treatment for the deprived populations.

If that is not done, the European Union should impose respect for the agreements in case of medical emergency, and require the granting of compulsory licences, which would finally mitigate the problem of the price of treatment.

I think the agony of a whole continent takes precedence over special interests.

Madam President, I agree with Mrs Carlotti that the merit of the Durban conference was to make it clear that Aids is not being fought in the same way in Europe and in Africa.

Aids lays bare all the economic and social deficiencies of developing countries and grafts itself onto the more general problem of destitution.

Prevention cannot succeed unless it is accompanied by access to treatment.

So, and here I agree with the previous speaker, the pharmaceutical companies with the monopoly of manufacture and marketing of triple therapy and even AZT charge a high price for them.

We would not be having this debate if triple therapy cost a dollar.

And as the director of UNAIDS recognises, we need to increase the amount currently invested tenfold even to make a start on a real policy of prevention and social security.

Besides, medication cannot be distributed like sacks of rice.

Doctors, dispensaries and social support structures are needed.

And, by IMF dictate, poor countries are cutting public expenditure, in particular on education and health.

The European Union must contribute towards the rapid cancellation of the debt of African countries, which costs them 15 billion annually, so that those resources can be allocated to establishing the health infrastructure and new social programmes.

Finally, the research priority must be to perfect a vaccine.

Madam President, I am speaking on behalf of the Members of the Bonino List.

I have taken note of the words of the Council representative to the effect that France will allocate part of the African countries' debt to the fight against Aids.

This is a major initiative which we hope will be echoed by all the countries of the Union and countries outside the Union as well.

We call upon the Union to make a contribution as well so that more funds are invested in the fight against Aids in Africa, where 95% of deaths caused by the HIV virus occur.

It is true that we currently spend USD 300 million per year on Africa, but, at the same time, Africa has a debt of USD 15 billion owed to the industrialised countries.

I would like to end by drawing attention to the great pervading silence and condemning it: I refer to the campaigns which aim to deter people from using condoms on religious grounds.

They are requesting people not to use condoms in the name of life, but that is to condemn the children to certain death.

Madam President, as a member of the Committee on Development and Cooperation, I would like to express my distress at the outcome of the 13th Aids Conference in Durban, South Africa, which is at the very least alarming, and my deep concern for the future of the developing countries, particularly the African countries.

This new resolution supplements the resolutions tabled last year in Lusaka, Zambia.

However, sadly, the situation is tragic and has shown no improvement at all recently. On the contrary, it is assuming huge proportions if we consider that, in Africa, five people die of Aids every minute.

The statistics presented by the experts are tragic, including the substantial population decline and the dramatic decrease in life expectancy in Africa, which will fall below the age of 45 by the year 2015. In the sub-Saharan area, as many as 10% of the population will be affected by the virus.

I therefore feel that there is a need for the Commission and the Member States of the Union to make an ad hoc intervention, in consideration of the European Union's major responsibility precisely towards developing countries.

Indeed, I would argue that we should relate the cancellation of the external debt of the poor countries to the fight against the Aids epidemic, and it is precisely with a view to this that we support the request of the specific programme Debt for Aids contained in the resolution.

The Cairo EU-Africa Summit on debt cancellation procedures and the Durban Conference are, in fact, closely related.

The grievous impact of Aids on economic growth and the close relationship between the fight against poverty and the fight against Aids requires coordination and closer and more effective cooperation between the WHO, the World Bank and the United Nations, with the involvement of the civil society of the countries concerned, the local Churches and the non-governmental organisations.

Madam President, despite significant scientific progress in treating Aids, the Aids epidemic is still ravaging more and more poor countries, thereby compounding problems in dealing with its multiple and serious consequences.

There is no doubt that preventive measures and treatment over recent years have considerably improved patients' chances of survival in developed countries; however, the same cannot be said of poor countries.

The spread of the disease has exceeded every worst-case scenario, especially in Africa; as has already been mentioned, five people a minute die from Aids, which has now reached the point at which it is a threat to public health.

Every day, children infected with this virus are born in these countries due to a complete lack of suitable programmes for mothers-to-be.

Similarly, the cost of treatment is so high that few patients receive this, their rudimentary right.

In this context, I think that the proposed reduction in the price of drugs for the victims of Aids in these countries is extremely important and I should like to urge the Commission and the Council to support this endeavour by exerting pressure on pharmaceutical companies.

Similarly, a concerted effort must be made to develop integrated educational, preventive, treatment and welfare programmes for developing countries, at least until the vaccine is safe to use, which is what we are all hoping for.

Until then, prevention and therapy are the most important factors in controlling the spread and dealing with the disease and these are services which all citizens should receive, irrespective of where they live.

Madam President, everyone in this debate has emphasised the importance of preventive measures.

As we know, there is an old saying, prevention is better than cure.

With the approximately 15 years' experience we have had of this epidemic - I myself have been active in connection with both the UN and the Red Cross - I can, however, see that we have not listened especially carefully to that saying.

As long as ten years ago, it was extremely clear how serious this epidemic could become in certain developing countries, but too little was done both in those countries and by the international community.

It is debatable what the reasons are why this epidemic hit poor countries especially hard, compared with how it affected countries in our own part of the world.

It obviously has to do with poverty, with lack of information and education, with patterns of sexual behaviour and, specifically, with young girls' lack of education of a kind which would better enable them to resist sexual advances. It also has to do, of course, with the shortage of money within the health care sector.

I welcome the fact that both Commissioner Nielson and the French Presidency now regard and describe the work on combating the HIV epidemic as a main priority.

Money is not enough, however. Instead, we must ensure that the Commission obtains a sufficient number of qualified staff so that it is not isolated employees who are trying to push ahead with these issues.

It is also important to have new kinds of cooperation with the pharmaceuticals industry so that we can produce not only vaccines, but also medicines.

This applies not only to HIV but also to malaria.

We need to be guided by innovative thinking in this area.

When, finally, we talk about partnership, it is, as Commissioner Nielson said, extremely important to seek out whatever proves to have worked and to support it.

There is a whole host of programmes which are crying out for money and where contributions from the EU could be of use.

We talk a very great deal about Africa.

I am afraid that, in five to ten years' time, the situation will be similar and very serious in parts of Asia.

I welcome Commissioner Nielson' s conference on 28 September 2000 and hope that it will lead to something of a crash programme for tackling these problems still more vigorously in the future.

I have received seven motions for resolutions, pursuant to Rule 37(2) of the Rules of Procedure, to wind up the debate on this statement.

Before closing the debate, I invite the President-in-Office to reply to the debate or at least conclude it.

Thank you, Madam President, for giving me a moment to say how moving it is to hear such powerful words spoken in this Parliament today, clearly demonstrating that we are of one mind in recognising that Aids truly reveals the state of poverty and injustice reigning on our planet.

We Europeans have a moral obligation to mobilise and it comes through from all these speeches that we are ready.

We are very grateful to the Commission for preparing its communication which we impatiently await and which will allow us to pool our energies and unite in a determination to act.

The time for thinking really is over.

We must act without delay because this is an emergency, and the French Presidency stands ready to put that determination to act into practice at European level.

To respond to the immense challenge we face, we need to mobilise all the partners, as I said in my earlier remarks, which drew a wholly positive echo from Parliament.

I can tell you that the presence on the Durban platform of the Director General of WHO, the European Commission representative and the President of the Health Council created immense hope.

We have no right to disappoint that hope and I will be at your side.

We will meet the challenge together.

We must denounce campaigns of disinformation, combat obscurantism, but not abandon any field of action.

I believe we must be conscious always of the need to promote information and training, prevention, access to care and treatment, and research - particularly into vaccines and medication.

I just want to thank you for these contributions.

We are aware of the enormous challenge facing us.

Prevention works, but it takes time.

Uganda is a good illustration of this.

For us as donors, this means that we have to be able to show what I would call donor stamina.

We have to be able to continue and to support the right strategies.

Mr Mantovani said that we should forgive debt and use the money instead to combat Aids.

When we forgive debt, we have used the money.

You are suggesting that we use it twice.

That is a good innovative approach, but still not that easy.

This is, in fact, why I mentioned that the offer the United States has made is to make available on a loan basis USD 1 billion for buying medicine from US companies.

That is in my view not the right approach, because it will actually increase the already double problem of Aids and existing debt in African countries.

That is why I made the point that Europe is actually providing funding that does not increase the debt of our partner countries.

Finally, I would warn against the dream of a quick fix in terms of new medicine.

We are trying to crack the code of protective rights for the companies but it is not easy.

In the meantime, the scale of the costs here makes it more necessary to emphasise prevention rather than cure.

A cure is still far too expensive.

I want to thank the President and the Commissioner for their understanding.

The vote will take place on Thursday at12 noon.

Creating a monitoring centre for industrial change

The next item is the statement by the Council and the Commission on creating a monitoring centre for industrial change.

I invite Mrs Péry to speak on behalf of the Council, and I know she will feel at home in this Chamber as she served as Vice-President of Parliament for many years.

Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, let me say how delighted I am to be speaking here, discovering these acoustics, as this is in fact the first time I have spoken in this Chamber.

First, I must present apologies from Martine Aubry who very much regrets not being here personally.

I want to thank the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs, and the parliamentary Group of the Party of European Socialists for the draft resolution to be debated, and the rapporteur, Mr Hughes.

I very much hope that our debate will contribute to progress on setting up European arrangements for monitoring industrial change, something the French Presidency takes a particular interest in.

You will note, Commissioner, that I said European arrangements, and I am deliberately non-specific about the name, because it is the principle that is important.

Before talking about the arrangements themselves, I think it is useful to give a brief review of the context in which this proposal was born.

The Special European Council in Luxembourg on 21 and 22 November 1997 tasked a high level group of experts with analysing industrial change in the European Union and looking at ways of anticipating and managing change as well as its economic and social repercussions.

The closure of the Renault Vilvorde plant is still a vivid memory.

All of us, in our own countries, are experiencing the radicalisation of certain social conflicts reflecting despair - I do mean despair - and incomprehension before the challenges of globalisation.

In its final report to the European Commission, the group of experts drew up an inventory and made recommendations.

These include the interesting proposal to the Commission to create a European monitoring centre for industrial change.

This centre would be a tool to help identify and analyse change in order to anticipate its consequences and ensure positive management of those developments.

This recommendation was received without comment as to the principle, the monitoring centre being perceived as a tool to assist restructuring, but debate arose around the work on its creation.

I believe there was also debate in the Commission and amongst both sides of industry.

I am now being told that positions have moved very close together on both on the tasks and on the structure of the centre, and I think that is a highly important factor.

Recognising this, and with your help, ladies and gentlemen, we need to create the conditions for rapid establishment of the European monitoring centre for industrial change.

The acceleration of the process of mergers and acquisitions in Europe is forever prompting us to think about the social and legal aspects of the issues raised.

The emergence of new information and communication technologies in the organisation of relations between the great principals and their sub-contractors - I am thinking of aeronautics, the motor industry - is bringing in its wake new ways of organising work liable to alter the industrial fabric substantially and promote the arrival of new territorial systems going beyond national frameworks.

As regards the future of employment, we need clarification to be able to make real forecasts successfully.

But clarification is also needed for developing vocational training both for learning a trade and for lifelong learning, which should become a right for everyone.

I very much hope, as the draft resolution underlines, that this will be included in the Union' s Charter of Fundamental Rights.

The nature and importance of the social dialogue accompanying these transformations goes hand in hand with the extent of restructuring or technological evolution.

The European monitoring centre for industrial change may respond to this problem if its tasks and structure are defined in that way.

The centre should identify and collect information relating to economic, technological, and labour market developments.

It should also identify and disseminate positive practical solutions to be implemented at various levels and promote exchange of experience on the evolution of and adaptation to change.

These tasks should respond to the needs of the European institutions, the social partners at all levels, the national and regional institutions and business.

There remains the question of how this monitoring function should be organised.

It is useful and necessary to remember that this centre should be a tool, not a place for political decision-making and industrial negotiations, and should be available to the publics I mentioned earlier.

It must be organised so as to fulfil its missions, and in our opinion that means a light, flexible structure.

For logistics it could rely on the existing European institutions.

In our opinion, European social partners and the Commission should naturally be involved in the management of the centre in appropriate ways.

A scientific council could determine the main guidelines and underwrite the work done.

A proposal that this European monitoring centre and the Foundation for the Improvement of Living and Working Conditions in Dublin should be close together makes sense and would receive our support.

In fact, the experience of that institution, its scope, the results of its work and its tripartite management, represent solid foundations for launching the centre.

In the view of the French Presidency, that proposal for a foundation should facilitate the rapid establishment of the centre.

France will do everything possible to ensure that it can be in place before the end of this presidency.

Madam President, I have not forgotten how precious time is in this institution, so I have made a point of respecting my speaking time.

In 1997, the closure of one Renault factory near Brussels employing 3 200 people focused public attention on the negative consequences of industrial change.

After this, in response to the European Council, the Commission invited a high level group of experts to report on the economic and social implications of industrial change and make recommendations on ways to prevent consequences of the kind witnessed at the Renault factory.

In its report the high level group recommended the creation of an observatory.

This report has been endorsed by the Council.

It is true that mechanisms and structures for the anticipation of change exist in the majority of Member States. But at European level there is no kind of observatory or mechanism to support policy makers and social partners in responding to these changes.

I am convinced of the need to provide European social partners and policy makers with a tool which enables us to adopt a forward-looking approach where industrial change is discussed at European level, with a view to managing it through positive and preventive action.

We have already discussed it three times in Parliament.

We really believe that there is an urgent need for a new structure, an observatory or whatever we like to call it.

The Commission has already proposed in the social agenda presented in 28 June 2000 to invite the European Foundation for the Improvement of Living and Working Conditions in Dublin - which is an existing structure - to put in place an information mechanism for change.

This mechanism could also serve as a forum on change.

What is the role of this mechanism?

This information mechanism should assist the social dialogue between employers and employees and it could support public authorities by providing information data and analysis of existing information on industrial change.

We all agree that it must be a lightweight and cost-effective structure and that it must be established as quickly as possible.

The social partners indicated their interest in this mechanism in the forum of 15 July and committed themselves to finalising their approaches and presenting their ideas on the possible structure for this mechanism.

Of course we shall take their opinion into account before our final proposal.

My last point is that anticipation of change and response to it must be multidimensional.

Coordination across all policy areas has been central to the Commission's deliberations in this area.

So what we could say is that we can ensure that the employment DG will collaborate with other DGs, in particular the internal market, education, culture and enterprise DGs, to present an integrated approach for this mechanism.

We believe that the output of this mechanism will be available to support the decisions of EU institutions and EU partners and this could be done in a flexible way within the European Treaty.

I too would like to welcome Nicole Péry back here in the Chamber and perhaps I could say, Nicole, that we miss you particularly when we have extremely difficult votes to transact.

Perhaps you could pop back periodically.

I would like to say that the compromise resolution tabled by my group and others has been cut down to the bare essentials to make it absolutely clear what we are calling for, but even so there seems to be a tremendous amount of confusion over exactly what we are calling for and I would therefore like to spell out two things that we are not calling for.

First, we are not calling for the creation of a new expensive agency or institute.

The tasks we want a monitoring centre to undertake can be handled at the Dublin Foundation and/or the Seville Joint Research Centre at little extra cost.

Second, we are not seeking to stop mergers, transfers, restructuring or globalisation itself.

That would be a ludicrous notion, but we want to see a socially responsible and anticipatory approach to these developments.

We want the establishment of a coordinating centre for the monitoring of industrial change as a contribution to a more pro-active approach to the management of medium and longer-term industrial change in terms of its impact within the European Union and I would draw Mr Chichester's attention to the fact that service industries too are industries and we are looking at industrial change overall.

This would be a centre to gather information and intelligence from all possible partners and actors, business itself, institutions of higher and further education, the employment services both public and private, the social partners from all relevant actors and again I would say to Mr Chichester, we are not saying here that governments should try to predict change.

We want to work with all partners including business itself to try to assess the direction of change.

The task of such a centre then should be to channel relevant information on anticipated changes to decision-makers at all levels to help increase our overall capacity to prepare the policy changes necessary to harness the opportunities to be gained from the perceived direction of change.

This is not an idea we have plucked out of the air.

As both the minister and the Commissioner have said, this follows on from the Gyllenhammar High Level Group following the Vilvoorde closure by Renault.

The recommendation to create an observatory is one in fact that has been picked up in several EPP resolutions in recent months and I am therefore very surprised to see such a hostile resolution from that quarter here this week.

The Liberal and EPP resolution says that such a centre would try to interfere in the markets and in commercial decisions.

That is not the case at all.

This is not about interference in commercial decisions but about making sure that we maximise the chances of us all being winners rather than simply the passive victims of change.

But who knows, Mr Chichester, maybe even the world of commerce would benefit from the improved intelligence such a centre could provide.

My final point is this: the resolution by the EPP and the Liberals is factually incorrect.

It states that both Council and Commission have pulled back from the decision to create such an observatory, such a centre.

We have heard from both the presidency of the Council here today and from the Commission that they are actively pursuing the idea.

It is missing the point and I hope even that at the eleventh hour you will recognise a good idea when you see it, withdraw your resolution and support ours.

But perhaps I am a hopeless optimist.

Mr President, the debate is most interesting but, as you can see from the screen, Question Time is due to start at 6.10 p.m.

It does not matter if Question Time is late starting but can you guarantee that it will last one and a half hours because otherwise we shall run out of time and numerous questions on the agenda will not be discussed.

And, while I have the floor, I too am delighted to welcome the representative of the Council presidency to the House.

I greatly regret the situation, just as you do, because I am inheriting the problem.

The fact of the matter is, however, that I can only guarantee us one hour here.

I will communicate this problem - and you will probably do so as well - to the Conference of Presidents and to Parliament' s Bureau, because it may occur once as an exceptional case, but when it happens more than once we must tackle the problem and find a solution to it.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, Commissioner and Mrs Péry, it was agreed at the Lisbon Summit that fifteen European Member States would be developing a common strategy for a smooth transition to a new economy. This is in the interests of our citizens as well as industry.

The Liberal Group is totally against the setting up of a new administrative body that will further increase European bureaucracy.

A European Monitoring Centre for industrial change is at odds with the liberal principle that governments should not interfere in commercial decisions.

Do not pick the winners and let the winners pick.

That was also the conclusion at the Lisbon Summit.

I was therefore amazed to learn that less than three months after the event, both Mrs Péry, on behalf of the presidency and Mrs Diamantopoulou, on behalf of the Commission had completely changed tack. I was really taken aback by this.

And there was I thinking we were dealing with reliable partners.

Remarkably, European government leaders, including those of social-democratic persuasion, do embrace the liberal principles and the new economy while in this House, the left wing falls back on old reflexes time and again.

The spectre of the repairable society is on the loose once again in Europe.

Therefore, my group has also failed to achieve a compromise with the Socialist Group on the resolution before us.

Europe and the European economy are doing well.

The blessings of the internal market and particularly the introduction of the euro have given employment a shot in the arm.

However, some large Member States are fearful to take the required measures, as a result of which they lose out on the benefits to be gained from economic growth.

A new Monitoring Centre is no antidote to this.

This is not the first time that this Parliament is discussing political interference in industry and business management.

The same arguments crop up time and again. I do hope this time is the last time.

Mr President, the European Union is facing far-reaching changes in our economy, globalisation, the new economy, the expansion of new technology and all kinds of demographic factors as well.

These developments have a major impact on employment, the balance between rich and poor, social exclusion and the environment.

There are all kinds of frictions within the labour market, we will have to adapt our education system and, at the end of the day, these developments also have all kinds of effects on individual companies, some of which are closing down while others are being set up again, etc.

However, one minute we are pulling out all the stops to fight unemployment and the next we are attracting employees from third countries in order to solve the problems within the labour market, for example in the care or ICT sectors, just to quote a couple of odd examples.

What we have noticed is that sometimes the policy is ad-hoc or belated and, in a sense, Lisbon, with its "dotcom approach" , is a good example of this.

We need to take a more consistent line.

Secondly we need involvement, involvement in the support networks, and this is the social implication that needs to be developed.

We are of the opinion, therefore, that in order to accommodate this development within industry and sectors of industry, the advice of the working party must be followed at a high level and a coordinating centre set up to observe these changes. This centre should not be an unwieldy, new body but rather fall under the remit of an existing body.

This type of industrial change relies completely upon the full involvement of social partners, citizens and politicians at local, regional and national level. Success will depend critically upon how well this change is managed.

From this perspective, the Commission and Council should also ensure that topics such as the right to information and consultation, revision of the law on works councils and the role of employees and citizens in mergers and business closures with their serious social consequences can be brought up for discussion sooner rather than later.

This too seems to us to be essential for the purposes of managing industrial change.

We are not going to oppose the creation of a monitoring centre for industrial change.

The right' s unanimous opposition to it only confirms their rejection of the slightest transparency on the disastrous consequences for society of the factory closures and redundancies people have the nerve to present to us as inevitable responses to change.

But this monitoring centre can only be a statistical instrument, and not even an objective one, in this class society.

A monitoring centre cannot replace the political will to prevent big business sacking workers to make bigger profits.

Calling for social cohesion amounts to asking workers made redundant by a firm which is closing down, and unemployed people who are victims of restructuring, to endure their fate patiently.

Most of the mergers or restructurings are financial operations quite unrelated to industrial change.

And it is always the workers who have to pay the price, never the shareholders.

That is why I say to the workers that they can and must defend themselves, in particular by imposing a ban on redundancies on any company which is making profits.

Accumulated profits should be used to finance the distribution of work amongst all, with no decrease in wages, no precariousness and no flexibility.

I have received 7 motions for resolutions to close this statement, tabled in accordance with Rule 37(2) of the Rules of Procedure.

My group would have preferred it if we had not concluded this, in itself interesting, debate with resolutions.

This is in response to the comments made by Mr Hughes.

I believe that the Council has indeed introduced new elements today.

Judging from the discussion, the Council has made some progress.

The Commission statement was also extremely clear and, in my opinion, we should all examine it very carefully once again.

This would be the best way forward.

Secondly, it is true that we need to avoid excessive bureaucracy. I fully share the view of my neighbour, Mr Chichester on this matter.

However, I was also reminded of what happened to the Titanic.

It sank because there was no observation system for icebergs in those days.

Needless to say, after the sinking of the Titanic, such a system was introduced without delay.

Surely over the past few years, we have seen a few cases, also in respect of industrial changes, where a little prescience might have prevented the worst from happening.

I personally take the view that we could explore this route a little more, provided it does not lead to further bureaucracy, especially in our host country.

We are constantly being faced with all kinds of states of affairs, blockades and such like, and I believe it would be of great benefit if more objective information on future changes could be provided so that we could perhaps prevent a few mistakes from being made, as might have happened in the case of the Titanic.

I like the film, but I would hate to see it time and again.

Mr President, let me start with a quotation: 'Unregulated mergers, based merely on dominant capitalist concerns, have a devastating effect on the Union's social cohesion.

That face of the European Union is unacceptable to men and women who wake up one morning to discover that the company they work for has changed hands and that they are at the mercy of their employer's economic strategy options.

The effect on the lives of those people, their families and their entire region is traumatic and, let's face it, inhuman.

Among Parliament's various proposals, the idea of setting up an observatory for industrial change is of particular interest. In so far as such an establishment will be independent and will have appropriate resources to carry out its research, and its work is made public and can serve as a basis for democratic debate, it can make a powerful contribution to developing intergovernmental cooperation which, in this area of social policy, remains predominant.'

That is not a quotation from some irresponsible or lunatic left-winger.

I am in fact quoting our President, Mrs Fontaine, who made those statements at the Lisbon Summit on behalf of us all.

Now, listening to certain leaders of the uptight right, here, today, I wonder if these honourable Members of Mrs Fontaine' s group really want to spend their time giving the lie to what our President said before the Heads of State and Government in Lisbon.

Of course, Mr Chichester and Mr Plooij-van Gorsel tell us, respectively, to 'leave it to the markets' and 'not pick winners' .

We know the old refrain only too well, privatise profit and nationalise losses.

My friend Steven Hughes has explained that the Socialists and the two other political groups tabling a joint resolution do not want a bureaucratic monster.

We do not want a new institution or agency but - as Mrs Péry, the representative of the presidency, says, and I welcome her too - a light arrangement, a light structure, which could coordinate the existing work.

In fact, the Commission has plenty of documentation available, and Eurostat can provide very interesting statistics on industrial evolution in Europe and beyond.

There are the national governments and research institutes.

There must be no duplication of existing work but coordination of it and a report, at least every six months, which can be debated in the Council and in the European Parliament.

We do not want to be mere spectators of the progress of industrial and social change.

We want to shape the future, and shaping the future does not mean fighting a rearguard action or useless protectionism, but accompanying change.

We are for the new technologies, we are for the new economy, but we also want to help the old sectors adapt.

Our aim is a pro-active policy. We want to anticipate change, because the future, and especially the economic future, is being built now.

Mr President, Minister, Commissioner, I would like to put this debate into context.

As a native of Auvergne, I would remind you that just about a year ago we were debating the Michelin crisis in this Chamber.

Michelin announced massive redundancies in its European factories at the same time as record profits on the stock exchange.

At that time, in this very House, we were collectively engaged in reviewing European regulations on company mergers.

I would suggest to the Commission that it might be worth having another look at Directive 94/EC and Regulation 4064/89 to strengthen information to and consultation of employees before major change - a euphemism for redundancies - whether due to restructuring or merger.

A year later, as a first concrete step, we are offered a monitoring centre for industrial change.

Fine, but let it really serve the cause of the employees.

For that, two conditions seem indispensable. The Commission must be allowed to evaluate the implementation of the directive on collective redundancies and closures of companies, and make proposals so that effective sanctions can be applied in case of non-respect of regulations.

The two sides of industry must be associated with this initiative by means budgetary resources allocated by the European institutions.

Minister, it is a great pleasure to see you here again.

The new economy and globalisation are producing an acceleration of industrial change and Parliament has several times discussed this issue and has established -I myself was the rapporteur - a certain number of procedures and the European works councils, and has done work on information to and consultation of workers. We are awaiting the results of these, Commissioner, because you know we are very committed to them.

We have also established procedures like the participation of employees in the capital, profits and results of the company, all indispensable procedures during industrial restructuring and change.

Of course there is still a great deal to be done in this field, but it seems to me that if we need to improve this type of procedure, as my colleagues have said, and it is not uptight to say so - we now have bodies in Europe like the Foundation in Dublin and the European Agency for Health and Safety in Bilbao, with which our Committee on Employment and Social Affairs cooperates, that are in a position to evaluate the consequences of these industrial changes effectively.

And we should not forget that both sides of industry also have an indispensable role to play as regards industrial change at the European and the social level.

More particularly, I hope the existing bodies will be required to contribute to making industrial change increasingly transparent and, Commissioner, I hope the texts we are waiting for, on information to and consultation of workers, and the European company, will one day be submitted to this Parliament.

Mr President, Mrs Péry, Mrs Diamanopoulou, I would like to start by thanking Mrs Péry for the clarity with which she outlined the Council's proposal, which I fully support.

As has been said, the European Parliament has on several occasions, at times of crises, restructuring or conversion of production plant, decided by a large majority on the need for the European institutions and social dialogue partners to intervene early enough to be able to find all the possible solutions in order to avert avoidable serious social conflict and prevent the deindustrialisation of entire territories and the triggering-off of processes of serious social exclusion.

What Parliament was complaining of was the lack of information which would have made it possible to analyse these processes in due time and, more generally, to examine the changes taking place in production and employment in these firms before such an analysis lost its value due to the precipitous adoption of irreversible decisions.

I feel that the creation of a monitoring centre - a centre coordinating all the information useful for predicting restructuring and conversion processes - could be a valuable service for the Community institutions and facilitate social dialogue at European level.

For we are talking about a service activity, not a new institution, a service activity which would contribute to producing a high-quality, timely intervention which is the responsibility of the Union institutions alone.

Therefore, I call upon all those Members who voted on the resolutions on the restructuring processes, from Verwoord onwards, and especially those who voted on the Michelin affair in a resolution which explicitly provided for the establishment of a monitoring centre for industrial change, to show consistency on this occasion.

Mr President, with a tool such as this, it will, indeed, be possible not only to inform the workers concerned in advance and to explore the possibilities of averting or reducing redundancies - as stipulated by the Community Directive of 24 June 1992 - but also to facilitate at local and Community level dialogue which would make it possible to ascertain the existence of alternative solutions to those put forward by the companies. These could be partly implemented through public intervention as well as through initiatives to find alternative employment for workers whose jobs are under threat and, in particular, initiatives for the vocational retraining of workers.

This is the only way we will be able to ward off the danger represented by restructuring processes or mergers of large companies for large numbers of workers and for certain areas which are undergoing a radical process of decline or exclusion, particularly affecting young workers.

Without such a tool and without such preventative analyses, Parliament is destined to remain a centre of belated, ineffective claims.

Mr President, Mr Hughes says he does not want a new agency and yet his resolution plainly calls for a new agency and to deny it is merely playing with words.

He says he wants no interference in industry, and yet Mrs Diamantopoulou talks about preventive measures.

She clearly thinks that change is a bad thing.

She wants to keep loss-making industries on life-support systems when we should be releasing the resources of labour and capital so that they can work in viable new enterprises.

If we want to survive and prosper in the 21st century then we must welcome and manage change.

We must not monitor and prevent it.

So I was deeply disheartened to hear of this proposal for an observatory.

The rule seems to be: another day, another quango.

For the benefit of colleagues I should perhaps explain that a quango is a recently-coined English word short for "quasi non-governmental organisation", in other words, a new piece of bureaucracy, more money spent, more jobs for the boys, more patronage for their bosses.

To produce fat reports which will be translated into 11 languages but which nobody will read.

We seem to have only two responses in the EU to any real or imagined problem. We either create a new regulation without any concern as to whether existing regulations are working properly or we create an observatory.

Then we stand back proud and happy that we have solved the problem.

But we have not solved the problem.

We have wasted time and money and we have raised expectations which will not be fulfilled.

As with so many EU initiatives - I am thinking particularly of the proposed food standards agency - this observatory will simply duplicate the work of other organisations, of innumerable private research companies and accountancy firms, of academic and university institutes, of trade unions and chambers of commerce, and national and local government.

I put two questions to colleagues. First, do we need this observatory at all?

I think not. But if we do, would it not be far quicker, cheaper and more cost-effective to commission one of our great European accounting firms to do the work?

(FR) Ladies and gentlemen, just two sentences.

I have listened carefully to the debate which has taken place in this Chamber.

What I want to say is that all those who support the idea of a European monitoring centre agree on its mission and its form.

A mission of information, a mission of exchange, and as to the form, the structure, a flexible, light, efficient structure, relying on existing structures.

I see Parliament, the Commission and the presidency united, so I shall leave here quite optimistic that the monitoring centre will come into being.

Mr President, I shall be brief because I know time is short.

It was a very interesting debate and there were two dimensions. The first is the political one and the second is the technical one.

The political debate raised the question whether we should intervene in the new economy or not and I will make just a political point. The new economy is not a natural phenomenon, it is a political phenomenon.

That is why there is a need for mechanisms and institutions - not to stop the changes but to manage the changes and to prevent their negative social consequences.

As regards the second dimension, the technical dimension, I agree with the EPP Group that there is no need for a new structure and I agree with all the others who say there is a need for a lightweight and flexible mechanism.

This is why we are not proposing a new institution or a new structure.

We are proposing to cooperate with the Dublin Institute and to take account of all the other resources (the resources of the Commission and other European institutions such as EUROSTAT and the European Employment Observatory, the evaluations and other studies we have); all these will be taken into account and this mechanism will support the social dialogue between partners, employers and the public and will support policy makers in managing this change.

The vote will take place on Wednesday at noon.

The next item is Question Time (B5-0535/2000).

We will examine questions to the Council.

You know that we have very little time.

According to the Rules of Procedure, for supplementary questions - which are not obligatory - you have 1 minute, but there is a Parliament recommendation that only 30 seconds be used.

I am not going to insist on 30 seconds, but I would ask you only to ask questions that are essential.

I must point out that Question Nos 1, 3 and 4 were included on the list of questions for the July Question Time but could not be replied to by the Council, because there was not sufficient time to translate them beforehand into all languages, and they are therefore being presented once again at the beginning of this part-session.

Since they deal with the same subject, Question Nos 1 and 2 will be taken together.

Subject: United Nations General Assembly Special Session for Children What action does the Council intend to take in order to ensure that the EU makes a positive and constructive contribution to the United Nations General Assembly Special Session for Children, in September 2001, when all states will review commitments and goals set ten years ago at the World Summit for Children?

Does the Council agree that it is important that Member States, the Commission and the Council have a coherent approach to this Summit?

Mr President, I would like to answer the questions from Mr Theonas and Mrs Kinnock together, because they both deal with the need to ensure that child labour is abolished for once and for all.

As regards Mr Theonas' question, I must emphasise that the European Union fully recognises the importance of abolishing the exploitation of children, which deprives them of their right to a normal childhood and education, and their right not to be subjected to forced labour.

The European Union actively supports the action of the United Nations, the International Labour Organisation and the United Nations Children' s Fund, better known here as UNICEF. It salutes the adoption of the ILO Convention concerning immediate prohibition and action for the elimination of the worst forms of child labour, ratified by the United States on 2 December 1999, and it will work to ensure that this convention does indeed help eliminate the most intolerable forms of child labour.

The European Union regrets that the United States has not yet ratified the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child.

Our representatives have been urging the United States to ratify it in bilateral contacts.

The Convention has been ratified by the Member States and is of capital importance for the European Union which is actively involved in the current preparations for the United Nations General Assembly Special Session on Children, scheduled for September 2001, to assess progress achieved in the field of the rights of the child over the last ten years.

The European Union often raises human rights issues in the context of its political dialogue with the United States and the Council takes note of the case raised by the honourable Member.

On Mrs Kinnock' s question, the Council entirely agrees with her on the importance of good preparation of September' s UN General Assembly Special Session devoted to follow-up of the World Summit for Children.

The European Union has started actively preparing for the event.

It is one of our priorities for the 55th session of the UN General Assembly.

Although the success of the event depends in large measure on the commitment of the international community as a whole, the Council recognises that the European Union can and must play a major role in the preparations, a role encouraged during informal contacts held with representatives of UNICEF.

In addition, the Council is constantly attentive to the rights of the child wherever issues relating to human rights are dealt with.

The preparations for the special session are on the agenda of the Council' s human rights group, and it intends to devote a special section of the European Union' s annual human rights report to this issue.

Finally, the French Presidency has proposed holding a European Day of the Rights of the Child to its partners, possibly on 20 November 2000 - but I say that with reservations, because it has not yet been made official.

One last point: the Council is promoting the signature of two optional protocols to the Convention on the Rights of the Child adopted and opened for signature by the United Nations General Assembly on 25 May 2000, and we hope a lot of countries will sign at the Millennium Summit, which opens tomorrow and will implement these two optional protocols.

Mr President, I really must thank Mr Moscovici for the quality and content of his reply and for the fact that the European Union feels that the international conventions of the United Nations Organisation, such as the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child, should be ratified.

I should just like to observe, by way of a supplementary question, that ratification is extremely important, but often it is not enough.

Because, if I am not mistaken, the United States have ratified the new International Labour Organisation Convention on Child Labour but the convention is not being applied.

And where I think the minister needs to add to what he has told us is on whether the European Union, whether the Council will also demand at a practical level during the two days of contacts that the United States apply the provisions of the International Labour Organisation Convention and the United States convention on the Rights of the Child.

(FR) It is true that the important thing is implementation, but it is difficult to implement a convention which has not been ratified.

That is why we want to start having a much more determined political dialogue with the United States on this issue and press for ratification of the Convention on the Rights of the Child by the United States.

We will also hold informal consultations to try to convince them of the need not just to ratify that convention but to adhere to it.

Subject: Involvement of labour and management In various Member States there is no dialogue of substance or effective cooperation between government bodies and representatives of labour and management on employment-related issues or, in a broader context, efforts to modernise the European social model.

The conclusions of the European Council held in Santa Maria da Feira referred to the need for labour and management to play a more significant role.

How does the Council envisage strengthening the role of labour and management?

How will it monitor their involvement more effectively?

The Council has always regarded social dialogue as enormously important.

But you will appreciate that it is not up to the Council to advocate any particular model of social dialogue at national level, because that lies entirely within the competence of each Member State.

However, in terms of the social dialogue at European level, both sides of industry in Europe are already heavily involved in two aspects of Community action: coordination of economic policies, and the effort to implement the European strategy for jobs.

On the latter aspect, both sides of industry participate, with the Council and Commission, in the work of the standing committee on employment with a view to facilitating coordination of employment policies in the Member States by harmonising them with Community objectives.

Our social partners are also associated with the work of the committee on employment, consultation of both sides of industry in this context being informal.

As regards the efforts to strengthen the European strategy for jobs, when the employment guidelines are revised in 2001, both sides of industry, including those at national level, will be invited to play a more important role in their definition, and in implementing and evaluating the guidelines which fall within their scope.

The stress will be on modernising the organisation of work, education for lifelong learning and raising the employment rate, especially for women.

There are also grounds for suggesting that it is up to the Commission, pursuant to Article 138 of the Treaty, to consult both sides of industry on the possible orientation of a Community action before presenting proposals in the area of social policy.

As an example, the Commission has recently consulted its social partners on the possible orientation of a Community action on modernising and improving working relations.

As regards the modernisation of the European social model, both sides of industry will be associated with the work of the new committee on social protection, just as they are already associated with the work of the old committee on employment and the labour market and its successor, the committee on employment.

Following the conclusions of the Lisbon European Council, the Fifteen are due to adopt a European social policy agenda at the Nice European Council in December 2000.

That is an important priority for the French Presidency.

The working document for that agenda is a communication from the Commission adopted on 28 June.

There will be contributions to it and consultations on it under the French Presidency, and naturally both sides of industry are expected to be closely associated in drawing up the social policy agenda.

Mr President, I should like to thank the minister for his reply; I naturally endorse the fact that the importance and value of the social partners in shaping a new model are much greater than anyone can imagine.

But what I should like to ask is this: when a tripartite dialogue takes place between the two sides of industry and the national government, how far can the national government ignore what was jointly agreed and proposed by the social partners?

Or, taken the other way, how binding on a government are proposals decided jointly by the social partners, who know better than anyone what the problems of society and the causes of unemployment are and what problems need to be solved in order to deal with unemployment, or how binding should they be on any national government?

(FR) Mr Folias, it would certainly be desirable to make things more restrictive, but this is not the route which has been adopted within the European Union.

On the one hand, there is the subsidiary nature of social problems and, on the other, the selection of a method we call the open method of coordination.

We are currently succeeding in reconciling the problems of economic coordination, the major objectives of economic policy, the problems of coordination in social terms, the guidelines for employment and the various methods, and the various bodies working on it.

I think that this is an approach which must be continued because, as we know, Europe is very diverse.

Europe must not and cannot interfere in everything.

At the same time, the involvement of both sides of industry must be continually intensified.

Mr President, the social partnership should be a forward-looking partnership.

The first priority should be to implement what both sides want for themselves, and I believe that dialogue is an essential and important prerequisite in this respect.

What do you perceive the role of the existing Economic and Social Committee to be in this context, and what changes do you think will need to be made here, to enable it to become more actively involved in the work in future?

The Council does not have any response to this question at this stage.

Subject: Professor A Pelinka and Austria Is the Council aware of the case of Professor Anton Pelinka who has had his work in the European Monitoring Centre deliberately impeded and sabotaged by the Austrian Government and who has consequently had to resign from his position as Vice-President and member of the Management Committee of the Monitoring Centre?

Does the Council not believe this to be a clear case of political interference of the kind many of us believed would follow from the entry into government of the Austrian Freedom Party?

Does the Council not believe that this case justifies the imposition of sanctions and makes it all the more important for the sanctions to be maintained?

The Council is indeed aware of Professor Pelinka' s resignation from his post as Vice-President of the European Monitoring Centre on Racism and Xenophobia on 31 May this year.

However, the measures adopted by the 14 Member States on 31 January, which are going to be reassessed, or, at least, which are due to be reassessed in the light of the report of the Wise Men, are of a strictly bilateral nature.

As such, they do not implicate the institutions of the European Union and, consequently, the Council is not justified in declaring an opinion on whether or not they should be maintained.

As you know, three experts were designated by the President of the European Court of Human Rights on 12 July in order to check specifically whether the Austrian Government had contravened common European values since taking office on 4 February, and also to look into the decidedly unique political character of the Austrian Freedom Party.

The Member States will, of course, be very interested to peruse the experts' report when it is published, which, according to my information, should be very soon.

Mr President, I had the privilege of being a member of the Council of Ministers' Consultative Committee on Racism and Xenophobia, along with Professor Pelinka.

He was a highly valued if not slightly boring member, who tried to prevent us going too far in our recommendations and acted as a brake on some of us who were more enthusiastic about pushing forward.

Is the Council aware that the management committee of the Monitoring Centre has passed a resolution expressing regret at the resignation of Professor Pelinka and the events leading to that resignation and is the Council prepared to draw the attention of the Wise Men to this particular incident and ask them to include that in their report because it clearly seems to be a possible example of how our common European values are being undermined by the current government in Austria?

Mr Ford, I have my own personal opinion on the matter. I imagine that you know something of my views as a member of the French Government.

They are known to Austria at least.

The fact remains, however, that I am speaking right now on behalf of the Council and, let me repeat, these measures are bilateral measures, not measures undertaken in the context of the European Union.

As far as the report of the Wise Men is concerned, it is, by definition, a matter for them alone. I have no doubt but that in the detailed study they make of the Austrian situation, after a number of consultations, they will be able to take the diversity of individual situations into consideration, or, at least, I hope so.

That, in any case, was the mandate given them.

I have listened to the French Presidency' s answer with a great deal of interest.

The Pelinka case is a very serious legal case which may be said to constitute direct interference with freedom of expression in so far as the legal apparatus is being used in practice to silence political criticism.

The Council has now explained that it cannot comment "in its capacity as the Council of Ministers" , but the French Government may perhaps comment in its own capacity.

Is this matter not thought to be serious and to need to be included in the assessment being made in the Wise Men' s report?

I believe that the stance of the French Government and even the French authorities on this matter has been known from the outset.

We were by no means the last to demand the bilateral measures which were taken.

The fact remains that I am speaking right now, let me repeat, on behalf of the Presidency of the Council of the European Union, and that those measures are not measures undertaken within the context of the European institutions but rather a set of bilateral measures undertaken by 14 Member States with regard to the fifteenth.

That, sir, is all I wished to say, and I repeat, once again, that, by definition, if we want the Wise Men' s report to be truly wise, we must allow them to work wisely, and not try to influence them one way or the other.

I place my trust in these important political and legal figures, especially the former Finnish President, Mr Ahtisaari, since he has shown in the past that he is capable of assessing complex situations.

Subject: Request for a documented assessment of the education of children in the countries applying for EU membership In view of the economic crisis and profound structural changes that the majority of the applicant countries in the enlargement process have undergone, will the Council say whether all children in these countries are receiving an education? To what age is education in these countries compulsory?

Is there any means of guaranteeing that all future citizens of the EU receive an education?

The Council is in possession of the latest statistics provided by Eurostat. I have them here and I am willing to offer them to the honourable Member.

The data refer to the now distant school year 1997-1998, and show that in 11 countries which are candidates for membership of the European Union, the duration of compulsory schooling is nine or ten years, i.e. until the age of 15 or 16, depending on the case.

It is therefore possible to estimate that the percentage of young people in education at 16 is approximately 90% and at 18 approximately 60%.

Reliable statistics are not yet available for Cyprus and Malta, and Eurostat has not yet begun to collaborate with Turkey on educational statistics, but it is, understandably, not a simple matter where retrospective data is concerned.

If she requires further details, the Honourable Member can also consult a collection entitled "Key Data on Education in the European Union" , produced by Eurydice in collaboration with Eurostat and published by the Commission in French, German and English.

Let me do a little advertising by announcing that the 1999-2000 edition is now available.

Finally, on the subject of the education of all European citizens, you should remember that it is up to every Member State and every candidate country to ensure that this objective is achieved.

Once more, I should like to make the statistics, in the form in which I have them, available to Mrs Gutiérrez-Cortines.

In fact, I have consulted the statistics and I have consulted the information provided by the European Foundation for Education, and I am surprised by the rosy picture they paint of the situation in the countries of the East.

The news we ourselves have received all indicates that, while the system has fallen, an enormous crisis has been declared.

There are problems in very many places. In rural areas, many teachers are in practice not being paid, and I do not believe that, with the crisis of structural change suffered in the rest of the system, education has been kept in the wonderful state indicated in the statistics.

It therefore concerns me that there is no way of searching or taking soundings.

It is clear that, beyond subsidiarity, even beyond formal legitimacy, there is a moral legitimacy, which is based on our commitment to ensure that in the rural areas, in the new Europe, in the new countries which are going to join us, not a single child should remain without access to education or be deprived of the right to education which they deserve.

I was basing my answer on the facts available to me, i.e. the statistics.

I am not willing to make a qualitative judgement which might not be justified.

Let me repeat to the honourable Member that I have available a table which, in effect, shows that what I have said includes the disparities.

There is an average, of course, but there are also cases of greater or lesser advantage, which undoubtedly illustrate situations at grass roots level which are not at all equal.

I can give you this summary table if you wish, Mrs Gutiérrez-Cortines.

Mr President, I should like to take advantage of the question by Mrs Gutiérrez-Cortines to touch on an aspect of tertiary education in candidate countries which affects young people not from these countries but from other Member States of the European Union, such as Greece, who attend universities in candidate countries in large numbers.

My question to the President-in-Office is this: is there any thought, are there any prospects, are there any plans to extend the scope of the directive on the mutual recognition of tertiary education diplomas which applies to the Fifteen to the candidate countries?

Will this be done once the accession procedures have been completed or could it be done earlier in order to solve the present problems?

I understand that the President-in-Office may not be able to give me an answer right now but perhaps he could inform us if or when he has an answer.

At this stage I can give you an initial answer, to the effect that one of the objectives of the French Presidency, as you perhaps already know, is what we call the European Research Area.

It is something we are working on together with Jack Lang, the objective being to remove all obstacles to the mobility of students, teachers and researchers. This, of course, also involves harmonising the recognition of qualifications.

This is what we wish to do for the European Union.

It is not an easy task.

I think that, as far as we ourselves are concerned, it would be ambitious to set a target of five years.

For the rest, however, it is a complicated matter to attempt harmonisation with countries which are not yet members of the European Union.

It must be considered, however, that if this is made a requirement within the European Union, then this is the requirement within the body to which the candidate countries wish and are going to accede.

The question of whether it should be an approach like that used for the internal market or like that in use for the Schengen countries can be posed at a later date.

The fact is, however, that we still have a few years to consider the matter.

Subject: Negotiating mandate covering the agricultural section of the free trade agreement with the Maghreb The Commission has submitted its proposal for a negotiating mandate for the free trade agreement with Morocco, Tunisia and Israel to the Council' s 'Maghreb' Working Party.

The proposal covers all theoretically possible liberalisation measures, from increasing quotas to reducing customs duties, with various formulas for handling entry prices.

What are the scope and substance of the mandate?

Mr President, I am happy that the Council is also taking account in this negotiation of the sensitivity of certain regions and certain products, especially in the agricultural sector.

At the moment there are agricultural sectors in the Mediterranean and also in the outermost regions of the Community, which could be threatened as a result of the very generous proposed concessions by the Commission.

I would just like to repeat what I said and encourage the Council to persist in maintaining the greatest possible vigilance so that those sectors are not fundamentally damaged by overly-generous concessions.

I believe that this is exactly the philosophy which will be guiding our negotiations.

I can therefore only endorse what is more a compliment than a question.

Subject: EU-Turkey partnership In the process of adopting Regulation EC/764/2000 regarding the implementation of measures to intensify the EU-Turkey customs union, on a proposal from the Commission, Parliament's amendments concerning democratisation, respect for human rights and the rights of minorities in Turkey were effectively rejected.

This development has given rise to fears as to whether the 'partnership', which will reportedly be discussed in the Council at the end of the year, will abide by the political terms and conditions laid down by the Helsinki Summit.

Does the Council, therefore, intend to adopt the proposal for a Regulation (COM(2000)169) regarding the implementation of measures to promote economic and social development in Turkey, together with the partnership?

Can it give assurances that the Helsinki political criteria will be clearly defined within the partnership and that the mechanisms for monitoring Turkey's progress towards democratisation will operate as they do for the other states applying for membership?

Following the adoption, on 10 April this year, of the regulation regarding the implementation of measures intended to intensify the EU-Turkey customs union, on 13 June this year the Council adopted its common position on the proposal for a financial regulation on the implementation of actions to promote Turkey' s economic and social development.

This common position was sent to the European Parliament for second reading at the July 2000 part-session.

The Council awaits Parliament' s opinion with interest.

You know that, in December 1999, the Helsinki European Council recognised Turkey' s candidacy on an equal footing with the other candidates in terms of rights and obligations and decided to implement a pre-accession strategy for Turkey.

In Feira, the Heads of State and Government invited the Commission to submit proposals regarding the single financial framework for aid to Turkey and the accession partnership as soon as possible.

As you know, at the end of July, the Commission approved a proposal for a Council regulation on launching Turkey's accession partnership. It is on the basis of this regulation that the Commission will, at a later date, submit its proposal for partnership, but it will include the short- and medium-term priorities and objectives to prepare for accession in accordance with the model adopted for the other candidates.

The Commission will present its proposal on the implementation of a single financial framework at a later date.

It goes without saying that, in working out this partnership, the Council will pay particular attention to compliance with the political criteria for accession, particularly in the areas of human rights, rule of law and the legal system.

It will also ensure monitoring to verify that Turkish legislation is made compliant in this and in other areas, in order to ascertain that this is carried out in the same way as in the other candidate countries.

In this connection, it should be noted that preparations for the examination of Turkish legislation in all the areas of the acquis communautaire have been undertaken within the EU-Turkey Association Council.

In addition, the Feira European Council requested that the Commission submit a progress report to the Council on the work undertaken in this area.

I would like to thank the minister for his reply; however, I note that, whereas I specifically asked if the Helsinki criteria would be defined within the partnership, he evaded the question.

I should therefore like to repeat and specify and update my question.

The 15, and first and foremost the presidency, received a letter from Mr Gem a few days ago asking for the partnership between Turkey and the European Union which is now on the drawing board not to mention Helsinki Articles 4 and 9 relating to Greek-Turkish relations - in his words, border differences - and the question of progress on the Cyprus issue.

I should therefore like to repeat my question to the minister and again raise the issue which he evaded: will mention be made of the Helsinki criteria on the Cyprus question and Greek-Turkish relations or will Mr Gem' s proposals be accepted?

What is the Council' s reply to Mr Gem?

I do not have a specific answer on this issue.

What I do recall is the European Council in Helsinki, as I took part in this discussion there, having just a short time before been on a brief diplomatic mission to Turkey and Greece, and the Helsinki conclusions are the ones which are binding upon us and upon everyone.

That is the basis on which we conducted our negotiations.

Minister, nine months after Turkey was granted candidate status in Helsinki, and irrespective of my opposition to Turkey' s accession, do you believe that there has been any progress with democratisation, which was one of the criteria for accession, or have you concluded that what we forecast at the time has come true, i.e. the Helsinki resolution has encouraged the Turkish regime to continue its inhumane policy?

What we have concluded, as you too can see, is that there has been no progress whatsoever in democratising the constitution and the penal code, parties such as the Communist party have been banned, the prison situation is festering, political prisoners are being treated inhumanely, new F-cells have been created for harsh, inhumane solitary confinement, lawyers who defend political prisoners are being humiliated, Kurdish villages in Iraq have again been bombed, more beatings have been carried out and arrests have been made in Diyarbakir, Istanbul and elsewhere for the events of 1 September, which is the international day of peace.

Similarly, not only does Turkey continue to occupy 38% of Cyprus following its barbaric invasion in 1974, contrary to repeated UN resolutions which Turkey disregards in the most provocative manner, but Mr Ecevit states that the Cyprus question was resolved in 1974 and refuses to apply resolutions to pay...

(The President cut the speaker off)

I do not share the viewpoint which seems to underlie your question, namely this opposition to the candidacy of Turkey.

Turkey' s candidacy was in fact made possible by a welcome rapprochement between Greece and Turkey, which, I hope, will continue, particularly under the enlightened leadership of the two great diplomatic leaders, Mr Papandreou and Mr Gem, both of whom I consider my friends.

Having said that, let me repeat, Turkey' s candidacy has been accepted on equal terms with regard to both rights and duties.

In order for Turkey to become a member of the European Union, it must respect its values and therefore make the necessary efforts.

At the same time, we must greet its efforts positively.

Nine months may be a long time for a human being to develop before birth, but it is an extremely short time for a candidate country.

Subject: US farm subsidies Has the Council of Ministers considered the recent substantial increases in agricultural subsidies provided for its farmers by the US Government, which now represent more than EUR 16 000 per farmer.

Are these subsidies in violation of WTO agreements and does the Council propose to take any action on this?

The United States have not yet notified the WTO of the measures to which the Honourable Member refers, which could warrant investigation under Article 18 of the WTO Agreement on Agriculture.

Moreover, I should point out that agricultural subsidies are among the subjects dealt with in the WTO negotiations which commenced in June 2000.

The implementation of the reduction commitments agreed at the time of the 1994 Marrakech Accord is also scheduled for examination in the course of these negotiations, which are based on the principles outlined in Article 20 of the Agreement on Agriculture.

The relevant Council bodies receive regular progress reports from the Commission with regard to the negotiations and other activities undertaken within the WTO' s agricultural bodies, and if the Commission considers it useful, the matter of the compliance of the United States' subsidy policy with the commitments signed in the Uruguay Round and other measures to be taken in this respect will be referred to the Council.

I wish to raise the question with the President-in-Office of the change in American policy since we in the European Union changed the whole direction of the support we give to agriculture following the last round of GATT negotiations.

The United States Government has more than doubled the level of subsidies per farmer.

At the same time the European Union, in pursuit of its policies which were forced on us by the clearance group and the United States, has reduced its share of world markets in the dairy sector, in the cereal sector and in the meat sector.

I consider that since the American Government has doubled the level of aid that it extends directly to its farmers the European Union has in fact been wrong-footed and that the policy which has led us to a reduction in our share of world markets is in fact outdated and should be reviewed.

I shall not go into the details, but these are, in fact, the sort of considerations which justify our rejecting attacks which may have been made on the common agricultural policy and our own system, and that is also the reason why the European Union adopted an overall negotiating mandate designed to safeguard the social model and the farm model, not to mention the European cultural model, with regard to the WTO.

Rest assured that, as far as we are concerned, the mandate is still the basis for further negotiations.

It is true that extending qualified majority voting to European Union sectors of activity which currently require unanimous votes is indeed one of the major issues of the Intergovernmental Conference currently taking place.

This is a crucial issue of democracy.

In a democracy, decisions are agreed by the majority not by unanimity.

In this context, Article 151 is one of the provisions likely to be converted to the rule of qualified majority voting.

I am sure that Mrs Zorba would agree that it is still too early to ascertain what direction the proceedings of the Intergovernmental Conference are going to take, even though I would hazard that, quite possibly, consensus will be reached quickly regarding Article 151, for not everything can be a source of disagreement.

As regards the manner in which Article 151(4) of the Treaty has been applied, I shall simply respond by saying that respect for and furtherance of the diversity of the cultures of Europe remain at the heart of the entire Community structure.

Minister, everyone who knows that we urgently need a cultural policy in the European Union also knows - and I agree with you - that the Intergovernmental Conference represents a huge chance to change the unanimity rule.

The Intergovernmental Conference is not a procedure which is foreign or bears no relation to the Council and it obviously takes account of all points of view and all types of need.

It does not operate in a vacuum.

My question therefore is this: is the Council doing anything to change the unanimity rule and push for a change at the Intergovernmental Conference.

The more economic policies progress, the more we need to study their cultural impact and develop a structural cultural policy.

That was the meaning of my question; I do not think we should just stand around and wait because it may be too late by then and an agreement may not be so easy to reach.

The Council as such is not, by definition, a member of the Intergovernmental Conference.

I would urge you to trust the French Presidency of the Council and the European Council to further the cause of extending qualified majority voting.

Let me abandon my official role for a second to say that we would like to see qualified majority voting become the general rule and unanimous voting the exception, rather than the opposite, which is the case at present.

Subject: Cost of enlargement and Mediterranean agriculture In the light of forecasts and the most recent legislative proposals on Mediterranean agriculture, which concern products such as cotton, rice, fruit and vegetables, tomatoes, nuts and olive oil, among others, and will have adverse effects on employment and social development in these poor regions of Europe, and bearing in mind also the budgetary plans for EU enlargement, what will the Council do to ensure that Mediterranean agriculture does not end up bearing the brunt of the costs of the forthcoming enlargement?

I understand the concerns behind the honourable Member' s question.

I feel, however, the question itself contained observations of quite a different kind.

Regarding your preliminary remark: the ongoing reforms of the common market organisations for predominantly Mediterranean products are intended to enable these markets to adapt to competition outside Europe, which is often extremely fierce, and to stabilise the production of these items within the European Union.

The desired aim is, therefore, indeed to maintain employment in areas which generally offer few possibilities for conversion to the cultivation of other crops.

This is the spirit in which the Council will declare its opinion on the legislative proposals put forward by the Commission, when the time comes.

Moreover, the European Union' s Ministers for Agriculture, whose informal six-monthly meeting has been held from Saturday until today in Biarritz, have just stressed their determination, now more clearly than in the past, to focus in agricultural policies on boosting product quality and diversity.

You then went on to make reference to the impact of European Union enlargement on the budget. In my view, this is not directly related to the adoption of the CMO reforms I was talking about just now.

The impact of enlargement on the budget was the subject of intense discussion at the European Council in Berlin in March 1999 when the financial perspectives for 2000-2006 were drawn up.

For each year in this period, and for each heading, the financial perspectives give the expenditure totals as commitment appropriations, and the commitment appropriations laid down under the various headings of the financial perspectives are not interchangeable.

There is hence no question of enlargement-related expenditure being funded at the expense of agricultural expenditure under heading 1 of the financial perspectives.

I therefore do not see how future enlargement can be carried out at the expense of Mediterranean agriculture under the financial perspectives for 2000-2006.

When the time comes, most probably by 2005 at the latest, we will, of course, have to establish a new institutional agreement on the future financial perspectives, but I am sure you will agree that this date is still too far away for us to be expected, reasonably, to discuss the matter today.

Would you be prepared to make some sort of recommendation with a view to preventing the negative impact of enlargement on the Mediterranean?

In truth, through his actions and proposals, Mr Fischler, the Commissioner responsible for Agriculture, has made the anti-Mediterranean impact of enlargement a reality.

It is a fact that the whole of the Mediterranean area is frightened about this.

As I can see that the Council is standing firm in its political will, and in order to prevent - as you say - anything like this happening, not through good intentions but through facts, I would like to ask you whether the French Presidency, before it ends, would be willing to make, in the way it considers appropriate, some kind of recommendation which would dispel these concerns, that is to say, which would ensure that Mediterranean production would in no way pay the price for enlargement.

This is not a subject that I am prepared to make impromptu comments on.

I can assure you of just one thing, Mrs Izquierdo Rojo, and that is that, as far as we are concerned, the financial perspectives, which were the product of tough negotiating in Berlin, represent a framework which it would be extremely difficult for us to shift.

We do not wish to do so, and so, once again, we shall discuss the matter again in 2005.

Subject: Attack on Greek minority in the village of Dervitsani in Albania The Greek inhabitants of Dervitsani, a village in Albania, passed the night of 3 to 4 July 2000 in shelters after being attacked by anti-tank missiles from the neighbouring village of Lazarati.

The police who arrived on the scene failed to make any arrests.

This is not the first attack against the Greek minority.

The previous week the Council of Europe had recommended that the Albanian government take measures to protect the minorities living in Albania.

Given the fact that the Council of the European Union adopted the action plan for Albania on 13/14 June 2000, will the Council say what political measures it intends to take and what immediate measures it will promote in order to strengthen security in the region and ensure the physical safety and the fundamental rights of minorities in Albania?

The Council is aware of the armed attack upon the village of Dervitsani from the village of Lazarati which occurred during the night of 3 to 4 July 2000, during which automatic weapons and explosives were used.

According to the information available, the firing was carried out by a small group of people allegedly wishing to prevent the Albanian policy carrying out arrests in their village.

Even though the Greek minority was not the target of the attack in question, the attack nonetheless contributed to creating a climate of insecurity in the region.

The European Union supports the efforts of the Albanian Government to restructure and modernise its police forces in order to increase the security of Albanian citizens and of the region.

The Multinational Advisory Police Element in Albania, formed under the authority of the WEU Council and deployed in Albania since 1997, has widened and developed the scope of its mission following the adoption, in March 1998, of a joint action on the European Union' s contribution to re-establishing a viable police force in Albania.

Following the adoption of the action programme for Albania and the neighbouring region, the Council is currently examining the proposed measures in order to identify those which can be implemented speedily.

The action programme is basically devoted to matters relating to problems of migration and asylum.

The proposed measures do, however, include projects in the field of human rights and the protection of minorities.

The European Union is, moreover, already active in these fields.

Since Albania is eligible for an association and stabilisation agreement, its performance in terms of respect for democratic principles and human and minority rights and in terms of public order and the rule of law, are closely monitored by the European Union, I can assure you.

I should like to thank the Council representative for his reply.

However, the purpose of my question was to draw attention once again to the huge problems in the Balkans, problems caused by economic and social deprivation and, more importantly, the fact that there is no democratic infrastructure.

The attacks on the Greek minority were just one in a series of incidents which occur in Albania on a daily basis.

My question therefore, minister, is how far are you prepared to give real support to Albania so that the rule of law can operate?

We saw no such support in the action programme decided for Albania.

You place greater emphasis in the action programme on how to stop immigration and how to send refugees back to Albania, which is clearly not a safe country, than on how we can give his country the means to develop.

We seem to have promised the Balkans a great deal but are unwilling to put our promises into practice.

I should like answers to these questions, minister.

I share your view, Mrs Karamanou, that the incidents mentioned appear, at first sight, to indicate a general problem of security and public order in Albania rather than a campaign of deliberate attacks on the Greek minority.

This is a general problem which must be dealt with as such.

The action plan for Albania to which you refer is a High Level Working Group on Asylum and Migration action plan for Albania and the neighbouring region, adopted by the General Affairs Council on 13 and 14 June this year, intended, in effect, to define and coordinate European Union resources with a view to responding to the problems of asylum and migration in Albania and the neighbouring countries and, as such, it is not intended to promote the rights of any particular minority.

Nonetheless, the suggested actions do include projects or programmes seeking to step up democracy and respect for human rights and minority rights in general.

The Council working groups are currently proceeding to examine the various measures proposed in order to identify which of them could be implemented in the near future.

An interim report is expected for the European Council in Nice in December.

Subject: Reduction of TACIS aid to Russia The European Union has punished Russia for its military action in Chechnya by reducing aid paid under the TACIS programme.

At the Feira European Council it was decided to relax sanctions.

Under what conditions does the Council consider that the TACIS funds should be granted to Russia for this year and next year?

In the wake of the Feira European Council, the General Affairs Council on 10 July this year requested that the Commission resume preparations for an indicative TACIS programme in favour of Russian, to cover the years 2000-2003, and to draw up a proposal for a TACIS action programme targeted at the year 2000.

The relevant management committee is scheduled to examine these proposals on 17 October this year.

The priority objective of this programme will be to support the rule of law in Russia, complying with the democratic requirements of a modern democracy and benefiting Russian society as a whole.

Special attention is to be paid to supporting institutional and economic reforms, schemes undertaken for the democratisation and reinforcement of civil society and the protection and development of independent media.

Moreover, the Council has agreed to adopt further decisions on guiding cooperation with Russia and the use of the available instruments, in the light of the development of the situation in Russia.

I would thank the President of the Council for that answer.

I should like to ask a follow-up question: What conditions are being laid down for in fact providing this aid?

Does the Council believe that the present situation in Chechnya is such that it is reasonable to provide this aid to Russia?

In 2000, only EUR 34 million have been committed to date, following the reorientation of the Helsinki programme.

A second tranche will be allocated to aid in support of the reform process initiated by the Russian authorities recently in order to establish a genuine rule of law, which will bring the TACIS appropriations allocated to Russia in 2000 to EUR 92 million at the most.

The only answer I can give you regarding the budget released in 2001 is that it will depend on the decisions the Council is induced to make at a later stage in the light of development of the situation in Russia.

This situation will be assessed in relation to the criteria for the progress to be achieved in terms of institutional reforms, democratisation, the strengthening of civil society and human rights protection throughout the territory of Russia.

Examination of the situation in Chechnya will thus clearly be part of the assessment process.

Subject: Incidents at the Matosinhos market During the night of 22 June 2000, various groups - probably coastal fishermen from Poboa de Varsím and Matosinhos according to various sources - used blunt instruments to break open the doors of four Spanish lorries containing sardines in front of the premises of the company Docapesa S.A. at Matosinhos market. They then removed the fish from the lorries and sprayed it with diesel oil or similar products in order to damage it permanently, while uttering threats.

Apart from the damage caused to the four companies concerned - one of them calculated that the damage to the fish amounted to nine million pesetas and the damage to the vehicles to 300 000 pesetas - incidents of this kind should not be allowed to happen (a similar incident involving mackerel occurred in 1998).

What steps will the Council take to prevent any recurrence of such incidents, which are against the law but in particular are contrary to the spirit and principles underlying the European Union?

Does it plan to make any arrangements to compensate for the unfair and deliberate damage caused?

Mr President, the Council deeply regrets the incidents which occurred at the Matosinhos market during the night of 22 June 2000 and the losses incurred by the victims of these acts of violence.

It is important to stress, however, in this connection, that it is up to the individual Member States to ensure compliance with the regulations of the common fisheries policy and the free movement of goods, and to take appropriate measures within their national legislative systems. The offences in question should be punished in accordance with the terms of the criminal and civil law of the Member State concerned.

To this end, let me remind you that on 7 December 1998 the Council adopted Regulation (EC) No 2679/98 on the functioning of the internal market in relation to the free movement of goods among the Member States, establishing procedures for the Commission to take action to require Member States, who alone are responsible for maintaining public order, to quickly remedy serious barriers to the free movement of goods caused by the actions of private individuals.

Mr President, first of all I would like to say that relations between Galicia and the North of Portugal have always been special, because the Miño river has never marked a boundary, it has not separated, but rather united.

However, unfortunate events such as those which took place on 22 June, caused by a small number of people, must not become the general rule.

It is therefore important to adopt measures which will prevent, in all events, their repetition and that the sanction adopted by the competent parties shall serve as an example.

Therefore, those of us from the other side of the river - and we are all Europeans - wanted to know how this issue is being dealt with and whether exemplary decisions have been taken so that these events will not be repeated in the future.

I can only repeat my previous answer, namely that the maintenance of public order and any application of penal sanctions are a matter, respectively, for the jurisdiction of the police forces and the legal authorities of the Member State concerned.

Let me quote the relevant part of the Regulation, which stipulates that, "Where the Commission considers that an obstacle is occurring in a Member State, it shall notify the Member State concerned of the reasons that have led the Commission to such a conclusion and shall request the Member State to take all necessary and proportionate measures to remove the said obstacle."

I therefore feel - and I am not saying that in order to duck the question, as we say - that the honourable Member would do better to address the question to the Commission, which does have the necessary means to provide a reliable and up-to-date response.

Mr President, Mr Moscovici, very serious attacks have also taken place in Finland on one certain means of livelihood, namely fur farming.

The principle of the freedom to pursue a trade is firmly upheld in the European Union.

Now, however, one Member State, Great Britain, has just banned fur farming in its territory.

Do you not think this might have harmful repercussions for the internal market in fur goods?

I would ask you to reply now, as President-in-Office of the Council, and not so much as a representative of the French Government. The French Government has already expressed its own views on the matter in the Agricultural Council.

I am answering on behalf of the Council and not on behalf of the French Government.

The situation you mention may share some of the features of the previous situation, but it is not the result of the same regulation, which is to do with fisheries issues.

I consequently feel entitled to ask you, please, to submit your question in the usual manner, i.e. in writing, and the Council will be pleased to respond.

I am not going to respond ad hoc to a question on such a difficult subject.

In support of the President-in-Office of the Council, I must point out that the Rules of Procedure for this Question Time state that supplementary questions must be closely related.

Subject: Public Council meetings One of the three goals of the French Presidency is to bring Europe closer to its citizens.

The logical consequence of this aim should, therefore, be to make Council proceedings more open.

How many fully public Council meetings will be held during the French Presidency from 1 July to 31 December 2000?

The French Presidency attaches special importance to ensuring that Council proceedings are accessible to the European citizens and that its legislative decisions are made in a transparent manner.

The public debates are, moreover, an established practice.

They lead to the European Union' s long-term evolution towards greater openness towards civil society.

Moreover, Rule 8 of the Council's Rules of Procedure provides for the organisation of public debates.

One of the top priorities of the French Presidency was, therefore, to draw up a list of public debates, covering a wide range of subjects, which was adopted by the Permanent Representatives Committee (COREPER) on 5 July 2000.

Two debates were held in July, a debate on the presentation of the presidency' s programme at the General Affairs Council on 10 July 2000, and a second debate on the presidency programme at the ECOFIN Council on 17 July.

I must specify that six further public debates are scheduled to take place before the end of the French Presidency: a debate on general interest services on 28 September 2000 at the Internal Market, Consumers and Tourism Council - I shall have the honour of chairing this council meeting; a debate on maritime safety on 2 October 2000 at the Transport Council in Luxembourg; a debate on noise protection on 10 October 2000 as part of the Environment Council; and a debate on information, consultation of workers regarding employment on 17 October 2000, as part of the Employment and Social Policy Council, again in Luxembourg.

On 9 November 2000, there will be a public debate on young people and Europe as part of the Education and Youth Council.

Finally, on 20 November 2000, there will be a debate on food safety as part of the Agriculture Council.

I should like to draw the attention of the Members of the European Parliament to the fact that a substantial effort has already been devoted towards informing the public about the Council debates organised.

Over 3000 detailed reports of the public debates have been delivered by post.

Furthermore, any interested parties will easily be able to access the Internet networks which deal with this subject.

In addition, television channels have the opportunity to broadcast these debates, in total or in part, via the 'Europe by Satellite' channel.

Finally, the French Presidency strives to make as much information as possible on all Council proceedings available to the public on its Internet website, as well as subject indexes for the main topics under discussion.

I want to thank the Council for its detailed answer.

In an ordinary democracy it is, of course, the rule that all decisions concerning new laws are made publicly in a parliament and that the debates too are held in public.

The curious situation in the Council of Ministers is that the public only has access to certain debates.

There is therefore an obvious risk of meetings being closed in cases where more controversial subjects are being dealt with.

I therefore wonder whether the French Presidency, given its high level of ambition, will hold any entire meetings in public, that is to say ministerial meetings which, from beginning to end, with all the debates and all the decision-making, take place in public, without the doors being closed for any part of them.

I think I have shown that the French Presidency is determined to open debates up to the public as much as possible, and I believe that our programme is perfectly sound.

I should just like to remind the honourable Member of the different roles of the various institutions of the European Union.

It is true that the Council is co-legislator alongside the European Parliament, which does not fit into the pattern of the clear separation between executive and legislative power in the form that it may exist in a parliamentary democracy in the context of a State.

Let us be aware, at the same time, however, that the European Council is not just a legislative body but also an executive body, a function which, this time, is shared with the Commission, and that it undertakes a whole range of debates which have nothing to do with the legislative process.

Consequently, in the same way that these things are managed within a government, for that is what we are talking about here, the intergovernmental aspect, debates often take place in camera.

I am fortunate enough to be a member of the cabinet in the government of my country.

The French Council of Ministers in the Elysée Palace is not open to the press, nor is it filmed.

I consider this to be reasonable, as it is a context in which decisions must be taken which are then passed on to the citizens quite openly.

So there you are. It is because of this concept of the separation of powers that debates are designated as either open or closed.

I think that it is, quite frankly, to the Council' s credit that they have opened up some of these debates, running counter to what I was saying earlier about the operation of a government.

This is the situation we have, if we take the hybrid nature of the Council into due account.

Thank you very much, Mr Moscovici, for showing such dedication to Parliament this afternoon.

Since the time allotted to Questions to the Council has elapsed, Question Nos 15 to 40 will be replied to in writing.

That concludes Question to the Council.

(The sitting was suspended at 7.15 p.m. and resumed at 9.00 p.m.).

Economic and social development of Turkey

The next item is the recommendation for second reading by Mr Morillon (A5-0206/2000) on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy, on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to the adoption of a European Parliament and Council regulation regarding the implementation of the measures to promote economic and social development in Turkey [7492/1/2000 REV - C5-0325/2000 - 1998/0300(COD)].

Mr President, the Council common position whose aim you have just stated has been referred back to Parliament for a second reading, not because of its content, but because of its form.

This could seem ridiculous, but it is not at all.

With regard to content, Parliament has agreed to commit EUR 135 million over the next five years to measures aiming to compensate Turkey for the sacrifices it has agreed to make in order to enter into a customs union with the European Union, and on this point there is no divergence with the Council.

With regard to form, we wanted to specify a number of areas in which the corresponding measures should be agreed as a priority, and the Council did not want to accept three of our proposals regarding the wording of a precautionary principle on the development of nuclear energy, in particular in earthquake zones.

The protection and recognition of the cultural identity of minorities and support for measures seeking to abolish capital punishment and, finally, perhaps most importantly, the development of any form of cooperation seeking to resolve the Kurdish problem.

I say that these matters of form are not trivial in a debate that precedes the one which is due to take place on accession in the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy in October, and following which, in November, I shall have to present the report on the state of progress of the work and any changes in attitudes within the European Union and Turkey.

Since the way to accession was reopened in Helsinki, nobody has been able to say where this newly-cleared path will lead, nor how long it will take to reach the end.

I think I can say that there is a broad consensus for granting Turkey a privileged position for geographical, historical, economic and political reasons, but I would also say that this privileged position can and must be envisaged within the European Union itself just as much as in close cooperation with the Union.

I say that this choice belongs, by democratic right, to the citizens of the European Union whom we represent here, and to the Turkish citizens themselves.

I understand that this was probably your opinion, Commissioner Verheugen, and I think I can guarantee you the support of a large majority of my colleagues in this area.

The decision on Turkey' s accession is too important for the future of the European Union and Turkey for it to be made in veiled silence, or even in secrecy, behind closed doors.

Long debates will be necessary, both here and in national parliaments, which is why everyone agrees that the road will be long and hard.

As rapporteur on enlargement, I was convinced of this, not only by the richness and passion of the debates that have already taken place in Parliament, but also by observing the reactions in Turkey itself, both in government circles and in civil society.

I shall come back to these contrasting reactions in detail when I present my report.

Today, I shall simply come to the main conclusion.

The people of Turkey consider that entry into the European Union will require not only a painless revision of their legal arsenal and the partial loss of their sovereignty, to which they remain attached, but also a radical change in their habits and mentality, for which they do not seem prepared.

This is why Parliament has proposed the creation of a Euro-Turkish forum, bringing together qualified representatives of the Turkish community and those Members of the European Parliament that have been given the task, for in-depth discussions.

I shall repeat this proposal in my report and I think I can say that the Turkish Government is not hostile to this, but quite the opposite, it would seem.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, at the beginning of this long road, aware of the realities, I think the time has come to leave hypocrisy behind and not to continue to ignore the most important obstacles, including the Kurdish problem.

It would not occur to the French today to deny that a Corsican problem exists, even if the French citizens and their government are divided on the solutions.

There is a Kurdish problem in Turkey.

The Council must not forbid the European Parliament to propose its contribution to the solution.

If the text of this regulation is referred back for a second reading, it is not purely for a matter of form, but because Parliament refuses to accept this kind of political sleight of hand.

Mr President, I wholeheartedly concur with Mr Morillon' s suggestion that we abandon the hypocrisy with which we sometimes deal with certain real problems for reasons of political or other expediency.

There can, in my opinion, be no doubt that the issues covered in the three amendments rejected by the Council are real issues and that the Council position, or the sub-text at least, indicates a hypocritical disposition to sweep them to one side or underestimate their importance.

And yet, these three amendments, which reflect the firm views of the European Parliament, are all of fundamental importance and the rapporteur is right to insist that they be adopted: they contain a safeguard against the Turkish authorities' constructing nuclear power stations in earthquake zones, an express reference to the death penalty and a clear indication of Turkey' s obligation to recognise and protect the cultural identity of minorities, within the wider context of its obligation to respect the rule of law and human rights, and they highlight the undisputed Kurdish problem and the need to resolve it - but not, of course, by dropping Turkish bombs on civilians, as in the most recent bombings in the Kendakor region on 18 August.

I should like to hope that Parliament' s insistence on certain points being adopted will also help the Turkish side to understand, even if - as Mr Morillon rightly comments - it appears to be somewhat unwilling to understand, that the road towards Europe is not a one-way street of determination and patient understanding on the part of the European Union in the face of Turkey' s so-called special circumstances; it requires the same measure of determination on the part of the Turkish authorities and Turkish society to adjust to the rules of law and ethics which govern the European Union and which apply indiscriminately to all candidate countries; rules which, unfortunately, continue to be violated by Turkey, not only when it comes to the Kurdish problem and its democratic shortcomings, but also in numerous other cases, such as the Cyprus question and Greek-Turkish relations.

A real sea change in Turkey' s behaviour and attitude would go some way towards encouraging all those who, in a spirit of perhaps excessive optimism, opted to speed up Turkey' s advance towards Europe and would help to shorten the long and difficult road - to quote Mr Morillon once again - of Turkey' s admission to the European family.

Mr President, Commissioner, I should like first of all to thank Mr Morillon very sincerely for the good work he has done and for his persistence in pushing through the demands and the most important amendments.

I am able to support him on behalf of my group, and I believe it must be possible to reach an agreement with the Council.

We are keen to use this instrument to promote economic and social development in Turkey.

Naturally, we hope that, parallel to this - and perhaps even as a result of it - political development in Turkey towards democracy and respect for human rights, in particular respect for its own Kurdish population, will also be strengthened, and the death penalty abolished.

However - and I have to say this again and again in this Chamber, and I also say it in Turkey- we are very dissatisfied with the pace of political development.

We could of course say that it is not our problem, and the fact that it is not prepared to make progress in this area more obvious and is not creating the political institutions for doing so is indeed Turkey' s own biggest problem.

Not so long ago, Turkey elected a new State President - a judge, and a highly respected one at that, and in fact with the support of the government.

And what does the government do as one of its first acts?

Over the summer, it sends its new State President a kind of emergency decree with a view to restricting some of the rights of people in government service.

Then it wonders why, as a former high court judge, the President rejects the decrees he has been sent and says that the matter in question is one which Parliament must deal with, as is in fact fully to be expected in a democracy.

Now, I have as little sympathy for Islamic militants as many others in this House, especially when they adopt the fundamentalist approach much in evidence in these regions and also manifested today in the debate between the Presidents of the Israeli and Palestinian Parliaments.

The issue in question is one which has to be settled on a legal basis.

It is just not on, using an emergency decree suddenly to remove all Islamic fundamentalists from office, as the government wants to do.

Is there really a problem here?

Then it is one for Parliament to deal with.

The Kurdish problem has already been mentioned.

In that area too, scarcely any progress has been made.

Again and again, we see first positive, then negative signs.

Those who know that this is a crucial problem lack the courage to do anything about it.

I have to say that, in France too, the necessary courage is called for to tackle the problem after so many years.

I should like to see just a little of this courage in Turkey with a view to finding a real solution to the Kurdish problem too.

Of course, there are also other problems involving minorities.

How many times have we heard the conviction voiced that it must be abolished, and how long will it be before the relevant steps are taken?

The fact that Turkey is not taking these steps is something which cannot but disappoint those in this House - and I count myself among them - who would dearly like to see Turkey become a member of the European Union.

I nonetheless believe that, if we persist, we shall achieve what we have pledged.

Our pledges can, and will be, fulfilled, and precisely on the issue of promoting economic and social development.

We are now waiting with bated breath to see whether Turkey will push ahead with political development on its own initiative.

Mr President, our relations with Turkey should promote democracy, stability and consistency.

The path to those goals is partly by way of social and economic development, and the way to social and economic development is partly by means of foreign investment.

The Union' s finance package will be an incentive to further investment in Turkey and, in the process, will also promote and consolidate democracy and human rights.

We have seen this strategy succeed in former dictatorships in Southern Europe, we shall see it work in Eastern and Central Europe, and it ought also to work in Turkey.

Parliament should support this strategy, and we should, at the same time, insist that, before there can be any question at all about membership negotiations, the Copenhagen criteria should be met as these relate to democracy and human rights.

Finally, I would emphasise the need to rebuild the thousands of Kurdish villages razed to the ground.

This ought to be an express priority in our policy on Turkey, and we must insist that the Turkish Government too make it a high priority. In the same way, we must insist that the rights of the Kurdish minority are respected, just as the rights of minorities are respected in the countries of the Union and in the other candidate States.

Mr President, on behalf of my group, I should like to thank the rapporteur for his recommendation for second reading.

He is very familiar with the situation in Turkey.

He is aware of the problems of this country and of the people who live there.

It is no secret that Turkey cannot be democratic in our sense of the word until such time as the economic and social problems there have been solved.

It is also widely appreciated that Turkey will not be able to get on top of these problems alone and without our aid.

The demands contained in the rapporteur' s amendments - he talks of the protection of minorities, rightly demands the abolition of the death penalty and calls for a solution to the Kurdish problem - are in no way conditions designed to stand in the way of aid.

Instead, they are valuable proposals for the necessary democratic reforms in Turkey.

At the very end of the day, Turkey will benefit from these reforms being put into practice.

To that extent, we support the rapporteur' s recommendation and thank him again for the work he has done.

Mr President, just nine months - or perhaps I should say already nine months - have passed since the Helsinki resolution granting Turkey candidate status.

At the time, we predicted that this resolution would not help, as many maintained, to bring about democratisation and improved living conditions for the Turkish people and that it would only encourage the regime to exercise ever greater oppression.

Nine months later, we are sorry to say that we were right because, to tell the truth, we would have preferred to have been proven wrong.

Now the Council has proposed releasing EUR 135 million for the economic and social development of Turkey.

We fear that a substantial proportion of this sum will be used, despite any controls carried out, to strengthen the machinery of oppression.

Allow me to give you some facts and figures.

As we all know, despite promises made from time to time, the constitution is still seriously undemocratic, the death penalty remains, Turkish jails currently house over 15,000 political prisoners in inhumane conditions, which are now being modernised with the introduction of solitary confinement, provoking outrage in Turkey, including in the Law Society of Istanbul, which has issued a special paper condemning these measures.

There were arrests recently during events for world peace day on 1 September, Cyprus continues to be occupied and, as we are preparing to release funds, Turkish Prime Minister Ecevit has said that the Cyprus question was resolved in 1974, i.e. with the barbaric invasion and continuing occupation, demonstrating his disdain for UN resolutions.

And, I would add, Mr Gem says the same about Greek-Turkish relations.

Some people would do well not to boast and brag because these Greek-Turkish relations constantly result in the Greek Government' s backing down and that in itself is a source of further tension.

So do you want to use this money as bait so that you can penetrate the Turkish economy even further, so that you can plunder the Turkish people' s wealth even more?

We do not intend to say give it or withhold it, we simply want to point out the conditions under which and the reason why this money is being given.

Mr President, I fully support Mr Morillon' s excellent work, as presented by him and supplemented by Mr Swoboda.

I do not therefore intend to repeat arguments which I accept overall.

However, I should like to make a few comments.

The strange nature of relations between the European Union and Turkey, which we have experienced for many years, from the beginning and throughout, is due to the political problem which we call Turkey.

Thus, 9-10 months ago, Helsinki set a procedure in motion, essentially with an eye to resolving the problem which we call Turkey.

In this sense, and because Commissioner Verheugen, the Commissioner responsible for enlargement, is here with us, and given that there is a whole atmosphere surrounding the text which will shape the partnership between the European Union and Turkey, a text which we shall receive at a later date, I am certain that he will advocate incorporating everything included in the Helsinki resolutions on human rights, on Cyprus, on the Aegean and on crises in the text of the Treaty rather than in the preamble.

Take a look at Turkey. It is a law unto itself.

It radiates crisis on every side.

Those of us who live in the region are sick and tired of crises.

It is because of its political system that Turkey radiates these crises.

We recently heard statements by Turkish-Cypriots in Cyprus, who have at last come forward and condemned Turkey as an occupying force.

Only yesterday on the BBC I heard the head of a party of Turkish-Cypriots - Turkish-Cypriots, not settlers - half of whom have remained in Cyprus, appealing to the Turks to let them join the European Union. Turkey wanted to join and he felt that it should let them join earlier.

In this sense, given that these relations gamble with the political face of Europe and with Europe' s prospects and principles, I am certain that Commissioner Verheugen will want to assure us that the Commission, as the guardian of these principles, intends to base the integration process for Turkey firmly on these principles.

And I think that the main issue is precisely this process and this road.

Because I do not think, Mr Verheugen, that we can all agree to vote for parliaments, to vote for governments, on the one hand, and yet still have military rule dictating political terms on behalf of us all on the other.

From this viewpoint, the Morillon proposal is an encouraging prospect.

We, as Greeks, want Turkey in the European Union, we want a democratic Turkey, because a democratic Turkey will be the beginning of the end of crises in the region as a whole, crises which we have lived with for many, many years and from which none of us has profited.

Mr President, first of all, I should like to thank the rapporteur, Mr Morillon, most sincerely for his most thorough report.

I am glad that we have been able to achieve far-reaching agreement.

I am also pleased that Parliament has responded very quickly to the common position unanimously adopted in the Council. Above all, I am glad that Parliament is able to accept far and away the greater part of this position, as proposed by the Commission.

The report now proposes adding three points to the draft regulation.

I am able to tell you that the Commission shares Parliament' s view on these points.

The Commission will therefore examine the relevant amendments proposed by the European Parliament, inform the Council as soon as possible of its position and ask it to conclude the legislative procedure.

A special importance attaches to this draft regulation for it constitutes the last of the three pillars of financial aid for Turkey, the others being the measures in favour of Turkey in the framework of the MEDA programme and the regulation issued by the Council in April.

All these financial resources are designed to support implementation of the pre-accession strategy.

The purpose of the strategy is to equip Turkey for entering into negotiations.

That will only come about when basic political, economic and social reforms have been implemented.

Improvements in relations between the Union and Turkey following the European Council, meeting in Helsinki, have enabled us to speak openly and frankly with each other on all issues.

The strengthened political dialogue at all levels characteristic of the climate following Helsinki has made a decisive contribution to this state of affairs.

I also have to say that open and frank discussions which sometimes address painful themes and touch upon sensitive issues are indispensable if we want to travel all the way down the path which lies before us.

I should like to take the opportunity to re-emphasise that we await a firm commitment on the part of Turkey to continuing with the process of reform that has been begun.

A few weeks ago, Turkey signed both UN conventions on civil and political rights and on economic and social rights.

I believe that this is of a piece with the decision we made last year and may be regarded as a successful outcome.

I welcome Turkey' s signature of these documents as an important step in the right direction. However, I should also like to emphasise that it is now a question of both conventions quickly being ratified by the Turkish Parliament and of the commitments contained in these also being put into practice.

On my last visit to Turkey in July, I was informed in detail of an inter-ministerial commission' s report, then before the government, on the reforms needed if the Copenhagen criteria are to be fulfilled.

The report contains a host of proposed reforms for improving the human rights situation.

However, it is now a question of the Turkish Government' s putting the proposed reforms into effect within the framework of a consistent legislative programme.

I also expressly insisted upon this in the course of the discussions in Turkey.

As you know, the European Council, meeting in Helsinki, has confirmed that it is essential for Turkey firstly to comply with the political accession criteria if its relations with the European Union are to become any closer.

This will also be the theme in preparing the Accession Partnership which the Commission is to submit in the autumn of this year on the instructions of the Council.

The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon.

Community audiovisual policy in the digital age

The next item is the report (A5-0209/2000) by Mr Veltroni, on behalf of the Committee on Culture, Youth, Education, the Media and Sport, on the Communication from the Commission to the Council, the European Parliament, the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions - Principles and guidelines for the Community's audiovisual policy in the digital age [COM(1999)657 - C5-0144/2000 - 2000/2087(COS)]

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the document on the Community's audiovisual policy in the digital age, presented by the Commission, is important because this technological innovation has, to a certain extent, a direct bearing on our cultural future and therefore on sensitive issues such as pluralism and the quality of democracy in our continent.

The digital age and convergence of media will change everything: our way of gaining knowledge, communicating, working, producing and understanding.

There are risks - as there always are when innovation bursts forth - but the transition to digital technology will bring with it huge opportunities for pluralism and massive production possibilities for the system.

It is no coincidence that the British Prime Minister, Mr Tony Blair, proposed a few days ago to put digital television frequencies up for auction in order to speed up the process, revolutionising the prospects of the conventional management of the electromagnetic spectrum.

And it is also no coincidence that Mr Blair also proposed free distribution of set top boxes, perceiving that this would benefit both the economy and the information and cultural pluralism of his country.

Changes in technology bring changing perspectives and therefore changes in legal approaches as well.

The Community therefore has to keep up with progress and endeavour to ensure that digital technology fulfils its potential as an opportunity for culture, pluralism, cultural and linguistic diversity and for the European economy and technical innovation and research in Europe.

We consider that the instruments which have already been defined in the Commission's text will make it possible to achieve these goals.

However, the debate generated in Parliament, which has looked at different points of view and has pulled out all the stops, as did the Committee on Culture, Youth, Education, the Media and Sport, in order to find a common point of agreement with the result that the report was adopted unanimously, proposes a limited number of nevertheless important supplements.

Firstly: the need for a rapid revision of the legal instruments governing the sector, in particular the "Television without Frontiers" Directive which has been in need of revision for a long time.

Secondly: in order to avert the risk of dependency of our cultural industry in the event of expansion, of growth of the number of channels, we would like to introduce the possibility of production investment in the audiovisual sector.

It is vital for the media to be financed but I feel that, following the example of certain countries, we should also provide for the television broadcasting companies themselves to set aside funds, dedicating a proportion of their revenue to the production of European programmes. I consider that this is a useful, important action for it both supports the industry and acts as an incentive for it.

Thirdly, monitoring the concentration of media ownership, in the future maybe on the basis of specific regulations at European level safeguarding pluralism, taking up once again the idea of a media directive and a body which would monitor at European level the application of the rules in this sensitive sector; in addition, a policy which, in the age of convergence, would also safeguard a universal service with regard to access to content, which is taken to mean non-discrimination and affordable access to services.

As the importance of the role of the public broadcasting service in the digital system is recognised, the service will, of course, have to be reviewed and revamped in the light of changes in technology, but it will also have to perform the function of guaranteeing the quality of services to a large public, which will continue for a long time to use its common or garden television sets and wireless reception on a daily basis; therefore, strategic recognition of the role of land-based digital television, whose growth can only be considered to be an opportunity here as well.

Finally, the report proposes a supplement to ensure that particular attention is paid to safeguarding cultural diversity, international negotiations and the need to consolidate the European audiovisual industry to make it competitive on the global market.

This is therefore the spirit of the report and its attempt to operate within the bounds proposed by the Commission's report.

The TDI Group has tabled amendments characterised by a different vision, a different legitimate cultural and political inspiration.

My opinion is that, if these amendments were to be adopted, the report would then be devoid of those characteristics which prompted agreement in the Committee, the very characteristics which are our basis for considering that the report could be a positive supplement to the Commission's report.

Mr President, I am speaking on behalf of Mr Tajani, as a member of the same delegation and the same committee, the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I congratulate the Commission on the complicated content of its initiative, but we must not let go of the importance of regulating the audiovisual policy in the age of high technology in which we live and which will become more and more important for our lives in the near future.

Due to the complexity of the material and the short time available to me, I will restrict myself to a few recapitulatory statements which I consider essential and which I hope the Commission will take into due consideration.

The free movement of information and freedom of expression serve now to safeguard rights and freedoms and will always do so.

The citizens' confidence in the audiovisual service must be won through compliance with the principles of the protection of human dignity and of minors.

The area in question, which is constantly developing, is in need of detailed rules, but they must not be too rigid or they will rapidly become obsolete.

Technology and content cannot be governed by the same legislation: technology must be neutral and content must be regulated.

The system of funding must comply with the principles of proportionality and transparency and must not influence the market or competition.

Where a commercial activity is associated with a public service, the keeping of separate accounts will make the compensation for the service rendered transparent, making it possible to prevent any disguised State aid and to allow private firms to provide the public service as well.

No national restriction must be placed on transposition, in order to achieve genuine European harmonisation, both now and in the event of future growth.

Including self-regulation codes in the legislative framework will ensure transparency, responsibility and the equal status of public and commercial operators.

Clearly, in the context of new technologies, a situation where State subsidies to public service broadcasters are used for commercial ends must be avoided, as this would distort the principle of competitiveness with private companies instead of ensuring compliance with specific content obligations.

Lastly, we must guarantee multiplicity and pluralism of bids and provide all operators with the possibility of playing an innovative and leading role, thus liberalising access to public financing.

Mr President, first of all, I should like to thank Mr Veltroni.

As rapporteur, he has done some very good work, including work of a very cooperative nature, and I should like to thank him very much for that.

However, thanks are similarly due to the Commission which has provided an outstanding basis for the discussions between the Committee and Parliament.

The audiovisual sector basically faces the task of having to develop in two main fields.

Firstly, it is a means of generating future jobs.

Secondly, however, it is also of great significance for securing cultural diversity and freedom of speech in Europe.

It is therefore important always to keep both perspectives in view.

I should like briefly to illustrate this by way of three examples.

Firstly, it is necessary to regulate content and methods of transmission differently and independently of each other.

We need a form of technology which can respond very quickly and very flexibly to the technological revolution.

I would just mention the buzz word 'Internet' at this point.

However, we not only wish to guarantee people universal access to all networks but also need to ensure that young people are protected and human dignity assured by means of legal regulations which, independently of the method of transmission, safeguard these values that are indispensable to us all.

Secondly, consider the level at which decisions are made.

Where the issue of technology is concerned, we need increasing cooperation among the Member States at European level.

When it comes to issues of content, however, we want to know that, in the first place, the Member States are willing and able to safeguard cultural pluralism and diversity of opinion.

We have both commercial and public service broadcasting which both require clear statutory frameworks in order to be able to develop in competition.

We therefore say a clear yes to the protocol of the Treaty of Amsterdam on public service broadcasting and to the Member States' responsibility for commissioning and for securing finance.

We are also, however, saying just as clear a yes to the task of developing and promoting commercial television companies in Europe so that they can compete effectively worldwide.

That is the crucial precondition for safeguarding European cultural content, with the conditions of future technology in mind.

Thank you very much to Mr Veltroni for giving us such a valuable report.

It is a welcome clarification on where Parliament stands on digital and audiovisual sector issues for the forthcoming revision of TV without frontiers.

However, I want to confine my remarks this evening to public service broadcasting in the digital age because there are some very important public access issues that we need to address when defining the principles from the crossover in our current media to the development of digital broadcasting.

Defining the values and principles underlying public broadcasting gives us some difficulties anyway, as Member States, corporations, and broadcasters all have very different ideas of what public broadcasting constitutes.

However, this should not prevent us from defining it in the digital age, because these principles are very important to us all, and, as infrastructure has developed, so content is going to develop as well.

We are all being told that we are entering a knowledge-based society, and if that is the case, then knowledge in a sense becomes power that defines the powerless and the powerful, the information poor and the information rich.

Overcoming that divide, to my mind, should be one of the key points that we emphasise in this report.

There are a number of reasons why this is important to us from the perspective of European content.

First of all, if we are in a knowledge-based society, we need growth in knowledge-based and creative skills.

Secondly, we are a democratic society, and digital policy in the audiovisual sector can connect our local citizens to our citizens at the centres of power.

In terms of cultural richness and diversity, it is important both that we should have individual centres of cultural excellence and that we be bound as a European continent.

And, finally, we have to ensure that the switchover from analogue to digital is attractive to all of our citizens: that is the end which we should work to achieve.

Mr President, Commissioner, the airwaves are buzzing.

You cannot open a newspaper or put the radio or television on without being confronted by new developments in the IT or digitalisation sectors.

Things are happening fast, in fact they are happening at the speed of light, which is why my group is delighted with the communication from the Commission and with Mr Veltroni' s exhaustive report, which looks into every aspect of these new developments.

As the rapporteur rightly points out, the AV sector is an extremely important sector in terms of employment, but also in terms of freedom of expression, democracy and cultural diversity in Europe.

But as far as the Liberal Group is concerned, that does not mean that Europe should set about regulating absolutely everything.

This would not be possible, and nor would it be desirable.

It is a self-aware sector and is perfectly capable of standing on its own two feet.

As the Liberals see it, for one thing this means that there is no need for yet another additional subsidy over and above Media Plus for the European film industry.

Complementary measures and cooperation with the business community, and fiscal measures, these are the key words of a more effective policy intended to increase the financial resources and to improve the marketing and distribution.

That is why we have requested split voting for Recital N. Nor are we in favour of quotas.

The TV operators must decide for themselves, on the basis of quality, what programmes they want to show.

It is not Europe' s business to regulate this, so no artificial protection.

The industry in Europe is more than capable of making interesting and quality productions that will attract viewers.

As I have already said, it is only the marketing and distribution that need to be improved.

On a final note: we attach a great deal of importance to the freedom of the user and therefore the same applies to parents.

They have the right and the responsibility to decide for themselves what is suitable for their children.

So we do not need complex censorship and filtering systems in programmes.

It is often very doubtful as to where the boundary lies.

And we certainly do not want a legal framework, where the powers that be set the rules.

Mr President, first and foremost, I must apologise on behalf of my colleague Mrs Echerer, who felt unwell and has gone to see the doctor.

So if I go over my allotted time slightly, I would like to pick up some of her speaking time.

Needless to say, I can only congratulate Mr Veltroni on his first-rate report, which, as someone has just said, has come at a good time.

In the past, as well as the present, Europe has taken a fairly progressive stance on the telecommunications front, when it comes to a European single market, and we are none the worse for that.

I believe it is high time for us to take a look at the content side of things, because, unfortunately, Europe is still lagging behind a little in this respect.

It is a marvellous idea to create a whole network that responds to the requirements of convergence, and which enables the public to receive information via a GSM, a computer or a television, but we must also be aware of what sort of information it is and, above all - and I am also thinking about what may be of positive value to our audiovisual industry - we must beware of being inundated by American products alone.

After all, the fact is that our European cinema, as I have said on other occasions, is light years behind, and we cannot allow this situation to continue indefinitely, particularly in the light of the history of European cinema.

I am not calling for quotas.

I am calling for a European investment fund to be set up, which will enable the creative producers we have in Europe to at long last enter into real competition with America, in a manner which fully meets with the requirements of the free market.

No, this is not regulation, it would simply be a means of enabling creative producers to get down to work in Europe, and a way of avoiding seeing all the talent, intelligence and capital - for this is the new trend - disappearing over to Hollywood.

I would therefore like to ask the Commissioner whether she does not think that the time has come to work on a new directive for the cinema.

Is it not time - since this is one of the distinguishing features of the Committee on Culture, Youth, Education, the Media and Sport, which I belong to, - for us all to sit down together one day and consider how we are going to rescue the European film industry?

And I repeat, this is not a petition for rules and regulations, this is taking a long, hard look at how films are made, for there is no mystery about it.

Films cannot be made without a major injection of capital, and that is where we fall down in Europe.

I believe this presents a unique opportunity for the European Investment Bank.

Mr President, I would like to start by complimenting the rapporteur on managing to combine so many proposals in one report.

However, I would like to touch on a few points.

In the first place, I agree that there is a need for policy-makers and the law to be able, or rather to be as good as under obligation, to adapt to the speed of technological progress.

In the case of the audiovisual sector, clear and, most importantly, timely legal instruments will mean that the institutions are able to regulate these changes: to provide better protection for the public and for users, establish the necessary restrictions to protect minors, lay down new rules to protect copyright and set regulations in place before certain developments occur, such as the fact that electronic commerce will soon be taking place via the medium of television.

Moreover, we must not be intimidated but take pride in the entire audiovisual sector in the digital age as a great vehicle of freedom, information and movement of ideas.

We have a vast European heritage of culture and communications which must be fully exploited, and for this more funding will certainly be necessary, but this purpose could also be served by opportunities for discussion, such as the Forum proposed by the rapporteur: this would be an opportunity for discussion aimed at the creation of a future audiovisual policy which would take advantage of the infinite number of openings provided by the newest technology and use them to further progress towards the goal of producing increasingly high quality products.

Therefore, our objective is to achieve an interactive audiovisual policy where there is more participation in order to give expression to the countless individual characteristics and differences in which our great European identity is rich.

Mr President, Commissioner, Mr Veltroni, on behalf of the Italian radicals, I cannot support the positive view you have expressed of the report under discussion on the Communication from the Commission on the guidelines for the Community's audiovisual policy in the digital age.

I cannot support your view because the communication is a reproduction of the old European TV and cinema cliché: direct public intervention through State agencies, welfarism and disregard for the nature of the market, a cliché which is characterising the audiovisual sector more and more.

All this has been dredged up and 'modernised' to suit the new digital age of multimedia convergence and the extraordinary spread of the Internet.

The impression therefore persists that European audiovisual companies are incapable of growing or standing on their own two feet and that users are incapable of discerning from among the vast amount of multimedia products on offer which products are better and most suited to their needs, as if past welfarism and paternalism had not been responsible for the difficult situation in which the sector finds itself today.

Everybody - companies and users alike - would benefit from the freedom of choice provided by a bold opening of the market and State withdrawal.

Moving on to some specific points of the report under consideration.

The regulation refers to the separation of infrastructures and content, serving up for content the old regulations once again.

Perhaps Mr Veltroni could enlighten us.

It may be, for example, that the intention is to extend the law governing the press, including related contracts and the need to be registered in the register of journalists and to be certified, to on-line publications.

In my view, this would be a serious error.

Or to extend the current stifling TV regulations to all the other programmes which are broadcast via the Web.

This would be a serious mistake, an illusion, for which the European companies and citizens would have to pay the price all over again.

The boom of the Internet was made possible by the State's inability to curb it with a mass of bans and regulations.

This was the right way for things to happen and it is right that they should remain that way.

With regard to intellectual property and copyright - another point covered by the report - I feel that it is pointless and damaging to the positive development of the Internet to strengthen the directive on copyright, as it is proposed to do.

Remember the Napster and the New Tell cases.

We consider that a critical revision of copyright ownership rights needs to be carried out in such a way as to facilitate and increase the transparency of the transmission of knowledge and products, and, on this point, the companies and the large corporations know that they will have to come to an agreement with the Web.

With regard to cinema, additional funding is requested for European cinema.

As Mr Veltroni is aware, there is a 50-year-old battle going on in Italy between the liberals, Sturzo and Ernesto Rossi, and those who want to continue with cinema subsidies.

We are of the opinion that the freedom of choice of the citizens to determine the success or failure of a film is also the best and most efficient way of ensuring the growth of the cinematographic sector.

We have tabled an amendment calling for a cost/benefit analysis of what has been done to date.

Lastly, on the subject of the privatisation of television, we call for a revision of the Amsterdam protocol which is referred to here as if it is set in stone.

The Financial Times has raised the issue of the privatisation of the jewel of European public television, the BBC.

Public television networks must be privatised or increasingly high licence fees will be imposed for new investments.

If we want to maintain a public service, the television broadcasting right must be auctioned off between all the operators: programmes will then be more efficient and there will be a saving for license payers.

I call upon you to consider the amendments we have tabled, which would change the intention of the report, following a system of aid incentives which has not worked in the past and will not work in the future either.

Mr President, I believe that the work carried out by the Commission and also by the rapporteur, Mr Veltroni, contains many important elements.

It is clear that a great effort has been made to introduce new issues and to take new steps in European audiovisual policy.

However, I believe that we still have a lot to do on certain points, both in the Commission and in Parliament.

We are very much lagging behind in relation to the huge changes taking place in the audiovisual sector, particularly as a result of digitalisation.

To fail to act would be like an ostrich burying its head in the sand.

I am sure that that is not what we want.

We all know that digitalisation began about five years ago and therefore this work on audiovisual policy is timely to say the least.

There are five points I would like to highlight because I believe that sooner or later they will have to be reviewed:

First is the definition of public service.

This is important if we want to have a public service in Europe in an environment which is truly competitive - and this can be seen from the audience for public services - and also for the good of the private audiovisual service.

There are still many issues to be resolved: one of them is the separation of the requirements established for each of these.

Secondly, it seems to me essential that there be a review of the "Television without Frontiers" Directive.

In this respect we are behaving like the aforementioned ostrich.

Thirdly, we must define in some way - and I believe that this document does not deal with this adequately - what is to happen with interactive TV services, what is to happen with the Internet on television.

The fourth point refers to the transfer from analogue TV to digital TV and its consequences for users in terms of the use and acquisition of new terminals.

Lastly, there is the implication of the laws on competition and mergers.

The audiovisual policy should tackle these points and also go into more depth in the field of competition.

Mr President, Mr Veltroni' s excellent report received firm support in Parliament' s Committee on Culture, Youth, Education, the Media and Sport, and the same seems to be happening here, too, in plenary.

The move into the digital age is a massive revolution for the media.

This technical development offers the consumer still greater opportunities for using audio-visual products, in terms of time, place, content and equipment.

At the same time, it means a splintering of the media and more pressure on development and commercialism.

The audio-visual sector is of the utmost importance to competitiveness, employment, and culture, too, in Europe.

The Commission' s initiative in this is also very welcome, as is the clarification of roles in respect of the information society and the main areas of culture.

Amid this technological revolution it is vital to bear in mind the social and cultural importance of media communications.

It cannot be a matter of equipment or financial gain.

The importance of the equality of information must not be underrated.

For that reason, I wish to stress the importance of safeguarding public service broadcasting in the future as well.

In that connection we must honour the Additional Protocol of the Treaty of Amsterdam, according to which Member States decide how to organise public service finances.

We also have to make sure that people' s rights to receive information and cultural services in their own language are protected.

As a certain European historian said, a person' s native country in Europe in the future will be that person' s native language.

Television and film, as cross-border media, attract more interest than radio.

However, the importance of radio, particularly in minority language areas, should not be underestimated.

For radio to remain part of the digital age development it is important to establish a DAB standard for it.

Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, we are talking about the "Television without Frontiers" Directive.

At the same time, we know that the transition to digital TV involves a risk of its being precisely TV with frontiers that we end up with.

It will not be possible to watch the BBC in the Irish Republic.

It may no longer be possible to watch Swedish television as easily in Finland.

It has in the past been possible to watch television across national borders.

It is difficult to buy digital cards for existing pay TV.

I appeal to the Commissioner to bear in mind the urgent request made unanimously by the groups in Parliament in conjunction with the reading of the technical directive on digital TV and really to examine this issue which has a very great deal to do with the fact that the copyright organisations have not agreed upon sensible conditions for selling TV rights.

I would therefore urge the Commissioner to bear this in mind.

At the same time, I want to support a good deal of what Mrs Iivari said about minority language areas.

Those of us who are interested in defining public service on a national basis must be watchful.

We must be careful that, for example, competitive aspects do not have the unfortunate effect of undermining our national right to define the kind of public service we want to provide.

Not all languages are in fact equal in the EU in this respect.

Mr President, Commissioner, ever since they came into being, audiovisual means have been an important factor in ideological intervention.

Controlling them is of strategic importance in the digital age in order to mould consciences and a modus vivendi, because whoever controls them decides what information they should carry.

In the view of the Communist Party of Greece, they should be controlled by the public sector.

Not because we are labouring under the illusion that governments in a capitalist system will allow full and fundamental information, but because then we can have maximum possible social control.

The Commission, however, has relegated the public sector to the role of poor relation and market legislation to the role of basic regulator.

The purpose of this apparently anti-monopolistic policy is to create oligopolies, which will be equally unconducive to objective information but which will guarantee huge profits and more secure ideological orientation, with the flow of information controlled by a few European monopolies, to the detriment of any notion of freedom and democracy.

As far as we are concerned, the problem is not whether information will be controlled by American or European monopolies.

The real problem is that the people need to develop their resistance and enforce their right to fundamental information.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, digital technology is changing our lives, and this change is taking place whether we like it or not.

We have to make use of it and create the relevant statutory framework.

I should like to add to what the previous speakers have said by expanding briefly upon a few points.

The Lisbon Seminar on Digital Television, held under the Portuguese Presidency of the Council, unfortunately came up with little apart from an incomplete overview of the subject.

That is why I am calling for a Digital Europe initiative with clear plans for the harmonised introduction of digital television and the digitalisation of content.

Merely setting deadlines according to a motto to the effect that the whole of Europe is to go digital by 2010 is not enough.

Secondly, the industry should be given a fair chance to regulate itself along the lines of the code of conduct for added value telecommunications services in Austria.

Not everything needs to be over-regulated by the legislator.

Thirdly, audiovisual policy concerns infrastructure and content.

We know that, where the latter is concerned, we have fallen far behind the United States, despite quota rules.

Only those who provide exciting content for a large number of viewers are taken notice of.

We must therefore do everything to support European content suppliers and to make their work easier instead of more difficult.

Fourthly, the approach according to which content and infrastructure are closely regulated should be maintained.

In my own country, the blueprint for the media authority KOMMAUSTRIA presents an exemplary way of doing this in line with the eight draft EU directives we have on the information society.

We need to keep pace and ought not to lose any more time.

Mr President, the document presented by the Commission in relation to its policy in the audiovisual sector in the digital era includes, amongst other things, two ideas which I consider to be fundamental.

Firstly, we must safeguard the future of the dual system of public and private television, and it is essential that European public operators can make full use of the possibilities offered by the new information technologies.

Secondly, cultural and linguistic diversity is a fundamental objective of Community policy in the audiovisual sector.

To this end, I wish to propose that the Commission, in its action and aid, prioritise positive discrimination in favour of the audiovisual sectors of the regional and minority cultures and languages of the European Union.

A good way of favouring diversity is to give particular support to the weaker elements.

Similarly, I propose that Community legislation and the decisions of the Commission itself favour the idea that broadcasts of all mass events - ceremonies, shows, sport, etc. should be considered to be of general interest and can therefore be followed in all the languages of the European Union, including regional languages.

That is the only way we can make Europe into a true union of diversities.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, a glance at German cable television, where some 30 channels are now already jostling for attention, is enough to show that multiplicity is not the same thing as diversity.

In competition with commercial suppliers, there is easily a danger of succumbing to demands for mass appeal and neglecting less lucrative areas of interest.

That is why it is so important for audiovisual strategy to be linked to protection of the pluralism and diversity of opinion which are now the crucial bases for democratic opinion-forming, as well as for public service media to be guaranteed an equal opportunity to develop in the media market of the future.

There must be non-discriminatory access to this future market for all citizens, and there must also be non-discriminatory access for suppliers of all types of content.

Specifically, this means market transparency and preventing developments whereby economic power turns into the concentration of media ownership and finally into the abuse of political power.

These key considerations define the most important premisses for the further development of statutory frameworks.

Mr Veltroni's report makes important proposals in this area.

However, not everything can be regulated by law.

I should therefore like to address a matter which has still not been mentioned in this House, namely the acquisition of media-related skills.

You have to get to know your way around what the multimedia world has to offer in order to be able to separate the wheat from the chaff, select what is of value and hone your judgement.

The transfer of media-related skills must become a component of the Community' s audiovisual strategy.

To that extent, the Commission' s communication still does not go far enough.

Mr President, as Chairman of the Committee on Culture, Youth, Education, the Media and Sport, I would also like to personally acknowledge the extremely valuable work carried out by Mr Veltroni.

I am pleasantly surprised that such a major, essential measure has been able to obtain the unanimous consensus of the Committee, for I honestly did not think that it would have been possible.

Digitalisation will enable citizens to access a substantial quantity of new, innovative content and this is why I can only fully support Mr Veltroni's consideration that all this has implications for democracy, the organisation of Europe and the States and the quality of the communications that we provide for our citizens.

This is why I consider that the period of transition from the analogue to the digital system must be our opportunity to entice the user to sample a series of new programmes on offer, not just a mere duplication of the programmes currently available on unencrypted line-aside channels.

Mr O'Toole is right in saying that simulcasts would not make it possible to attract a group of substantial users and he therefore believes that a trial period for new audiovisual products on channels made available through digital transmission, possibly only over sections of territory, will enable operators and users to achieve the same objective.

The Commission is right to say that the system of funding adopted by the Member States must comply with the principle of proportionality and must not influence market conditions and competition in the Community in a way contrary to the interests of society.

In the audiovisual policy, the two fundamental criteria to be applied when drawing up provisions for funding are proportionality and transparency.

Transparency implies that the Member States should define a clear public service mission, that financial transparency should be guaranteed and that, if public service operators carry on purely commercial activities, separate accounts should be kept.

I consider that this separation has prompted the Commission to produce the best policy currently possible for the States and Europe, a policy worthy of the changing technologies and which will lead to the switchover of the entire system.

The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon.

The next item is the report (A5-0199/2000) by Mr Heaton-Harris, on behalf of the Committee on Culture, Youth, Education, the Media and Sport, on the report from the Commission: "Survey into the socio-economic background of Erasmus students" [COM(2000) 4 - C5-0146/2000 - 2000/2089(COS)].

Mr President, it is not often that a politician of my calibre gets to speak to such a packed and huge audience.

I should like to thank all the interpreters for staying behind.

I understand that my speech leaked out to the rest of the Members of Parliament beforehand, hence their disappearance in mass numbers.

Many of the interpreters, I am sure, would have liked to have studied on a Erasmus course when they were learning their languages and studying at university.

I, as a British Conservative, often find fault - and it is very easy to find fault - with many of the programmes organised and paid for by the European Commission and the European Union.

However I have a soft spot for Erasmus because it is very difficult to find fault with that particular programme.

It seems to achieve some of the results that it actually expects.

This survey is a fascinating one, carried out in 1998.

It was fascinating that so many students actually bothered to take part in filling out a form and sending it back to the Commission.

The one problem, I suppose, with the results of the survey was that they were reported after we had decided on the Socrates II programme and the Erasmus parts of it.

We could have drawn some very useful information from this survey on the socio-economic circumstances of students on Erasmus courses at that time.

There are a number of interesting facts and figures.

I could bore you with them but they are all contained within the explanatory statement of the report and in the Commission report itself.

But there are a few that I have a great deal of interest in.

Certainly of the people who took an Erasmus course in 1998 and bothered to reply to the questionnaire 98% found that the programme was extremely positive or at least very positive.

Ninety-one percent were over the moon with what had happened to them on the course.

It is a shame that 57% of them experienced financial hardship as a result of their particular Erasmus course.

One wonders whether, when only half the money is being spent on the Erasmus places being taken up, (half are left open at the end of each year) the money could not be better redistributed within Erasmus itself.

When I initially tabled my report I put forward a few controversial ideas just to see if anybody bothered to read what was going on.

Fortunately two or three Members (and the Commission as well) did read them.

A number noticed little points that I had to then retract.

But one which is still there in point 4 of my report, which I would like to underline, is the part that condemns any internal discrimination practised in Member States.

If you had trouble getting on a higher education course in Austria for example, because you were of a certain race, this place would have been in a complete uproar.

But that is exactly what is going on in my own country at the moment, with English students who want to study in Scotland being penalised financially by the Scottish Executive.

So I really wanted to keep that in my report.

I sneaked it in there and it stayed pretty much hidden until now, and I would like to reveal it to the very few people who are in the Chamber tonight.

I look forward to my new Labour colleagues voting on this particular matter.

I believe it is slightly too late to ask for a split vote.

I have also tabled a couple of amendments.

One helps with a bit of punctuation, a bit of grammar on the particular passage in point 4, the second in point 6.

In the committee stage of this report part of a sentence was added which said: "considers that the survey's findings should be taken as an opportunity to review national higher educational policies".

I do not think it is in the remit of this report or this place or the Commission to ask for that.

So I have tabled an amendment which would delete that.

A third amendment which I have tabled has changed just one word in the English language version from "regrets" to "notes".

I really enjoyed working with the Commission and all the people that have helped me.

I would like to end by thanking those who helped me with this report, especially my researcher Nicky Smith, who waded through every single statistic.

We contacted every university and vice-chancellor in the UK and many across Europe to ask for their comments on this report.

I commend it to the House.

Mr President, Commissioner, I know it is very late and not a lot of people are here. That should be no surprise to you, however.

It happens not only, thank heavens, where cultural and educational matters are concerned but also in many other areas.

I think, though, that, as you yourself have already said, quality speaks for itself.

You have briefly commented upon your report and your amendments yourself.

I am an Austrian and know from experience that, in Austria, there is very good access to all universities and courses of study.

I should also like to make it clear that we have no problem giving ethnic minorities access to these, either.

We certainly do not lag behind England, or Great Britain, in that area.

On the subject of the Erasmus programme, which is, after all, a part of the Socrates programme, I should like to say that - given the need not only to set up the programme but also to evaluate it - it is quite important to examine the efficiency of what is being offered and to carry out an assessment of the resources, if new knowledge is to be obtained and, above all, the defects in the programme removed.

It has already been said that new knowledge of this kind will unfortunately not have any impact upon the Socrates II programme.

I think we could have done to update things in this area, since 40% of the Socrates budget is, after all, being allocated to the Erasmus programme and, in that way, to students at European universities.

It was, and remains, the goal to make it possible for 10% of students to spend a part of their degree courses in other Member States.

Unfortunately, a figure of only 1% was achieved in the first year.

The participation rate has risen and is now just under 50% of the figure aimed at.

The report has shown that the reasons for this are both structural and cultural, as well as economic to quite a significant degree.

So far, there has been no success in complying with what is also laid down in the Socrates programme and giving a special boost to groups that are weak in socio-economic terms.

On the contrary, the programme is instead used by students whose parents have both a high level of education and a corresponding level of income.

Fifty-seven percent of Erasmus students had considerable difficulties financing their stay abroad.

I think there needs to be coordination between the Erasmus scholarships and the countries and the universities concerned. In that way, reform can be implemented and an information campaign launched in order to question, and shed some light upon, why so few people are able to participate in this programme.

Above all, it is a question of preserving equality of opportunity in all countries.

That is why it is worth showing some commitment.

I think that making equal opportunities available to young people is quite important for us all.

Mr President, I would first like to congratulate the rapporteur on this, his first report, which succeeded straightaway in achieving unanimity.

I feel this is a very promising beginning, although undoubtedly the subject lends itself to unanimity; indeed, I do not think that, amongst the impressive number of European programmes available to our citizens, there is a report that is as well-known and as much appreciated by the public, and not just by the students; recently, a grandmother stopped me in the street to thank me for what I was doing for her grandchildren, who were travelling abroad thanks to an Erasmus grant.

So, you see, these programmes also achieve the unanimity of the whole population and naturally, they can always be improved.

This year, 110 000 students are receiving the special attention that we give to all aspects of their Erasmus trip and to the smooth running of this section of the Socrates programme, and we thank Parliament for supporting this measure.

It is often said that only the children of fairly comfortably off families can travel as the others cannot live on this modest grant.

If we consult our statistics, however, 4 out of 5 Erasmus students were the first members of their family to study abroad, which does illustrate the role that this programme plays in the opportunities for mobility available in Europe to students of new social backgrounds.

Therefore, it is untrue that only children from privileged backgrounds can benefit from Erasmus grants.

Furthermore, even if the latter have more to live on because they receive additional help from their parents on top of their grant, in other respects it seems that these financial difficulties are the only criticism made.

Ladies and gentlemen, like you, I would have liked the amount of the loans allocated in the negotiations with the Council over the budgetary appropriations for the Socrates programme to be set at a higher level than they were since I am limited in my ability to increase Erasmus grants as much as I would like.

What conclusions can we draw from this?

Well, quite simply, the national bodies with decentralised responsibility for student mobility have to take the national situation into consideration and adapt the grant policy accordingly.

I have asked the Ministers for Education, each in their own country, to take the necessary steps to grant supplements and advantages for Erasmus students in order to offer those who are not fortunate enough to have a benevolent father or generous grandmother the chance to travel too.

I also urge each one of you to contact the Minister for Education in your country so that he will do all he can to remedy this financial problem.

I have asked the ministers to make sure that a larger grant is given to the poorest students.

I have asked the regional authorities to make an effort to assist their students and I have asked university rectors to provide for financial resources within their universities to enable students on lower incomes to still benefit from grants, if they want to and if they are eligible.

I think that in future, I will once again have to request the help of all the national and regional authorities in this area.

Furthermore, I shall consider this question in a moment as the French presidency wishes to develop a real action plan to foster mobility and together with the minister, Mr Jacques Lang, I have just set a specific meeting of the Ministers for Education on the theme of mobility.

On this occasion, we will not only talk about what we would like to do and what we should do in future, but we will cite examples taken from certain countries as models, but not necessarily at national level.

I will give you an example at random.

In one region of Germany, a regional Minister for Education has created a 'mobility' savings scheme in conjunction with banks and building societies so that parents, friends and families, instead of buying vast numbers of toys for children, invest in this scheme which will be available to the child when he is old enough to study abroad.

As you can see, there are good ideas, all sorts of good ideas.

I hope that the discussion on 'mobility' that the French presidency wanted will get this situation moving and that goodwill will be sought both at a private level and at regional, European and national levels so that the great success of Erasmus will encompass a growing number of students.

This is the price to pay for creating Europe, since students who have got to know another country within the framework of Erasmus, who have made friends in another country, at another university, are the true Europeans who will make European policy tomorrow.

A greater number of happy Erasmus students is in the interests of our society as a whole.

So let us all work together so that there will be a large number of them in future.

The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon.

The next item is the joint discussion of the following reports:

by Mr Varela Suanzes-Carpegna (A5-0194/2000), on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries, on the proposal for a Council regulation relating to the conclusion of the Protocol establishing the fishing possibilities and the financial compensation provided for in the Agreement between the European Economic Community and the Government of the Republic of Guinea on fishing off the Guinean coast for the period 1 January 2000 to 31 December 2001.

[COM(2000) 304 - C5-0315/2000 - 2000/0154(CNS)]

by Mr Varela Suanzes-Carpegna (A5-0188/2000), on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries, on the proposal for a Council regulation relating to the conclusion of the Protocol defining, for the period 3 December 1999 to 2 December 2002, the fishing opportunities and the financial contribution provided for by the Agreement between the European Community and the Government of Mauritius on fishing in the waters of Mauritius [COM(2000) 229 - C5-0253/2000 - 2000/0094(CNS)]

Mr President, today we are discussing two new international fishing protocols between the European Union and third countries: Guinea and Mauritius, the Atlantic Ocean and the Indian Ocean.

These two agreements are different in terms of geographical location, dimension, fishing allowances and financial compensation. However, at the end of the day, they are two important agreements which will add to the already significant network of international fisheries agreements between the European Union and third countries, the basic pillar of the common fisheries policy, since it is essential to cover our supply requirements, both for the European consumer and for our industry, and it is also essential to do so by means of our own fleet.

The fisheries agreements with third countries therefore fulfil a crucial objective of the common fisheries policy, and they also contribute to employment and, in most cases, in European regions which are very dependent on this activity.

They therefore create commercial balance, employment and preserve the competitiveness of Europe' s own significant fishing fleet.

In its opinion on the 2001 budget, our committee has this afternoon approved the draft which our Vice-Chairman, Mrs Miguélez, had presented us, to increase budget line B7-8000 (International fisheries agreements) by EUR 7 million, thereby re-establishing the amounts in the preliminary draft budget presented at the time by the European Commission.

Morocco, Mauritania and Greenland are great negotiating challenges for the European Commission and we all hope that these negotiations will soon conclude successfully.

For the moment, we are happy today with the agreements with Guinea and Mauritius, which will cover important needs of different fleets, of different States of the European Union, in the Atlantic and Indian Oceans.

Notable in both cases is the constant and worrying increase in the payments by shipowners while, curiously, these are not included in other agreements, as is notoriously the case with the agreement with Greenland.

For example, in the case of Mauritius, there is an increase in the amount that shipowners are to pay for licences, of EUR 5 per tonne of fish, that is to say, they are increased from EUR 20 to EUR 25, and there is also an equivalent increase in the case of catches by ship.

The European Union' s contribution is reduced by 29%, payable by shipowners which, in the case of complete exploitation of the fishing allowances, would mean a contribution of 23.5% of the total cost.

In the previous protocol it was 7%, that is to say, there would be an increase from 7% to 23.5% of the total cost payable by shipowners.

In this context we also wish to highlight the imbalances in the internal distribution of these fishing allowances by the European Commission amongst the Member States, as was the case with cephalopods in the agreement with Guinea.

Both agreements give significant support to the local authorities for the conservation of their own fishing resources and furthermore advocate agreements between states as opposed to private agreements - which is very important in agreements such as the one with Morocco, which we are trying to negotiate - as well as the contribution of the European Union to the establishment of modern control systems, which forms part of the conservationist position of the European Union in all of the world' s seas, in accordance with its internal approach to its own Community waters.

On the other hand, there is an important direct relationship between the financial compensation and the objectives and cooperation actions that have been agreed.

In the case of the agreement with Mauritius, we are talking about 50%, as opposed to 30% in the previous agreement.

As is so often the case, there is a lack of documentation for comparing figures and data between the protocols, although in this case we should thank the European Commission for including the minutes of the negotiations, in the case of Guinea, which makes more data available and ultimately makes the process more transparent. This is welcome and the European Parliament is grateful for it.

The Committee on Fisheries has voted in favour of these agreements, and this has become the norm, since it considers that they are both highly beneficial to both parties, that is to say, the European Union and the third countries.

The Liberal Group has now presented Parliament with an amendment of similar content to each of the reports which would mean - in the view of the rapporteur - that the common fisheries policy would cease to be common and would mean a departure from an important pillar of external policy. It would mean that only the direct beneficiaries of the agreement negotiated by the European Commission would pay for it, on behalf of the fifteen Member States of the European Union.

The rapporteur is against this amendment, since, if only those who benefit directly from Community policies are to pay for them, that would quite simply be a way of breaking up the single market and dismantling the European Union itself.

We are therefore in favour of both fisheries agreements, which we hope may continue in the future, and we are anxious, Commissioner, to be able soon to hold a debate in our Fisheries Committee, and to repeat what we are saying now, in relation to the extremely important fisheries agreement with Morocco.

Keep up the hard work - I can see from the conversation we had this afternoon that you are working hard - and I encourage you also to move forward with that important negotiation.

Mr President, Commissioner, in principle I approve the new protocols to the fisheries agreements with Mauritius and Guinea.

The Commission and the rapporteur have done some good work.

However, the effects of fisheries agreements upon the EU budget are not something to be sneezed at.

If we are to draw the correct conclusions, no more time must now be lost in involving Parliament, because trouble is brewing.

Allow me to explain what I mean.

We are concerned here with mixed agreements.

It is not just a question of how many fish are to be obtained for how much money, but also about employing the precautionary principle to achieve the sustainable use of fisheries resources.

We want to help Mauritius and Guinea develop fisheries management, as well as offer financial support in the fields of education and research.

In Mauritius, for example, just under 50% of the total volume of available finance is to be used for these measures.

I myself consider it a good thing for us also to be promoting development measures in connection with fisheries.

Fisheries is the ideal field for such a combination.

Yet, in the Committee on Fisheries, we are repeatedly confronted by the issue of whether the price paid by the European Union to third countries for its fishing rights is not too high.

There is a danger of the European Union' s one day being ridiculed and taken advantage of internationally because of its generosity.

Moreover, to what extent are third countries now really all dependent upon EU funds?

Bilateral agreements are increasingly coming into force because ship owners or others offer more money than the EU.

If the latter were to become a day-to-day occurrence regulated by the market itself, might not consideration have to be given to the question of whether the EU ought not progressively to withdraw from the current agreements and perhaps spend its subsidies in other ways?

Obviously, that would have to be compatible with the common European fisheries policy.

I welcome the agreements that are before the House.

Only, we ought not to be blind and, above all, not issue any blank cheques.

Mr President, the Socialist Group supports the proposal for a Council Regulation on the European Community fisheries agreements with Mauritius and the Republic of Guinea.

Both agreements fall within a general European Community policy based on our presence in the rest of the world.

The fishing sector forms part of the Community' s economy and, in order for the Community fleet to be able to fish and carry out its activity, the Community must reach agreements with third countries and international organisations, so that our fishermen can enjoy adequate fishing allowances.

Both agreements have been renewed regularly.

In the case of Guinea we have had an agreement since 1983 and in the case of Mauritius since 1989.

There can be no doubt about the cost-effectiveness of these agreements for the European Union, as demonstrated in the study commissioned by the Commission on their cost-benefit relationships.

Nor can we doubt the beneficial effects for the other contracting parties, in this case Mauritius and the Republic of Guinea.

Both countries gain valuable resources for their development in exchange for the fishing allowances which they grant to our fleet.

These are agreements which benefit both parties and which have been amended over time, being adapted to the demands of the sustainable exploitation of resources and of actions supporting the efforts of the authorities in the third countries to develop their own fishing sector.

The protocols that periodically renew the agreements have been adapted to the true situation, to the quantities of fish actually caught and the state of resources in those fishing grounds.

Despite reducing the quantity of catches in the agreement with Guinea, the economic compensation to be received by the African country will be maintained, since the new protocol increases the amount of the tariffs and the licences which must be paid by Community shipowners.

Therefore, the contrast with other agreements - I would like to highlight, for example, the agreement with Greenland, in which the shipowners do not contribute to its cost - is the all the more drastic.

In the case of Mauritius, it also reduces the volume of authorised catches and specifies the number of vessels authorised to fish.

The approval by the European Parliament of these two fisheries agreements sends a political message demonstrating our support for the signing and renewal of other fisheries agreements which are of much greater importance for our sector because of the number of ships and fishermen which depend on them.

I am referring in particular to the agreement with Morocco.

Seven hundred ships out of action is excessive, and 8 000 fishermen not working for 10 months are far too many, given that the contacts so far between the Commission and the Moroccan Government have offered little hope of success.

Everybody must do their duty and fulfil their obligations.

This institution has done so, with its Committee on Fisheries approving today, in a special meeting, the amounts proposed by the European Commission in the B7-800 line on fisheries agreements with third countries.

It now falls to the European Commission to negotiate hard in order to reach a reasonable agreement with Morocco.

We are still waiting for that to happen.

Mr President, may I first of all thank the Chairman of the Committee on Fisheries, Mr Varela, for a particularly good piece of work on these reports.

In principle, those of us in the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party support the EU' s having fisheries agreements with third countries, but I should also like to point out that what we in the Liberal Group want - and this is why we have tabled a number of amendments - is for the fishermen or ship owners to make more of a contribution to financing the fisheries agreements.

It is, of course, only right that they should be involved in financing those agreements from which they themselves benefit more than anyone else.

The fisheries agreements are extremely important for certain regions in which, in addition to employment in the fisheries sector itself, there are a range of associated businesses wholly or partially dependent upon the fishing industry.

By means of the fisheries agreements, the EU is able to develop its activities in this sphere and exchange fishing rights with third countries.

The effect of the EU fleets upon fishing resources - in terms of structural policy and the financial situation - ought to be analysed much more than it is at present.

I want to conclude by asking the Commission to provide the Committee on Fisheries with a report on what for third countries are the positive and negative consequences of the EU' s fisheries agreements.

Mr President, last October I spoke here against the EU-Angola fisheries agreement.

My reason for doing so was simple.

All the evidence shows that agreements between the EU and third world countries have been conservation disasters.

They also seriously damage the indigenous populations.

This time we have proposals for agreements with Guinea and Mauritius, which will have similar effects.

In a way, that much is recognised in the current proposals.

More stringent checks are being called for.

Inspection vessels are to be provided, and greater note taken of the needs of local fishermen.

There is no guarantee that these agreements will be properly policed.

Policing of fishing effort in European waters is woefully inadequate, and it is therefore hard to believe that things will be any different in foreign climes.

In addition, British fishermen from the south-west of England to the north of Scotland are continuing to suffer greatly because of the common fisheries policy.

Fishermen are discarding thousands of tonnes of saleable fish and going bankrupt in the process, yet while this economic and conservation disaster is in progress, the EU is proposing to spend over EUR 7 million to give Greek, Spanish and Italian fishermen access to the waters.

By any standards, this is preposterous.

Not only will I vote against these proposals, but I shall urge my government to oppose them.

Mr President, I welcome the Commission' s two proposals on these two fisheries agreements, particularly the agreement with Guinea.

I should like to begin by highlighting and expressing my support for the innovations introduced by the current agreement, which dedicate 50% of the European Union' s total support to specific actions aimed at the sustainable development of the sector.

Amongst other new aspects of this agreement, I also wish to highlight the innovation of providing an additional premium of EUR 370 million in the event that the Republic of Guinea implements a range of actions designed to reduce its overall fishing effort.

As Guinea is a country with an annual available production of 250 000 tonnes of fish, and since its small-scale fishing fleet only has the capacity to catch 50 000 tonnes, this is clearly an agreement of mutual convenience, which avoids any conflict of interest and which also enables Guinea to obtain exceptional financing to develop its fisheries sector.

We see from this that, apart from the importance of fisheries agreements for the European Union, they can also be used as instruments for development in these countries.

As a Portuguese citizen, I am bound to regret the fact in this context that the Commission and the Council are so far behind in their negotiations on the agreement with Morocco.

I am also unhappy at the difficulties being raised over other Member States having access to fisheries belonging to Greenland, the agreement with whom has hardly been used, and which is shortly due for renewal.

It is nevertheless important that the requirements of supervision and control, as well as the programmes designed to control the reduction of the fishing effort are also imposed on the other countries that fish in the waters of these developing countries and not only on the Member States of the European Union.

I therefore ask the European Union, during its negotiations, to make an extra effort to ensure that this rule is applied to everyone and not just to us.

Mr President, sadly, all too often in the past, the reorganisation of the European fishing fleet has led to these ships being transferred to the African coast.

They was no limit on the extent to which they could be used there, which posed a serious threat, not just to the fish stocks but also to the livelihoods and the food supply of the people in the local area.

Accordingly, when we draw up these fisheries agreements, we should not just take account of the interests of the European fishermen, we must also bear in mind the interests of the local population.

The agreement with Mauritius concerns the tuna fish catch, but the situation is far more complex for Guinea.

European ships fish there for fish species that are used by the local fishermen.

It is encouraging to see that in both agreements 50% of the financial contribution will be allocated to developing the local fishing industry.

Control over how this money is spent is certainly prerequisite to the future extension of the Protocol.

Private contracts between European shipowners and the Guinean Government are often concluded without this form of assistance from the local fishing industry, and contribute to over-fishing due to a lack of controls.

A very worrying recent development is that small French trawlers are concluding contracts outside the fisheries agreement.

These trawlers will fish in the coastal zone, where they are a direct threat to local fishermen.

All Member State ships should respect an economic twelve-mile exclusion zone.

In addition, I feel it goes without saying that shipowners should contribute more to the costs of the fisheries agreements and that the tax payer should not be the one to subsidise this exploitation of fishing grounds.

Mr President, first of all I would like to compliment the Commission, and also our rapporteur, on the agreement reached.

The agreement takes more account of the developing countries themselves, in this case Guinea and Mauritius, than was formerly the case.

That is something in its favour and what it in fact means is that these agreements should actually fall to be considered under the codecision procedure with Parliament.

Perhaps this will take place next year though, after the IGC.

I am critical of a number of other points.

I believe it is a sound agreement.

Clearly this agreement is extremely important to the countries of the south; after all, the southern fisheries agreements are directly responsible for 13 000 jobs in Spain and Portugal, among others.

The turnover is no mean feat either, amounting as it does to around EUR 485 million, in comparison with which, an agreement with Greenland, for example, pales into insignificance.

This means that the sums set aside for this purpose will also mainly be spent in these countries.

There is something to be said for this alone.

Historically, these countries had their agreements, but it would be a positive move if the business community itself were to make more of a contribution to this kind of agreement.

I mention this because a balance must be struck between developing countries and countries with a large fishing industry, but it is also necessary to strike a balance in the way funds are spent across the various fishing zones.

That being the case, I would point out that certain countries in the north, of which my own country is one, have great difficulty with the cutbacks they are experiencing in the multiannual orientation programme.

The honourable member from Great Britain has already described the problems the fishing sector is having to contend with there.

This simply means that when it comes to the fisheries policy, we must look with a critical eye at this agreement in order to ascertain where the interests lie and how the money is being spent.

It is quite clear that regional elements are going to play a more prominent role.

Let there be no mistake, I think this agreement is indispensable to Spanish and South European fishermen - that is the first point - but I think it is also essential for a regional policy to allow for restructuring of the fishing industry in the northern coastal areas, to offer scope for sound agreements with northern countries, and for it to be properly tailored to specific regional needs.

Mr President, it seems that the Commission is happy to ignore the requests of the Council and this Parliament - the former clearly expressed at the Council of Ministers of October 1997 - and delay the work on the guidelines for the negotiation of the fisheries agreements.

The protocol with Guinea-Conakry is a good example.

We expected the payment quota for shipowners to be increased, but it is intolerable that, in the Council working groups, the Commission is prepared to describe that increase as light, given that it means an ever-greater sacrifice for the fleet and that - I repeat - in the agreements with the northern countries, shipowners do not pay a penny.

Furthermore, the Commission has been prepared to ignore the principle of relative stability by casually removing from the Community fleet fishing rights that have been acquired in accordance with that principle.

The principle of relative stability is either sacred or it is not, and it cannot be untouchable in Community waters when the complete opposite is the case in the fisheries agreements with the southern countries.

The Commission says that it has taken away Spain' s allowances for fishing cephalopods because it did not fully utilise them during the last protocol, and it grants them to countries which had never fished there. That is all very well.

I have always argued for the total exploitation of the fishing rights granted, but in all waters, not just in relation to the agreements with the southern countries.

In the agreements with the northern countries they are completely under-exploited and there is no way that the fleets with the greatest interest in fishing there can do so.

Could you please explain this once and for all.

Furthermore, what makes the Commission think that, because it did not utilise the fishing allowances during the previous protocol, it will not do so during this one, given that its cephalopod-fishing fleet which was fishing in Morocco has been out of action for nine months and there is no solution in sight?

Mr President, all of this illustrates the mental and physical chaos of our Community fishing authorities, and it will only be resolved when the guidelines which I referred to earlier are established in a clear and agreed way.

Can I first of all welcome the report and congratulate the rapporteur for his work in bringing forward this report?

There is little doubt that fisheries agreements are coming under much closer scrutiny to determine what they achieve and what they deliver, not only for people in the European Union, but also for the countries with which they were concluded in the first place.

The rapporteur rightly mentioned the agreement with Morocco several times.

This agreement is causing tremendous concern to the people most directly affected and those who might benefit to some extent and has certainly prompted great disquiet in the Fisheries Committee.

I want to ask the Commissioner very straightforwardly and point-blank whether the Commission, and Parliament, and the European Union are being held to ransom by Morocco because of its unwillingness to agree.

Perhaps he could give an answer when he comments on the debate later on.

We cannot overlook the concern about fisheries agreements.

They are expensive and the amount of money involved is substantial.

The money has to be taken into account to a greater extent in the future, and we cannot pretend otherwise.

Yes, in the past the agreements have been acceptable, but we need a new approach and a new vision in the future.

In the longer term the Commission will have to cooperate with Parliament, because Parliament is concerned to determine how agreements can best be achieved.

Looking at what we have before us, I have to say to you, Commissioner, that the present situation cannot continue.

Yes, I support the proposal submitted and I will support the proposal that emerges, but I wish to stress that the principle cannot continue for ever and support in the future cannot be taken for granted as it has been in the past.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, first of all I should like to say a warm thank you to the rapporteur, Mr Varela Suanzes-Carpegna, for the two reports he has submitted today when the new protocol for a fisheries agreement between the European Community and the Republics of Mauritius and Guinea is up for discussion.

Where the first agreement with Mauritius is concerned, I am glad to hear that you support the new technical features, as well as the further amendments to this protocol as these relate, for example, to the distribution of costs, to the increased finance available for scientific programmes, to monitoring and control and to subsequent financing.

The agreement with Mauritius is a typical tuna fish agreement, involving a small number of fishing opportunities for line fishermen, and forms an important component of the EC network of tuna fish agreements in the Indian Ocean.

This new protocol is the fourth since the Framework Agreement came into force in 1990.

The three-year extension to the protocol creates fishing opportunities for 83 tuna fishermen and, by means of this protocol, the October 1997 guidelines of the Fisheries Council are to be included in the agreement for the first time, namely an increase in specific measures for developing the fisheries sector and a new distribution of the costs between the Community and the ship owners.

Among the most important features of the protocol is the fact that, in view of the small quantities of fish caught during the three years that the last protocol was in force, the authorised tonnage has been reduced from 7 500 tonnes to 5 500 tonnes, which will also lead to a corresponding reduction - namely of 29% - in compensation payments.

I can also inform you that 50%, that is to say half, of compensation payments are intended for specific measures to develop the local fisheries sector.

Measures in the fields of science and technology, including plans for monitoring and control, are to be financed.

In this connection, I should like to emphasise that the conditions for monitoring such measures have been improved by the fact that the authorities on Mauritius now have to submit a detailed report each year and by the fact that the Commission is able to review payments in the light of whether the various measures have in practice been carried out.

Licence fees for ship owners have been considerably increased, from EUR 20 to EUR 25 per tonne.

All in all, the protocol has led to a comprehensive redistribution of the costs between the Community and the ship owners, since the latter now have to bear 23.5% of the total costs compared with a previous figure of only 7%.

That is in line with the Council' s 1997 decision in connection with the third country agreements, whereby costs are to be distributed in a balanced way.

There are also technical improvements when it comes to catch notifications, the deduction of fees due and the procedures for taking catches on board.

If I understand you correctly, you also welcome the technical features we have introduced into the agreement with Guinea, especially the fact that, by means of a special premium, more attention is being given to the development of marine resources.

Since 1983, we have also maintained a Framework Agreement with the Republic of Guinea.

This agreement too is important for the European Union because it specifies fishing opportunities for trawler and tuna fishermen.

Within the framework of the agreements with various neighbouring States, particularly Senegal, Mauritania and Morocco, it also offers a partial alternative for the fisheries industry during the close seasons.

It also, to some degree, offers an alternative to Moroccan waters.

I am therefore pleased to be able to inform you that the protocol with the Republic of Guinea contains important innovations, aimed especially at promoting the precautionary principle and the sustainable use of resources.

I should like specifically to mention at this point that a premium is to be introduced for the purpose of supporting the Guinean authorities in improving fish stocks in Guinea' s exclusive economic zone.

This premium will only be paid if Guinea can prove that its overall fishing activities have been reduced and that the agreed measures aimed at more stringent monitoring and control have been applied.

The idea is that we want to support Guinea in promoting bilateral fisheries agreements with other States and in reducing the number of private arrangements which frequently undermine sustained fisheries management.

What is more, 46% of the total aid package is now to be spent on the financial counterpart for specific measures such as scientific and technical research and the monitoring and inspection of fishing activities, as well as on supporting technical training and further education in the sphere of fisheries and on supporting participation in the work of international organisations.

Finally, the protocol provides for close cooperation between both parties in administering the measures.

Monitoring is to be facilitated by means of a detailed financial report and by the Community' s ability to review payments in the light of whether or not the measures have in practice been carried out.

Where your amendments are concerned, I should like to make it clear that the Commission can in principle accept the first two of these.

The Commission has to reject Amendment No 3 because it contradicts the current theory on protocols to fisheries agreements and affects the Commission' s negotiating powers.

Since the protocol constitutes an annex to the Framework Agreement, it can be regularly renewed without the need for any new negotiating mandate.

It goes without saying however that, with its leading role in the negotiations, the Commission will see to it that the negotiating guidelines laid down by the Council are observed.

The Commission must also reject Amendment No 4 because it contravenes the spirit of the Council' s 1997 decision calling for a distribution of costs between ship owners and the Community.

The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon.

We have exhausted the agenda and ourselves, I think.

Ladies and gentlemen, I bid you goodnight.

(The sitting was closed at 11.25 p.m.)

It is my very great pleasure to welcome Mr Avraham Burg, Speaker of the Knesset, and Mr Ahmed Qurie, Speaker of the Palestinian Legislative Assembly, to the European Parliament. I am thrilled to be able to do so, and to do so with great hopes for peace.

I would like to thank you both for the courage and open-mindedness with which you have both accepted the invitation I made to you during my official visit to the Middle East in February this year.

Your joint visit is unprecedented in the history of this institution.

It has been made possible because you are both men of peace, and it is as such that Parliament welcomes you here today.

I am mindful that your visit is also due in great part to the persuasive diplomatic efforts of our fellow Member, Luisa Morgantini, Chairman of the Delegation for relations with the Palestinian Legislative Council, whom I must thank particularly for this.

It is highly significant that, in your capacities as the speakers of the two assemblies which will be required to ratify the agreements which are being drawn up, and in which negotiations you are yourselves taking part, you have opted to come together to address the European Parliament.

We appreciate the true worth of your approach: the value of your shared determination to reach a peace agreement, the determination to see Europe involved in the ongoing process to a greater extent, and let me welcome Ambassador Moratinos at this point, and the determination to step up your cooperation with the European Union at parliamentary level.

There is not one of us who is unaware of the complexity of the situation in the Middle East, in this land which is home to what a large part of the human race considers to be the most sacred historic sites, which are hence the most disputed sites.

We Europeans are in a good position to know just how difficult it is to make peace rather than war.

It has taken us, particularly in the twentieth century, devastating wars which have ravaged the entire world with the tragic loss of millions of lives before realising, at last, that war is a madness which wreaks universal ruin.

The European Parliament is not welcoming you here today in order to preach at you, but as a friend to the two nations you represent, which are both finally entitled to peace, security and development.

When the same process is under way in the Middle East as the one which has brought Europe not only from armed conflict to peace, but from peace to cooperation between neighbouring countries, perhaps we can envisage a parliamentary assembly uniting the peoples of your region as our counterpart!

What a wonderful dream this would be, and I am sure that our shared determination will one day make it a reality.

Mr Avraham Burg, Speaker of the Knesset, Mr Abu Ala, Speaker of the Palestinian Legislative Council, the debate which you have just heard has testified to the European Union' s and, in particular, the European Parliament' s interest in the progress of the current negotiations.

Your may rest assured that we shall be listening to your words with the utmost attention.

Allow me to hope, without denying the major obstacles, weighty as we know them to be, during this crucial phase of the negotiations, that you will be able to assure this House that the gateway to peace will remain open and that both your nations will go through it together.

Without further ado, I shall give the floor first to Mr Abu Ala and then to Mr Burg.

Thank you, Mr Ahmed Qurie, Speaker of the Palestinian Legislative Council,

for your compelling speech. I shall now give the floor to Mr Avraham Burg, Speaker of the Israeli Knesset.

Mr Burg, you have the floor.

Ladies and gentlemen, it is my sincere opinion that we have just witnessed a very moving moment that will, perhaps, one day be seen as a historic moment.

There is not a great deal more that I wish to say.

I should just like to thank our friends for both having opened their hearts to us, each in his own way, Mr Abu Ala with his determined realism and Mr Avraham Burg with his infectious enthusiasm.

You have told us clearly and frankly of your hopes.

You have also given us your analysis of the problems which remain.

Mr Abu Ala reminded us of the gulf that remained, but Mr Avraham Burg also said that he preferred the frustrations of negotiation to the atrocities of war.

This is something we have taken on board.

We have had confirmation, as if indeed it were necessary, that both of you are men of dialogue and that you are also good friends - and this is something I think is very important - and leaders who are determined and passionate to achieve this peace which can only be achieved with your help and between you, this peace which both your nations are waiting for, and which we too are waiting for.

I must thank you, too, for outlining the possible avenues regarding the extremely sensitive matter of Jerusalem.

Mr Abu Ala, you put forward the idea of according Jerusalem international status, and Mr Avraham Burg, you mentioned the idea of restoring the sovereignty of Jerusalem to God.

These are all, of course, avenues which we have considered with great interest.

I think the main thing right now is to acknowledge that various avenues are open.

The European Parliament has always considered that Jerusalem' s definitive status should be internationally recognised.

I shall take the liberty, in conclusion, of referring to an episode from a book which I have been reading by Uri Savir, the chief Israeli negotiator in Oslo.

When he met you, the Norwegian negotiators introduced you as 'enemy number one' , and yet after the very tough negotiations, you went to visit him in Tel Aviv, and you went for a walk on the sea front, he says, away from all the media pressure, and, ahead of the thinking of the time, discussed how, after the historic breakthrough in Oslo, you might establish a sustainable and equitable peace, as you have said.

The time for that has come.

You have clearly understood that you will have the European Parliament at your side, and that is why you are here today.

Believe me, the European Parliament will spare no effort both as a whole and, more particularly, through its three interparliamentary delegations - the delegation for Israel, chaired by Mr Gerardo Galeote Quecedo, the delegation for the Palestinian Legislative Council, chaired by Mrs Morgantini, and the delegation for the Mashreq Countries and the Gulf States, chaired by Mr Michel Dary - to offer you our most active assistance, particularly, moreover, in developing Euro-Mediterranean dialogue, which we hold to be an essential complement to the enlargement of the European Union to Eastern and Central Europe.

So, my dear friends, in conclusion, may I simply wish you Shalom and Salaam!

(Loud applause) (The formal sitting was closed at 12.55 p.m.)

Mr President, I would like to make what I consider to be a very important point. Yesterday, I came to Strasbourg on Olympic Airways flight 165 from Athens to Frankfurt.

When the plane arrived at Frankfurt airport, it was immediately surrounded by German police.

Nobody spoke anything but German, and we were not allowed to leave the plane without showing our passports to the German police.

I remind you that Greece, as well as Germany and France, are countries that belong to the Schengen area.

The worst thing is that this was not an exception; this, I was told, is something that happens systematically at Frankfurt airport when planes arrive from Greece.

As a Member of the European Parliament, where we have so often voted on Schengen, I believe that, although there is legislation for the free movement of people, the fact that, in reality, this legislation is being systematically violated by the German authorities is an insult to, and undermines, our work.

As this concerns the free movement of Members of the European Union, I would like the President of the European Parliament to take the appropriate measures to ensure that we come to Strasbourg in a way that befits people who belong to the European Union and to Schengen.

Mr Alavanos, I consider that our President shall forward the text of your speech to the authorities of the Federal Republic of Germany and the Frankfurt airport authorities so that - and I do not know what the grounds might be for the current practice - we receive at least some sort of explanation or, alternatively, this procedure, which, I agree with you, has very little to do with the Schengen provisions, ceases to be used.

Mr President, on Monday, in my absence and without any prior notification, Mr Murphy, the leader of the British Socialist Group, raised a question about my involvement in supporting the Danish anti-euro campaign.

He was very careful not to accuse me of anything but has none the less contrived to give the impression that I am somehow under suspicion.

I should like to put on record that my involvement with the Danish referendum has been entirely separate from my work in this House and that I have never infringed any parliamentary rules.

Unlike the Danish "yes" campaign, the "no" campaign cannot rely on taxpayers' money or subsidies from the European Union.

It is outrageous that Mr Murphy should have sought to give the impression that I am under investigation when he has failed to produce evidence or even make any allegations against me.

It cannot be right for Members to be subjected to this kind of baseless innuendo.

I would ask you to insist that Mr Murphy either accuse me outright or apologise.

Mr Hannan, Mr Murphy is, of course, free to decide whether and how to respond to your speech.

Mr President, we very frequently complain about the Council's attitude towards Parliament.

I would like to highlight an incident of a completely opposite nature which took place yesterday during the debate on EU external action priorities.

We had the reports from the President of the Council and the Commissioner followed by a debate took place.

At the end of the debate, due to the presidency's total lack of flexibility, the President of the Council and Commissioner Patten were not able to respond to the numerous questions which had arisen from quite an intense debate.

Now then, I cannot understand this Parliament for complaining about the Council's behaviour.

Yesterday, the President of the Council was in the Chamber from 9 a.m. to 7 p.m. while the number of Members of Parliament present was not great - and, in actual fact, we prevented both the Council or the Commission from replying to extremely important questions posed by Members.

This does not seem to me to be very polite, and I would go so far as to describe it as verging on the downright rude.

Mr Dupuis, I doubt that this situation was due to lack of flexibility on the part of the presidency on duty. It is more likely to have been a mistake, a misunderstanding between the Chair at the time and the Council and Commission representatives.

Mr President, I am very surprised at what I heard from our British fellow MEP, Mr Hannan, for he presented himself in the Danish media as a Member of the European Parliament.

If he were there as a private individual, he should have let this be known in the Danish campaign.

All things considered, I think Mr Hannan should stay at home in Britain and mind his own business, and leave us to get on with it in Denmark.

We have no use for people like that acting the fool in Denmark.

Mr President, I do not want to detain the House too long but I think that Mr Hannan protests too much!

I made a very simple request to the President on Monday.

The President agreed to my request and referred the matter to the Quaestors.

But while Mr Hannan is here in the Chamber this morning, perhaps he could give us a guarantee that he will be making a new entry in his declaration of financial interests to say where the money has come from.

The Danish people have a right to know in advance of the referendum on 28 September where the "no" campaign funds have come from.

Now then, we cannot continue with the debate and we cannot turn this Chamber into an annex to the discussion leading up to the Danish referendum either.

We now know the essence of the issue.

Everyone will do what they think best.

The next item is the report (A5-0201/2000) by Mr Watson, on behalf of the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs, on the proposal for a Council directive on the right to family reunification [COM(1999) 638 - C50077/2000 - 1999/0258 (CNS)]

Mr President, I would like to begin by thanking Mrs Klamt, who was the original rapporteur designated by the committee which I have the honour to chair to look at this issue.

Mrs Klamt did a very considerable amount of work on the proposal for a Council directive on the right to family reunification.

She deserves the credit for the work that has been done.

I wish to congratulate her on that.

I have inherited this particular cornucopia as chairman of the committee because Mrs Klamt felt at the end of the votes at committee stage that she could no longer support the text as it stood and therefore I am presenting it to the House today.

I would like to commend the European Commission on what is an extremely well argued and well presented report, drawn up in record time considering the relative lack of resources of the departments concerned and the demands laid down at the European Council in Tampere last year.

The Commission has come forward with an excellent draft directive which will permit third-country nationals legally resident in a Member State of the Union to reside in another Member State as is required if a true area of freedom, security and justice is to be established.

The Commission has said, quite rightly in my view, that the goal of zero immigration mentioned in past Community discussion was never realistic and sought instead to put forward realistic proposals for the protection of the rights of third-country nationals in accordance with the many international treaties that have been signed by Member States, such as the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the international covenants of 1966 on civil and political rights and on economic and social rights.

Very clearly, the importance of legal immigration is recognised.

The importance of the family as a unit is also recognised and the importance of making a success of the integration of third-country nationals residing lawfully in EU Member States is the whole basis of these proposals.

We have in my committee considered a number of contentious areas, not least the question of the right to bring in ascending relatives.

The Commission proposal quite clearly recognises the difference of legal treatment between descending and ascending relatives.

It is evident that, in the context of the international legal framework, mention must be made of the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child.

This convention requires states to ensure that the child is not separated from the parents.

There is no similar convention dealing with ascending relatives, but it is clearly the case that if we wish to live up to our humanitarian ideals we must provide the opportunity for third-country nationals to bring dependent relatives in the ascending line into their family units.

This has been a matter of some debate within the committee.

I am pleased to see that a number of amendments to the final report have been put forward; in particular Amendments Nos 18 to 23, which propose a compromise on this matter.

May I briefly introduce some of the amendments that the committee's report puts forward.

Amendment No 3 looks at the need for data and recognises that in order to have an effective evaluation of the situation in the Member States, the Commission will need more information from the Member States.

Amendment No 5 deals with relatives from the ascending line.

This has now been overtaken in a sense by the compromise Amendments Nos 18 to 23.

Amendment No 6 recognises the very real problems that the administrations of the Member States currently have with the workload created by the demands of family reunification.

Amendment No 9 allows each Member State to introduce more favourable provisions than those set down in the directives, and insists that these new rules will not lower current standards of protection.

Amendment No 11 deals with the grounds on which a Member State may deny the right of entry to a relative, namely on grounds of public policy, domestic security and public health.

Our amendment seeks to insist that any Member State wishing to refuse entry on those grounds provides very clear justification.

I do not wish to comment on all of the 66 amendments put forward to my report, but I would say that this is a very complicated area.

Parliament had relatively little time to look at it and inevitably not all of the compromises which were necessary to reach a favourable outcome were achieved in committee.

I would therefore urge Members to look carefully at the amendments that have been tabled in plenary to reach the compromises which will allow us to go forward in an effective and humanitarian way.

Mr President, my task as draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market was a relatively easy one compared with that of the honourable members in the committee responsible, and I would like to congratulate them all on the outcome, even if we do have to discuss a few compromise amendments in plenary today.

The reason I said that my committee' s task was an easy one, is because the proposed draft directive raises few difficulties from a legal viewpoint, and nor is there a great deal of room for manoeuvre when it comes to framing policy.

I would also like to say how impressed I am with the logistical quality of the draft directive, which certainly cannot be said of all the Commission' s draft directives.

Pursuant to the new Article 63 of the EU Treaty, it is now the Community' s task to settle the matter of family reunification, and the Community must take these measures in accordance with the provisions of international law, in particular the European Convention of Human Rights and the other instruments of international law already mentioned by our committee chairman.

The right to respect for family life is a universal human right.

It is not divisible and cannot be reserved for EU citizens alone.

This would be a dubious line to take, particularly as we are concurrently working on a European Charter of Fundamental Rights.

If Community provisions are now to be put in place for family reunification, we also need to close incomprehensible and, in some cases, absurd gaps in the existing legislation.

This particularly applies to the right of EU citizens themselves to live together in their home land with family members originating from a third country and not to be in the position where the only way they can live with them as a family is to avail themselves of freedom of movement and settle in another Member States.

Therefore this directive is only too welcome from a legal viewpoint, and it is to be hoped that neither Parliament, nor, more importantly, the Council, will make any changes to the substance of the Commission' s original draft.

Mr President, in principle, everyone agrees that open internal borders make a compelling case for a pan-European, harmonised immigration and asylum policy.

The Commission has put forward the first draft of a legislative initiative in this field, which concerns the right to family reunification.

Unfortunately, it failed to place this draft directive in an overall frame of reference.

What point is there in knowing which family members have the right to enter and reside in the EU, when it is not known what provisions are to be made for which immigrant groups and for which reasons for immigration?

In addition, Parliament is expected to vote on a legislative initiative which lacks absolute fundamental principles.

We have neither a joint evaluation of demographic trends, nor do we know what impact this legislative initiative will have on the individual Member States.

Unfortunately, the lack of overall strategy and statistical basis are not the only weak points.

The Commission lumps economically motivated immigration and asylum together.

I take the view that as far as family reunification is concerned, there should be one set of arrangements for asylum seekers and refugees, and one for immigrants.

Different rules must apply to those who have been driven out of their native land than apply to those who emigrate for economic reasons.

We need to clearly distinguish between asylum seekers and refugees on the one hand, and immigration, i.e. economic migration, on the other.

This will allow for provisions that do justice to the people concerned and the situations they are in.

Many of my proposed amendments have this distinction in view.

Another problem with the present draft directive concerns the widening of the definition of family.

Grandparents, children over the age of majority and non-married partners should also be entitled to family reunification.

That is where the dilemma lies: there is no overall frame of reference for immigration.

As such, family reunification is currently the only legal channel of immigration.

The proposed sweeping provisions on family reunification are open to uncontrollable abuse.

Just ask yourselves this question: who will decide, according to which criteria, whether a relationship is bogus, contrived purely for the purposes of immigration?

That is why quite a few of my proposed amendments call for priority to be given to the core family.

Another cardinal sin committed by the Commission is that its proposal contains no measures whatsoever for integration.

It is not right to bring people to a foreign country without making the necessary provisions for foreign nationals and local people to live together in peace and friendship.

A final point to be made is that a directive of this kind is paving the way for us to have an objective and constructive discussion on the whole area of immigration.

If people feel they are being overrun by waves of immigrants, then their reaction is one of rejection.

If we put transparent, enforceable provisions in place, then people will be more inclined to allow foreign nationals to integrate.

By producing moderate and well-considered solutions, not only will we be able to overcome problems such as xenophobia; we will also be able to tackle the problems associated with having a disproportionate number of elderly people in the European Union.

However, this draft directive seems to be a poor first attempt at this.

Mr President, I am sorry to hear Mrs Klamt' s words.

I wanted to begin by congratulating the Commission and Commissioner Vitorino on this proposal which seems to me to be very complete, well constructed and timely, coming almost a year after the Tampere Summit.

We must clarify today in this Parliament whether we want the immigrants and refugees who live amongst us to do so legally with their families, giving them the opportunity to live a normal life and to integrate fully into our society, or whether we are going to continue to feed the myth that they are provisional co-citizens whose final destiny is to return to the hypothetical homes they came from.

This issue is so important that we must make an effort to reach a consensus.

All of our groups were in agreement in committee, apart from the PPE Group.

I would like us today to send a message to the people who live amongst us that they can do so with their right to live as a family recognised.

Mr President, this is the intention of my group, although I would also like to ask the Commission, on behalf of my group, to think twice about one aspect included in the current directive.

We have also applied these rules we are debating to people who are under alternative protection.

Unfortunately, the European Union does not have homogenous criteria. There is no harmonised asylum policy.

Therefore, there are very different situations in many countries, and on this minor point I would agree with Mrs Klamt.

It is not a question of rejecting these people - they have the right to live as families - but of the Commission thinking twice about it and of their being subject to a future directive which would include persons under temporary and alternative protection, while we await the future harmonisation of the Union' s asylum policy.

Otherwise, I congratulate the Commission and I hope that it receives the full support of this House.

Mr President, the ELDR Group is backing this report as one of the essential building blocks in constructing the area of freedom, security and justice and in following up the Tampere Summit, which rightly made it a priority to establish rights of free movement for legally resident third-country nationals.

This is an injustice which needs remedying.

Like Mrs Terrón i Cusí, I am surprised at the stance of the EPP Group, which normally puts a lot of emphasis on family values and yet today is undermining the family by opposing reunification, which will assist the social integration of these legally resident migrants.

To take up some specific points in the report, first of all on the inclusion of beneficiaries of subsidiary protection.

We will wait to hear Mr Vitorino, but it is rumoured that the Commission will accept amendments to take these beneficiaries out.

The ELDR Group would regret that because we think that, like refugees, beneficiaries of subsidiary protection should be in.

They are long-term residents, they are not analogous to beneficiaries of temporary protection.

We will listen to the debate because our overwhelming desire is to get the bones of this proposal through.

On ascending relatives, we consider that Amendment No 20 is superfluous because there is a general right in Article 9 of the proposal to apply a non-discriminatory means test to all entrants.

However we are willing to look at that if it assists in saving the report.

It is important to be absolutely clear on unmarried partners.

The proposal will not force Member States to give legal recognition to unmarried partnerships, but if they do they must treat unmarried partners like spouses.

There has been a lot of misinformation on this, not least stirred up by the Conservatives in the United Kingdom - tabloid headlines about outrageous plots by the EU to force the UK to accept refugees' gay lovers.

That is stirring up homophobic prejudice and I deplore it.

Mr President, we are going to vote on a report today that has caused a political stir in certain EU States.

The Commission and Commissioner Vitorino have done some sterling work here, and I would like, on behalf of my group, to take the opportunity to thank them for it.

The European Council confirmed, at its special summit in Tampere, that the European Union must ensure that third-country nationals are treated fairly. The Commission has taken this resolution forward.

This directive is conclusive as it stands, and should be transposed with all haste.

Sadly there were, and still are, reservations against including refugees benefiting from temporary protection in this directive, and against recognising same-sex relationships as the basis for family reunification.

This debate demonstrates once again that, unfortunately, integration and migration policy is still a controversial issue in the European Union.

There is, after all, a great deal to be considered.

Nevertheless, we must make it possible for people who live apart from relatives who are third-country nationals, to be brought together.

Therefore, in principle, this is an initiative that deserves everyone' s support, particularly where it concerns children, and these self-same children - irrespective of whether they are the offspring of refugees or immigrants - should have a future in the European Union.

However, opinion is being stirred up against this directive in the political arena.

It is to be hoped that the majority of honourable members will support the directive put forward by the Commission as it stands.

I know that my fellow socialist members are awaiting a statement from Mr Vitorino, in the hope that refugees' interests will be sacrificed for the sake of this directive, under pressure from quite a number of EU Ministers for Home Affairs.

I regret this decision, and the fact that Ministers for Home Affairs appear to carry more weight in this Parliament than the honourable members, who are expected to act according to their consciences.

For this reason, I reiterate my call for us to support the Commission' s directive and at last set down a marker for an up-to-date, modern and humane policy of integration.

I hope the Socialists will refrain from making this deal with the Conservatives.

Mr President, I would like to commend the Commission on its serious and balanced work. Too often, when we broach the subject of immigration, passions, excesses and political ulterior motives prevent us from reflecting objectively and making progress.

In dealing in depth with the issue of the right to live as a family, and in defining the precise conditions for its application, the text enables us to hold a real debate.

Far from casting suspicion a priori, as is often the case, on those who wish to live with their spouses and children, the text recognises the legitimacy of such a right even if, in fact, this right must now apply equally to homosexual couples and to all other categories, as the honourable Member has just said, especially in the case of asylum seekers.

The text also takes into account that nowadays there are several types of families in our society, especially certain forms of cohabitation, and that we cannot therefore discriminate against immigrants who live in the same way.

In recognising this, the text helps to give real meaning to the term 'integration' .

Through harmonising legislation in Member States, this draft directive will provide protection and legal stability for immigrants and will above all prevent them from being subjected to national political fluctuations.

I therefore hope that subsequent work by the Commission and Parliament will take its inspiration from this example.

Perhaps we will then be able to talk further on the equality of rights and the often positive contribution made by immigration, in dealing with issues that are vital for integration and the fight against the unemployment, insecure employment, violence and discrimination, of which immigrants are often victim.

Yet we must resolve to talk about the real problems such as the imbalances between the North and the South that often force men and women to flee from poverty.

We must also recognise that the waves of immigrants towards the countries of the European Union have been more or less constant for a couple of decades.

In other words, by implementing restrictive laws, Member States have not succeeded in reducing the overall number of entrants; they have simply reduced the number of legal immigrants while increasing the numbers of illegal immigrants by declaring them illegal.

By underpinning these values, this draft directive will not only have positive consequences for immigrants and their families, but it will also be a symbol for refuge and integration.

I sincerely hope that we will be able to follow the same line of conduct in subsequent work.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the text that has been presented to us, and in fact the entire immigration policy that is being pursued by European institutions, exhibits a worrying trend.

Indeed, there would be cause to worry about a certain form of capitalism that imports workers and cuts them off from their families, with all the risks of rootlessness that could give rise to. But today we have gone well beyond that.

What were initially nothing more than a temporary work contracts are tending to turn into permanent residence.

What has become permanent for one person is tending to become permanent for that person' s family and friends.

Initially it was just the close family, but now it is the extended family as well. And we are very well aware that the extended family is extensive, given the social structures of the countries of origin, in which the registration of births, marriages and deaths is sometimes only rather ad hoc.

And then, from the extended family - brothers, cousins, nephews, parents, grand parents - we move on to the polygamous family.

And why favour just family ties? From the polygamous family, we move on to cohabitation and soon, as the preceding speaker, Mr Sylla, has just proposed, we will move on to mere homosexual association.

These are the considerable risks resulting from this policy trend.

We are going to end up with what we are already starting to witness; a veritable, suicidal immigration of entire populations, organised by Member States and European institutions alike.

This is, quite manifestly, the suicide of Europe.

The only solution worthy of the name is to organise family reunification but to organise it in the country of origin with the support of the policy of cooperation to which end these methods should be employed.

Mr President, whilst expressing my continued dismay at the ongoing prejudice shown towards Austria by the 14 other Member States, I have this to say about the report currently under discussion. I regret the way in which it was handled in the committee responsible, as this has led to the rapporteur being unable, in the final analysis, to identify with the outcome, causing her to withdraw her name.

A rather singular occurrence. As I see it, constructive and well-founded amendments proposed by the rapporteur - which she has expounded and justified again today, and which I am therefore in a position to refer to - as well as by other members of the committee, were simply swept aside and not handled properly, for reasons of political ideology.

In assessing this improper conduct, I would refer - on behalf of Austria, among others - to the decision taken by the conference of the heads of provincial governments on 17 May 2000, whereby all the new Austrian heads of the provincial governments rejected the draft directive in this form, unanimously and in fact right across the political divide.

I am sorry that the committee has behaved in this way, because I believe a sledgehammer approach does the cause more harm than good, particularly in an area as sensitive as this.

Mr President, Commissioner, the present document, like the report, is a labelling con.

The wording on the outside belies the actual contents of these documents.

We would be delighted to endorse family reunification measures, for this would be deeply humane and would also be key to an integration component, but what we have is something entirely different.

This is about initiating sociopolitical debate on how far the circle of those entitled to family reunification can be extended beyond the core family.

You include a proposal relating to unmarried partners, whose parents and children would be allowed to join them, according to which, testimonies from the country of origin would be enough to satisfy you as to the authenticity of a relationship, regardless as to how it appears.

This would mean that children or parents joining members here would have the same rights as EU citizens in the educational, employment and social spheres.

The traffickers in human beings and the document forgers will thank those of you who support this proposal, and you can rest assured that the general public' s response will be one of indignation.

You also include a proposal relating to multiple marriages, i.e. the first wife is to be accepted along with the children and relatives in the ascending line. However, you also make the point in this document that naturally it would be possible to bring another wife and her dependants in, if this were necessary for the sake of the child' s welfare.

This begs the question as to how much wider the door is to be opened to uncontrollable immigration?

As far as we are concerned, the proposal under discussion is unacceptable.

It lacks an overall frame of reference, a statistical basis and there is no differentiation. You are also overstepping the mark in respect of the Treaty of Amsterdam, which requires the integration capacity of each of the Member States to be taken into account.

We have no intention of voting for this document unless it includes our amendments and follows our political line.

Mr President, after the recent events in Dover, when 29 illegal Chinese immigrants suffocated to death, the tragedy of illegal immigration and the methods of responding to it have become a considerable problem, which the European Union must definitely tackle.

This problem requires us to work on a particularly sensitive issue, that of shaping and harmonising a European immigration policy. This will be one of the major issues of the twenty-first century.

The European Commission' s draft directive establishing the right to family reunification is perfectly timed, and I would like to congratulate the Commission particularly on this text, which was drawn up under the auspices of Commissioner Vitorino.

The right to family reunification is crucial to normal family life. What is more, this right has long existed in the form of Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights, according to which all persons have the right to family life.

But this is a particularly sensitive issue in view of the different laws existing in the various Member States, as it can come into conflict with notions of sovereignty. But that is the gauntlet that has been thrown down to the European Parliament, which must succeed in transcending these differences.

The draft directive we are being asked to give our opinion on today is, in my view, a text of major importance, and it must receive the firm backing of the European Parliament. This text holds out real prospects for legal immigration, most of which is family immigration.

As has already been said, this directive is the first example of this type of structure resulting from the Treaty of Amsterdam and the Tampere European Council, which is why it is so important.

I would also like to point out that the modern world has many advantages, but for certain categories of people, including foreigners, there is a significant risk of exclusion. It is our duty as European democrats to be particularly diligent in this matter.

The directive proposed by the Commission enables us to take a major step forward, under conditions that are entirely satisfactory, but with all the necessary guarantees.

There has never been any question of authorising polygamous family groupings, contrary to what I have just heard.

Let us remember that this is the first text in the process of integrating the 'justice and internal affairs' pillar into community policy in the wake of the Treaty of Amsterdam and the Tampere European Council last November.

Let us also remember that this is no more and no less than a matter of establishing the right to family reunification and that we must stop seeing family reunification as a privilege.

As far as we are concerned, what is at stake is the construction of a Citizens' Europe, something we are hoping and praying for in order to be able to continue to build Europe.

It is up to us to seize this opportunity. Otherwise we will not succeed.

Mr President, I am of the firm opinion that this draft directive is a major step forward.

That said, restrictive conditions are still being placed on the process of family reunification.

I believe we should be highlighting the fact that, in the final analysis, it is unemployment and insecure employment that should be banned and not the right of immigrants to live with their families only if they can provide evidence of adequate means and a roof over their head.

For the nationals of a country, society makes progress slowly, but it does make progress, witness the PACS vote in France, but the notion of the family in the case of immigrants is inflexible.

The laws in force provide for the right of residence to be revoked if there is a break-up in the matrimonial household, effectively outlawing divorce, and, as has just been said, homosexual couples are still not recognised.

Under the pretext of combating polygamy, second spouses and their children are condemned to illegality and to even greater dependence.

Family reunification must be liberated from the archaic conditions that still exist as a result of fanatical immigration control.

In conclusion, Mr Watson' s report has fortunately made real progress following the work in committee on the initial report by Mrs Klamt.

I am bound to say that, when I hear Mr Gollnisch' s racist, reactionary and unacceptable comments, I want to vote for this report.

It is a question of dignity.

Mr President, contrary to popular belief and notwithstanding the debate that has taken place here this morning, this directive is not about defining the concept of family, which is generally binding throughout the European Union.

It has far more to do with establishing in precise terms, which third-country family members should be entitled to join relations who are immigrants to the European Union.

No one would dispute the fact that families have the right to live together.

But what really matters here is where we draw the line as regards family members.

For example, I have a wife and two children, and they have children too. I also have siblings and aunts and uncles.

If I were to count the number of relatives I live in close contact with, that makes 25 all told.

Commissioner Vitorino, if I were to apply for asylum in Portugal, for example, then clearly I would be unable to assert a claim to live there with 25 relatives.

In other words, we must be sensible and draw the line somewhere.

That is the crucial problem we face with this directive.

We must also distinguish between those whose stay in the European Union subject to a time limit, and those who reside here permanently.

I should point out that this draft directive extends family reunification provisions beyond those that have been in force in the Member States to date.

This sends out another signal to would-be immigrants, which will, of course, have major consequences.

This directive would have very different implications for States with a high proportion of immigrants, such as Austria, Germany and the Benelux States, than it would for States such as Portugal, Finland and others, which do not see very much in the way of immigration.

We cannot endorse this directive as matters stand, because it would lead to a dramatic increase in family reunification, which is one of the main grounds for reunification.

Therefore, Commissioner, with all due respect for your work, I cherish the hope that the Council will decline to give it the unanimous assent it requires.

Mr President, I would like to begin by warmly congratulating the European Commission and especially Commissioner Vitorino, on its extremely constructive legislative proposal on the issue of family reunification.

At last, Europe is on the move, after decades of zero immigration and, more especially, after so many years of refusal by Europeans to grant third-country nationals residing lawfully in the European Union their fundamental human rights.

Recognising the right to family life is one of the basic conditions for the integration of refugees and migrants in the social life of the country in which they reside.

Unfortunately, those in this Parliament who extol the virtues of the family and hold it up as the highest ideal happen to be the very people who undermine it. This is exactly what is happening with this draft directive on the reunification of the families of refugees and migrants.

Self-righteous hypocrisy is the main feature of this wing of the European Parliament, and we have experienced it again and again.

Yet I would like to say that I understand the qualms of many governments, including my own, concerning this draft directive.

Indeed, countries such as Germany, where millions of refugees and migrants have sought refuge, are shouldering an enormous burden.

But at the same time I would like to point out and to highlight the enormous contribution that refugees and migrants make to the economic development of our countries, through their work and through taxation.

The social burden that is referred to by the critics of the proposal may be reduced if refugees and their family members have the right to work, as provided for by the Commission proposal

Finally, I would like to point out that this directive sets out the minimum requirements, and governments retain the right to put in place better conditions for the reunification of families.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, this is the first time since the Treaty of Amsterdam entered into force that the European Parliament has been consulted on a Commission proposal for a Council directive on the matter of the lawful immigration of persons originating from third countries.

It is therefore a sign of the profound institutional changes introduced by the Treaty and given top priority on the European political agenda by the Heads of State and Government at the Tampere European Council.

The Commission has decided that a proposal on family reunification should start us off on this journey, this considerable effort to construct a common European immigration policy.

I should also like to begin by explaining why we have chosen this subject - in answer to a critical observation from Mrs Klamt, whom, regardless of our differences of opinion, I should like to congratulate on the work she has carried out as the first rapporteur for this matter.

I believe family reunification is a concept that is thoroughly coherent with the commitments that all the Member States undertook several decades ago in the sphere of international law.

From the reference to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights to the international convenants made under the United Nations in 1966, to the European Convention on Human Rights itself - in all these instruments of international law family protection is upheld as an essential factor for ensuring social peace.

I do not believe anybody can deny that family reunification is also an important instrument for the integration of immigrants from third countries into their host societies.

This has indeed been repeatedly recognised by the bodies of the European Union.

That is, since 1993 the Council has been devoting constant attention to the subject of family reunification.

It must also be recognised that family reunification is significant in numerical terms because it is today one of the main causes of immigration into the countries of Europe.

The directive is not creating this flow of migrants; what the directive intends is to regulate a situation that already exists on the ground.

Those who refuse to see that this directive aims at setting up legal rules to respond to a situation that already exists on the ground and try to blame the Commission for inventing a new flow of migrants are therefore being unfair in their analysis of the actual situation that we are addressing.

That is why the Commission decided that family reunification should be given priority treatment over other forms of lawful immigration.

It is not a matter of deciding on entry and residence for economic purposes, or the immigration of workers, or the immigration of students.

As we see it, it is a matter of regulating a different form of admittance in response to values - that is, family protection - and a strategic political objective: the promotion of the integration of third-country nationals who are already living lawfully in the Union into their host societies.

We are basing our approach on a principle which is debatable, but without any evidence to the contrary I believe it can be demonstrated.

This is that family reunification is a factor which promotes the personal stability of the immigrant, since family life is always an important instrument for integration into the host country.

The Heads of State and Government at Tampere in fact unanimously stressed the need to ensure equitable treatment for third-country nationals who are lawfully resident in the Member States of the Union.

They also stressed that a more dynamic integration policy needs to be developed in parallel, and that this policy should aim at offering third-country nationals rights and duties comparable to those held by the citizens of the Union.

These, then, ladies and gentlemen, are the values and political commitments upon which the Commission has based its proposal.

I should also like to point out that the Commission has proposed an initiative in which family reunification is seen as a right.

This is not, however, an absolute right of the third-country citizens who reside in the Union' s Member States, and reside there lawfully.

Instead it is a right subject to conditions, whether procedural in nature or material conditions regarding the definition of the status of the family members in the country to which they have been admitted and regarding the rights that they enjoy.

I am willing to discuss all the implications of this proposal, also because the French Presidency considers this subject to be central during the six-month term for which it is responsible.

For our part, we are also willing to introduce an amended proposal as quickly as possible so that we can achieve a positive outcome during the French Presidency.

I should like to thank all the Members who have taken part in the debate.

Here as in the Commission it has been a lively, at times even passionate debate, because it deals with a sensitive issue on which, naturally, each country puts forward a very strong case for its own situation.

It is difficult to find common ground at European level.

Above all, however, this debate has one fundamental feature.

It is no longer a debate on statements of intention: it is a debate on rules, binding legal provisions, which will have to be implemented.

It is therefore natural that it should be a lively, even passionate debate, and one in which there are divergent views.

The Commission considers your opinion to be of the utmost importance.

And I should like to congratulate Mr Wilson on the job he has done in presenting a report under the difficult circumstances in which this debate has taken place.

I should like to explain to you all what the Commission' s position is on the more difficult political issues in this directive.

First, the scope of the proposal: the Commission believes that refugees should be included within its scope, because from a political viewpoint it would be incomprehensible if economic migrants were granted a right to family reunification that we did not grant to refugees recognised under the Geneva Convention.

I accept, however, that it is necessary to exclude the beneficiaries of temporary protection or subsidiary protection.

This is not a matter of going back on a question of principle.

I am convinced that a certain kind of beneficiary of temporary or subsidiary protection should also have the right to family reunification.

I do recognise, however, that the lack of harmonisation of this concept at European level and especially the Commission' s intention to submit a directive on temporary and subsidiary protection to Parliament and the Council next year will allow us to deal with the right to family reunification in that directive very soon.

We therefore accept an amendment to the proposal excluding beneficiaries of temporary or subsidiary protection.

Where issues relating to the concept of the family are concerned, I should like to make it very clear that in this proposal the Commission is not interfering in the matter of defining the concept of the family.

This proposal fully accepts that each Member State has the competence to define what a family is, as well as the issue, for instance, of unmarried partnerships.

This proposal does not say that all the Member States will be obliged to recognise unmarried partnerships and accept unmarried partners under all circumstances.

We are simply saying that in those countries where unmarried partnerships are placed on an equal footing with marriage in domestic law for their own nationals, these unmarried partnerships must also be recognised for the purpose of family reunification for third-country nationals.

I should therefore like to state clearly that there is nothing in this proposal favouring family reunification for polygamous marriages.

I am sorry, but the text is quite clear! It is not possible to apply for a second wife to come!

Only one exception is made: for the children of the second marriage if the interests of the child so justify.

But how could you explain treating the children of a second polygamous marriage differently from the children of a first marriage or the children of an unmarried partnership?

I am not a subverter of moral values, but I think we have to keep the interests of the children in the forefront.

Finally, Mr President, the Commission is willing to accept a number of other amendments and other modifications regarding the rights of family members, the conditions and clarification of the conditions for family reunification, the situation in which the person being reunited may acquire independent status, and concerning procedural rules.

Full details will be given before the vote is taken.

I should like to conclude by saying that this is, of course, an exercise that will give rise to debate.

The debate with the Council will not be easy, just as the debate with Parliament has not been easy.

I respect the opinions of all Members.

I should like the final opinion of Parliament to have as broad a support-base as possible.

And I hope - regardless of our differences of opinion, which are to be expected and, may I say, useful and essential for democracy - that once this directive has been adopted, we may all be able to pool our efforts to solve the essential question that we have before us. This question is how we can create a clear and transparent legal framework that will ensure the integration of lawful immigrants into their host countries and we must do so because this integration is the key to the success of a common European immigration policy.

The vote will take place at 12 noon.

Movement and residence of EU citizens

The next item is the report (A5-207/200) by Mrs Boumediene-Thiery, on behalf of the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Internal Affairs, on the Commission report on the implementation of directives 90/364, 90/365 and 93/96 (right of residence) and on the Communication from the Commission on the special measures concerning the movement and residence of citizens of the Union which are justified on grounds of public policy, public security or public health [COM(1999) 127 COM(1999) 372 - C5-0177/1999, C5-0178/1999 - 1999/257 (COS)]

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I would first of all like to thank all of you who have, through your comments, contributed to fuelling this debate.

Before embarking on an explanation of my report, I would like to start by asking you a question that I cannot get out of my head.

This is in my view the crux of the problem described in my report and will determine the way we vote.

This question is: what in fact does European citizenship really mean?

Is it just a simple expression aimed at selling Europe, or do we really want to add content to this term?

Today, for the majority of us who live in Europe, European citizenship is still a concept that is devoid of meaning.

If we want Europe to be more than a vast free trade area, we must take action to ensure that European citizenship goes beyond the status of a concept and takes root in the everyday life of the citizens of Europe.

This is the context in which I wish to place this debate.

The directives that have been examined concern Community nationals, but they must be modified in favour of third-county nationals.

The report aims to sum up the reality of the freedom to move and reside in the European Union.

With reference to the EC Treaty, my report was written with due regard to Article 14, concerning free movement of persons, and Articles 17 and 18 concerning European citizenship, which entails the right to move and to reside freely throughout the territory of the European Union.

Although Member States have made great progress in ensuring the free movement of goods, services and capital, it is clear that we are no nearer to achieving the same for people.

I will start by filling in some of the background and the content of the directives. Initially, freedom of movement was reserved for people who were economically active.

In June 1990, the Council adopted three Commission draft directives to extend this right to all Member State nationals, even if they were not economically active.

I will just give the broad guidelines of these directives.

For retired people and other non-economically active people, the right of residence is open to those who have health insurance cover and adequate means.

For students, the right of residence is subject to the condition that the student is enrolled at a recognised educational establishment and that he is covered by sickness insurance.

In both cases, spouses and dependent children may accompany the holder of the right of residence and may work.

The transposition of these directives was doubly problematic.

On the one hand, the directives were transposed extremely slowly throughout the Union.

What is more, the Commission had to initiate fourteen infringement procedures.

The Commission concludes that 'for too long, EU citizens have been denied some of their rights or been faced with unjustified administrative difficulties due to the incorrect transposition of the Directives' .

Let us now proceed to a concrete assessment of the situation.

This right to free movement and residence, which is confirmed in the Maastricht Treaty, is violated by economic considerations.

The notion of adequate means is incorrectly interpreted by governments.

What income is to be taken into account when evaluating means?

How does one take into consideration a progressive financial situation which sometimes depends on the help provided by the spouse?

Because the acceptance procedures are long and difficult, it is often necessary to take out a second health insurance in the host country.

When you are not in salaried work, it is difficult to obtain a residence permit and the instability of the professional situation is added to by the short-term nature of the residence permit once it has been obtained.

With regard to special measures justified in the name of public order, the Commission gives examples of many cases of incorrect interpretations, such as criminal convictions that justify systematic deportation and expulsion.

Finally, administrative procedures are too long - more than six months - and become very costly when frequent renewal is necessary, as the period of validity is normally two years rather than five.

I will now present the main measures advocated with a view to overcoming these problems.

Our first proposal is to ask the Commission to prepare a framework directive, which would adopt a position based on the fundamental right of free movement and residence rather than on a sector-specific approach which necessarily leaves room for ambiguities.

It will still be possible at a later date to implement a whole raft of specific measures to help citizens depending on their particular situation.

This reworking of the existing directives must dissociate the fundamental right of movement and residence from any economic considerations.

These measures must be concomitant with simplifying administrative procedures and providing documents free of charge.

Until these mechanisms can be put in place, a transitional measure may be to introduce a one-year residence permit for all applicants.

Harmonising social protection systems and pension systems is vital.

Finally, in the case of special measures justified by the notion of public order, we can only call on Member States to narrow down their interpretation, to put an end to the double penalty and to protect certain categories of people from expulsion.

I would like to finish by clarifying a number of points.

Rights must be attached to the individual and the individual must take the rights with him wherever he goes.

Third-country citizens living and working legally in a Member State must benefit from the same rights as European citizens.

Furthermore, it is a pity that the Council has not followed up this proposal of citizenship and residence.

In conclusion, I hope that I have persuaded you to support this resolutely citizen-centred approach of freedom of movement and residence, which is a fundamental issue for awareness of a European identity.

At a time when discussions about the future of Europe are hitting the headlines, and when we are examining a future charter of fundamental rights, we must support any project aimed at providing an area of freedom, justice and equality, where all the residents and citizens who contribute to the construction of Europe must have the same rights.

Perhaps it is time that people acquired the same rights as the products they consume.

I should like to congratulate the rapporteur.

We are dealing here with a long-overdue overhaul of a number of directives relating to rights of residents of the non-economically active.

My starting-point, as was the rapporteur's, is that we should give European Union citizenship real meaning.

The Treaty statement that every citizen should have the right to move and reside freely within the territory of Member States and the reality are still far apart.

I draw on the experience of a number of language students from other Member States in my own constituency.

They received a standard letter from our local social security office asking them to attend for a two-hour interview and to bring with them as many items as possible on a non-exhaustive list of about twenty documents such as a passport, bank statements, or household bills to "establish their identity".

When I enquired further about this I was told that it was not an EU matter, because the same letter would be sent to UK residents.

In what circumstances I cannot imagine.

And, the two hour time-scale, even more ludicrously, was supposed to save them from a car parking fine in the local car-park!

I would not want to see any citizens treated in the same way as these students.

The history of the directives that deal with the rights of residence of the non-economically active is an unhappy one: non-implementation, infringement proceedings, a patchwork of different and burdensome requirements.

You can move a sack of potatoes around Europe more easily than a citizen can move.

If we are to appeal to our citizens and the basic right of free movement is to be real, then simple, fast codification of this area of Community law is long overdue.

Then, and only then, will the Treaty statement on European Union citizenship become a reality instead of mere words.

Mr President, we are great talkers about human rights in the EU, but in practice it is often the case that citizens' rights are synonymous with money.

Those who have work and can support themselves are protected by legislation, but there are large groups of people who do not have work of their own and who therefore do not have rights.

This may apply to students who have to prove that they have a proper place at university or to pensioners who have to prove that they will be taking their pensions or own capital with them if they move.

It may also apply to third-country nationals and especially to relatives who are third-country nationals and who are not allowed to accompany the breadwinner when he or she obtains work on the other side of the border.

This means that those who are weakest economically are still discriminated against.

The report proposes significant improvements for these groups, which in practice are larger than one might think.

They are to be given better opportunities to move and an extended right to take up residence in other countries.

In this connection, I would also point out that the right to move within the labour market and the right of residence are not the same thing.

Nowadays, there are many workers who are sent on short-term contracts to work in other Member States and who do not receive any right of residence at all.

For those who do not have a secure income or other means of support, the right of residence is almost nil.

Freedom of movement for labour is protected by the legislation of the internal market.

For the majority of people, it is more important, however, for their right of residence, including their right to stay on, to be protected. This means that people are not compelled to move even if they cannot support themselves.

Radical improvement is needed in this area, and it would be as well to tackle this problem now, at a time when the Member States' economies are looking better than they once did.

.- (DE) Mr President, Mrs Boumediene-Thiery 's report addresses the problems that the Commission mentions in its report on how matters stand with regard to the application of provisions on residence rights.

Yet, Mrs Boumediene-Thiery would like to see the scope of application of these residence rights extended to third-country nationals.

The Committee on Petitions was asked to submit an opinion because it is a special committee that is directly concerned with the problems facing the general public.

Unfortunately, there are still far too many infringements of the rights of EU citizens; I wholeheartedly agree on that score.

Firstly, Member States are wavering when it comes to implementing Community law provisions on residence rights.

In particular, subordinate authorities in the Member States are unfamiliar for the most part with the relevant provisions.

Secondly, the problems associated with the recognition of diplomas are hugely restrictive.

What use is the right of residence to me, if I do not have the right to exercise the profession I am trained in, in the host country?

Thirdly, a failure to adapt the provisions on freedom of movement, and the social security rules, to the changing labour market, is causing problems.

It is simply not acceptable that I could fail to be reimbursed for medical treatment abroad merely because I do not have the correct form.

Mr President, we have provisions governing EU citizens' right of residence in other Member States, but even now, they are not being fully applied.

We are constantly hearing of cases where EU citizens are unable to reside in another Member State.

Therefore, let us urge the EU Member States to implement the existing Community law provisions without delay, before we consider extending these rights to third-country nationals at any rate.

Mr President, in the event that the amendments we are presenting to Mrs Boumediene-Thiery ' s report are not accepted, my group will vote against it for reasons which I believe to be fundamental.

The directives under debate today refer to the free movement and residence of students as well as people who have ceased professional activity or who are economically inactive and who, furthermore, receive disability or old-age pensions or subsidies - all of them Community citizens - as well as the exceptions laid down in another directive on expulsion for reasons of public order, security or public health.

The problem is that Mrs Boumediene-Thiery widens the scope of these directives to include citizens of third countries.

For example, section 20 of the resolution extends family reunification to non-Community families and their relatives in ascending and descending lines, who are not dependent on the resident, which would increase admission without restrictions.

Furthermore, to treat unmarried couples on the same terms as married couples, which does not raise many problems in the case of Community citizens, given the diversity of the legislation, does raise problems in the case of third country citizens because there would be very real problems recognising stable cohabitation.

It would give rise to so-called marriages of convenience or false marriages, and that amounts to fraud..

Furthermore, I believe that all the false logic which is used when referring to migrant workers has no place in this debate, not so much because of the subject matter but rather because it is not appropriate for the study of these directives.

As the Commission says, the level of information needs to be improved so that European citizens are crystal clear as to what their rights are with regard to moving freely within the internal market, with clear, concise and specific rules and using communication technologies such as the Internet, the television, or local and regional media.

Commissioner, the suggestion that replies to parliamentary questions should reach our various citizens by means of the methods of communication considered appropriate, does not seem to me to be a good procedure.

I think that it is impractical, apart from anything else because not even MEPs always read those replies.

It is also necessary to eliminate the absurd amount of paperwork needed to justify the nature and size of the pension.

I believe that an identity card for pensioners and the use of computers should replace these cumbersome forms of authorising payments.

The same would apply to students.

In order to facilitate their mobility, we should free them of unnecessary costs and make their residence compatible with their periods of study or apprenticeship.

Finally, I would also like to point out that it makes no sense to link public order, as section 6 of the resolution does, with the Schengen area in a proposal aimed at the citizens of the European Union, who are not governed by the Schengen legislation but by Community directives, in particular those relating to public order.

In order to update the legislation, I believe it is necessary to revise the texts by means of a new regulation and simplify the obstacles to free movement and to the residence of Community citizens.

Mr President, there has thankfully been a change in European Community law over the last 30 years from freedom of movement of persons being seen as purely an economic issue - functional mobility - to it being seen as a personal right.

This has meant a lot of rhetoric about a citizen's Europe but not much change in the mentality or administrations of the Member States, as Mrs Wallis has pointed out.

In saying that, I am not overlooking the economic benefits of free movement.

Mrs Boumediene-Thiery's report points out - and I congratulate her for its quality - that facilitating mobility promotes dynamism and economic competitiveness.

So why does the Right ignore this?

But the real bottom line for Liberals is whether the Member States believe in and respect the notion of European citizenship, not only allowing the citizens of a Member State and their families to move around but also conferring such rights, to the greatest extent possible, on legally resident third-country nationals and their families - which unfortunately were not covered by the Commission report.

It is very aggravating when the Council of Ministers and individual governments wring their hands about the low turnout in European elections, launch campaigns with balloons and plastic bags about people's Europe and seek to win citizens' votes in referendum campaigns, but still maintain obstructive red tape when those citizens have the cheek to assert their European legal right to move freely.

Those rules are far too complicated anyway.

We need a complete overhaul to streamline and make crystal clear the unimpeded exercise of free movement.

It is not too much to ask.

As Mrs Wallis said, it should be as easy for people to cross borders as it is for widgets or potatoes.

Mr President, as the rapporteurs who have just spoken said, although the right to free movement is deemed to be one of the most important aspects of the fundamental right of European citizenship, it is a right which is all too often subject to restrictions, and the large number of petitions to the European Parliament on precisely this subject are testimony to this.

I would first of all like to focus on a point strongly emphasised in the report: the need to fight against all abusive and excessively restrictive interpretations of the concept of public policy by some Member States.

For example, someone who has lived in a country since childhood or, at any rate, for a large number of years, and therefore has cultural, social and family ties in that country, should not be deported unless he or she is convicted of a crime which is deemed to be, in effect, a serious offence, under the criminal law of the country of residence.

Sadly, this is very often not the case.

Another point which I would like to focus on concerns the members of certain royal families, such as the Italian royal family, for example, which, despite the fact that it does not pose a threat to national security, cannot fully exercise its legitimate right of free movement.

I feel that the time has truly come to make a genuine attempt to tackle these issues and remove the barriers to free movement once and for all, for the very reason that - as has already been said - potatoes and goods appear to have greater freedom of movement in Europe than the citizens.

Freedom of movement and residence is a right enshrined in European treaties and granted to all citizens and should only be denied in exceptional cases when there is a real threat to public safety.

It is therefore all the more extraordinary that 50 years after the signing of the Convention of Human Rights, which ironically was signed in Rome, and one year after the Treaty of Amsterdam upholding such rights, that one European family, which for a thousand years has been involved with the continent's history, is being denied the fundamental rights my colleague has mentioned.

The Watson report demands such rights for family reunion and the Boumediene-Thiery report for freedom of movement and residence, even for third-country nationals and even for convicted criminals.

This family, as mentioned, is the former royal house of Savoy in Italy and lesser violations are also being committed against the royal houses of Austria and Greece by their governments.

The thirteenth transitional article of the Italian Constitution, absurdly labelled "transitional" but still in force after 53 years, is not only a violation of European treaties, but also sexually discriminatory in that it applies only to male royal descendants, no matter how far removed, of the constitutional monarch King Victor Emanuel, deemed guilty of signing unacceptable wartime fascist laws.

Ironically, descendants of Mussolini are not only allowed to live in Italy but one actually sits in the Italian Parliament.

This article is shameful and obsolete and all Members of Parliament, even those with anti-monarchist feelings, should join me in calling upon the Italian government to allow an innocent European family to return to their native land, where it poses no conceivable threat to public safety or the stability of the Italian Republic.

We can only call for European citizens to have more rights if all their rights are upheld irrespective of origin and without discrimination.

This issue goes far beyond individual families and goes right to the heart of the Union's respect for its own laws and treaties.

Either we have a European Union based on law or we do not.

I therefore commend my Amendment No 14 to this House.

Can I congratulate Mrs Boumediene-Thiery on her report on special measures concerning the movement and residence of citizens of the Union which are justified on grounds of public policy, public security, or public health.

It is a very good report.

Unfortunately, in two minutes all I can do is talk about some of its failings.

Firstly the Commission has failed to deal with the issue of the 12 to 14 million third-country nationals living legally in the Union who currently suffer discrimination and, outside the Union's island States can move freely de facto but cannot do so legally, which of course creates situations in which they are exploited and used in illegal ways.

With all due respect for the rapporteur, I have to say that we also have a problem with a number of areas that she has not dealt with, one of which is the issue of football hooliganism.

I am generally in favour of free movement but I think it needs to be limited.

I do not normally believe that persons who have not been convicted of crimes should be prevented from moving freely, but there is a European problem that is being ignored at European level.

Europol should be used to prevent the free movement of people who have been convicted of football-related crimes to ensure that they do not cause the same kind of trouble as at previous World Cup and European championship tournaments.

I also believe that the provisions should be invoked on the grounds of public security to prevent the free movement of German neo-Nazis who produce Holocaust denial material in Denmark with the clear intention of reimporting it into Germany, where it is illegal.

I hope that the Danish Government will use the provisions in this instance.

Equally, we need to make sure that the system is not abused.

I naturally hope that the free movement of people who have the misfortune to be HIV-positive is not restricted in any way on grounds of public health.

I agree with Mr Tannock in principle.

Of course the royal families of Europe should be allowed to move about freely.

However, I disagree with his priorities.

When we ignore the rights of 12 to 14 million legal residents, then the rights of two families are comparatively insignificant.

Mr President, I should like to begin by agreeing with all those who have pointed out that the matter we are discussing concerns the very essence of European citizenship.

We might say that this right contributes towards a practical and concrete expression of the concept of European citizenship, in that the great challenge facing us at the moment is to turn this legally recognised right into a practical reality that is implemented in citizens' everyday lives.

I also agree with those who have pointed out that the transposition of these directives has taken place too slowly, or even incorrectly in some cases.

In addition, we must also face up to the difficulties arising out of implementation of the directive on special measures concerning the movement and residence of citizens of the Union which are justified on grounds of public policy, public security or public health, in that there should be guidelines not only for the Member States, which have so far interpreted the provisions of the directive in quite a variety of ways, but also for the citizens regarding the rights conferred on them.

The Member States may impose restrictions on the right to free movement of Community citizens, particularly in matters of entry to and expulsion from their territory as well as the issuing or renewal of residence permits, where this is justified on grounds of public policy, public security or public health.

Member States cannot, however, abuse such prerogatives in a European Union based on the rule of law, respect for human rights and particularly respect for the European Convention on Human Rights as well as, soon, a Charter of Fundamental Rights.

It is for this reason, then, that these measures of exception to free movement have been subject to restrictive interpretation.

Finally, Mr President, I should like to express my agreement with my colleague Hernández Mollar when he gave his support to the proposal from the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market to try to integrate the various texts into a single regulation. This could be implemented directly and would be a primary document on European citizenship, which would offer all the necessary information not only to citizens regarding their rights of citizenship but also to the government departments in each Member State that have the task of implementing existing legislation.

Mr President, Commissioner, in company with Mr Hernández Mollar - whom I would like to thank for his enthusiastic support for Amendment No 15, tabled by myself - I feel that this document must be rejected if the European People's Party's amendments are not incorporated.

I support Amendment No 14, tabled by Mr Tannock, which upholds the free movement of the heirs to the Italian and Greek thrones and supports the monarchy.

Personally, in tabling Amendment No 15, I support the pensioners, for although the measure facilitates the movement of non-EU citizens, it does not remove the difficulties facing its own citizens, particularly its disabled citizens, who wish to travel within Europe.

At Bergamo Orio al Serio airport, as I was leaving to come to Strasbourg, I met a pensioner - a very old lady who is 80 years old - who told me that she wanted to go to Paris to visit her daughter but that she could not do so because she would lose her Italian State pension which is her only means of support.

Another person, who is totally handicapped, said that they wanted to go to London but that they could not do so because they would have lost their pension.

Yet another person, who is disabled - in a wheelchair, no less - told me that he would have liked to go and visit his brother but that in doing so he would have lost his incapacity allowance.

Therefore, our goal must be to bring about the free movement of pensioners and disabled citizens in Europe.

Mr Fatuzzo, you have made me think very carefully about where I shall travel to in old age.

Mr President, on behalf of the Commission, I would like first of all to congratulate Mrs Boumediene-Thiery and all those who have taken part in this debate.

Indeed, I think that, for the Commission, the establishment of European citizenship has created a new legal and political environment and, for our part, we intend to draw all the practical lessons we can both in the legislative field and in the field of day-to-day public administration.

The Commission is counting a great deal on the support of the European Parliament when the time comes.

With regard to the motion for a resolution that you have just presented, I would simply like to address two or three comments directed at the Commission.

The three directives on the right of residence of the non-economically active have, I am sure, enabled thousands of European Union citizens to benefit from this right without encountering any particular problems.

However, there are still cases where these directives are incorrectly applied.

I can assure you that the Commission always intervenes - and tries to do so strictly under all circumstances - even if its intervention is not always obvious. If agreement is not reached, the Commission does not hesitate to notify Reasoned Opinions to the Member States concerned.

Citizens' complaints that meet with a satisfactory administrative response through extra-judicial procedures can be counted in their hundreds.

The action of the Commission also applies to the laws of Member States.

One could, in my view, cite several cases where this intervention has brought about modification of the legislation of Member States and sometimes even the examination, by the Court of Justice, of issues to which it has provided positive solutions.

There is no shortage of examples either concerning the Member States' improper use of the notion of public order, especially that leading to the expulsion from their territory of nationals from other Member States.

I can assure you, however, that the number of these cases is now very low and that, with regard to such cases, the European Commission never fails to take the necessary measures pursuant to Community law.

Nevertheless, it cannot be claimed that the strict application of Community law is sufficient to eliminate obstacles to the free movement of European Union citizens, bearing in mind the huge number of obstacles that persist due to the shortcomings in Community law. These shortcomings have already been identified in the second report by the Commission on European citizenship and in the report by the High Level Group headed by Simone Veil, which was presented to the Commission in 1997.

Moreover, I would like to draw your attention to the fact that this morning we debated the directive on family reunification and that the Tampere Conclusions require the Commission to present a proposal on the recognition of entry, admission and residence conditions and on the legal status of third-country nationals within the European Union legally.

We are currently working on this.

For all these reasons, the Commission shares the opinion expressed by several Members of this House on the need for a global reworking of existing texts within the context of a single legal instrument, which will organise and guarantee the unimpeded exercise of the freedom of movement and residence.

This reworking, which moreover is included in the Commission action programme for 2000, is already in preparation.

It is based on the idea that entitlement to the right of free movement and residence must be dissociated from any prior reference to the economic situation of the beneficiaries in order to be attached henceforth to a concept and a status resulting directly from the importance of European citizenship.

The unique status of a European Union citizen necessarily creates the need for a unique general system of movement and residence in response to the demand to enrich the content of European citizenship in accordance with the political aspirations of the Union.

The vote will take place today at 12 noon.

The next item is the recommendation for second reading (A5-0196/2000) by Mrs Schörling, on behalf of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, on the Council common position (C5-0180/2000 - 1996/0304(COD)) for adopting a European Parliament and Council directive on the assessment of the effects of certain plans and programmes on the environment.

Mr President, I am very pleased that I have been entrusted with being rapporteur for the second reading of the SEA Directive which I believe is an important step towards a new form of behaviour in environmental policy.

I want to thank all my fellow MEPs in the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, together with the Commission and, in particular, the Portuguese Presidency for the excellent way in which they have cooperated.

This draft directive concerns strategic environmental assessments which, in brief, involve a systematic process for identifying, analysing and assessing the influence and likely effects of plans and programmes upon the environment.

The assessments are to be carried out at as early a stage as possible in the planning process, partly so that alternative solutions might be found before the decision-making process is taken any further.

Environmental reports are to be written and made available to the environmental authorities, the public and environmental organisations, which are also to be given sufficient time within which to respond to the reports.

This is a very important directive for the whole of the Community' s environmental policy if a tool is to be obtained which makes it easier to comply with the commitments to sustainable development and compliance with the precautionary principle which have been made in the Treaty and in other agreements.

A modern environmental policy worthy of the name must do everything to ensure that damage to the environment does not occur and that effects upon the environment are minimised.

What often happens nowadays is that attempts are made to identify and repair damage once it has occurred.

As early as at the planning stage, we must learn to use policy areas, plans and programmes to avoid and reduce the negative effects and influence upon the environment.

The SEA Directive constitutes a very important step towards an approach of this kind.

Unfortunately, this draft directive makes no mention of policy areas, in spite of the fact that they figure in the Commission' s original draft from 1991 and in spite of the fact that all researchers in this area actually take it for granted that policy areas too must be included in a strategic environmental assessment.

It was not possible to achieve this in the Council, but the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy considered that policy areas too must be included in the review to be carried out in five years' time.

This has been discussed in Amendments 2 and 21.

A crucial argument when the Commission finally tabled this proposal in 1996 was that the assessment at project level enters the decision-making process much too late.

In actual fact, this is one of the main points in the directive - that an environmental assessment should be made early on in the decision-making process.

At first reading, the European Parliament had quite a lot of points of view. The proposal was thought to be heading in the right direction but in many areas, it did not go far enough.

Parliament tabled 29 amendments, of which 15 are more or less to be found in the common position.

If the SEA is to be a genuinely useful tool, the directive must be sufficiently broad in scope and the environmental report and the assessments must naturally be of very high quality.

In the common position, the Council has now made the text worse in a number of areas, specifically when it comes, for example, to the scope of the directive and the definition of what it is to cover.

The Commission too was very, very critical of the common position because it was far too limited in relation to the original text.

The Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy has tried to restore something of the balance, for example by means of Amendments 6 and 7 which broaden the scope of the directive by not limiting it only to plans and programmes linked to EIA projects.

We do not permit whole categories of plans and programmes to be exempt.

Nor can we accept that financial plans and the whole of the defence sector are exempt from strategic environmental assessments.

This is discussed in Amendment 10, which also proposes that structural funds must also of course be covered by strategic environmental assessments next time around.

Other amendments which improve the directive concern greater transparency and openness to inspection and the need also to cooperate and consult with countries outside the Community.

I personally am very surprised at Amendment 26 from Mr Nassauer and 29 other MEPs who want to reject the common position.

This possibility was not mentioned at all in the Committee' s discussion.

Clearly, they are fully entitled to make this proposal, but do they really think that the EU' s environmental policy is something extraneous which is not in any way binding?

Should the European Parliament just not bother about the text of the Treaty, the Cardiff Agreement, the Fifth Environmental Programme and so on?

I really do not think that the proposal is a genuinely serious one.

Amendments 11 and 31 also worry me a little.

Amendment 11, in particular, says that the Member States should define at what level SEAs are to be carried out if plans and programmes are part of a hierarchical system.

In this way, the whole idea of arranging an SEA is called into question, so I hope these amendments do not go through.

Mr President, this is a small but significant measure to extend the duties of Member States to carry out strategic environmental assessments on the planning framework as well as on the actual plans where the implementation would or could have a significant impact on the environment.

All Member States voted for the common position, but some made it clear that they would go very little further than that.

Our task is to clarify and to amend responsibly and on behalf of the PPE-DE Group I congratulate the rapporteur, Mrs Schörling, on the work she has done and the consultation she has had with us.

We will however be rejecting some of her amendments, notably those that seek to extend the system to all financial plans, to defence and civil defence, to consultation beyond what is reasonable and to the general policies she has just mentioned, which become more of a wish-list than firm proposals.

However, we agree that it makes no sense to exclude projects financed wholly or partially by the European Union, especially structural funds, and we certainly agree that it makes sense to talk to neighbouring states outside the European Union.

We agree that there should be adequate reporting back, not only on the environmental risks identified by the assessment, but on the action it is proposed to take to mitigate or remove them.

We also of course have to consider Amendment No 26, in the name of some of our German colleagues, which rejects the common position.

I understand the concerns of colleagues from Germany and some parts of Italy. These result from the way in which some governments and regional governments have chosen to implement the assessments.

These governments are giving environmental assessment and Europe a bad name for what are entirely excesses of their own making and they need to look carefully at their domestic policies.

But this is a subsidiarity measure which leaves the details to Member States.

It is not the big hand of Europe extending control to local planning matters.

It does, however, ensure that particularly at our respective borders our planning takes account of the environment quality within and across our borders when planning frameworks are being agreed.

We believe that to be a good thing and my PPE-DE Group will therefore not be supporting Amendment No 26 and will vote for the common position.

We shall then vote for the amendments we supported in committee and for one further clarifying amendment which has been submitted since, but we shall oppose the amendments which we believe are a step too far in terms of what is desirable, practical and acceptable.

Mr President, the directive we are about to vote on represents a major step forwards.

The obligation to carry out an environmental impact assessment at an extremely early stage of town and country planning activities does, in fact, make it possible to incorporate environmental concerns fully right from the conception of town and country planning plans and programmes.

The Union has at last realised that we can no longer restrict ourselves to merely picking up the pieces following damage caused by short-sighted planning, but that the damage must be averted as early on as possible.

The amendments approved by the Committee on the Environment substantially improve the Council's common position.

Firstly, it was upheld that, in order to exert any real influence over national customs, the scope of the directive must be as wide as possible.

In this context, I feel that plans and projects financed from the Structural Funds must without exception be governed by the directive, seeing that, in practice, they represent all the programmes implemented, particularly in regions whose development is lagging behind.

Secondly, the principle of consultation and provision of information to the public and the organisations concerned throughout the assessment process, in compliance with the Aarhus Convention, has been reestablished.

I therefore feel that this is a sound text overall.

I understand the concerns of the Members coming from countries organised according to a Federal State model, who fear that the local authorities will be overloaded with work, but I feel that the amendments, particularly Amendments Nos 19, 29 and 31, are sufficient to avoid an overlap between the two directives and still ensure respect for the environment.

Mr President, every day it is drawn to our attention that the environment is changing.

Last Sunday, I was listening to a Swedish radio programme which said that, in central Sweden, people would have to adjust to the fact that rainfall would increase by 50 per cent over the next few years.

In one way or another, environmental questions are always the subject of public opinion nowadays. They must therefore feature in a better way in political work, too.

I therefore want to congratulate Mrs Schörling on a very good report which proposes that environmental aspects must be taken into consideration at an early stage.

In principle, environmental issues must permeate all activities, economic activity above all perhaps.

When it comes to plans, building projects etc, it is of course important, as proposed in this report, to take account of environmental aspects as early as possible so that mistakes and increased costs can be avoided and the right solution found as soon as possible.

I think it is extremely important and commendable that Mrs Schörling should propose that the scope of the directive should be broadened.

It is a matter of urgency that economic activity should be included in the environmental assessment.

It is transparently obvious to the EU, which invests a very large part of its budget in the agricultural sphere, in regional policy and in the structural funds, that these areas should be examined from an environmental point of view.

We cannot go in and do this directly but should do so as quickly as possible whenever new plans come out.

It is unreasonable to do what is at present done with EU funds and to support such activities within these sectors as are opposed from an environmental point of view in other contexts.

We must try to create a system in which we think in environmental terms from the very beginning, even when it comes to economic problems.

This is a major and important issue.

I realise that large sections of this House do not agree with me, but my group and I completely support Mrs Schörling in this connection.

Mr President, I am going to refer briefly to four points which were fully debated in the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy.

We are basically in favour of the proposal of the Environment Committee and its rapporteur.

With regard to the inclusion of some of the sectors in the directive, in particular the extractive industry and the defence industry, we believe that they should not be left out.

Provided, of course, that the necessary precautions are taken.

I would also like to stress the importance of the inclusion of the management of water resources.

An ambitious government plan will be presented soon in Spain, the National Hydrological Plan, which will have a clear impact on the places where it is put into practice.

We feel it is essential that these assessment studies should be carried out.

Also very important to us is the role of the public, i.e. transparency.

There is a directive on the right to information, No 313, which has been repeatedly ignored by the Member States and by local and regional authorities.

Likewise, we must include the quality of the studies and the issue of health amongst the significant sectors affected.

High environmental standards and good health are very closely related.

Mr President, I welcome the opportunity to make a brief contribution to this debate and in so doing acknowledge the positive role of Parliament in setting the agenda for the highest standards of environmental protection.

There is of course a cost factor in environmental management, but equally an economic return, which not easily quantified but exists none the less.

The proposed directive, which requires an environmental assessment before the adoption of a regional or county plan, makes good environmental and economic sense.

Far too often in the past we have seen costly development plans collapse because of environmental considerations that were not addressed at the initial planning stage.

Finally, I would appeal to professional planners to use their common sense by taking account of the views of public representatives and community groups.

A textbook approach of the kind seen far too often has not always served to meet citizens' requirements in this important area.

Planning must not become the sole preserve of those who have an academic qualification.

Elected Members must exercise greater care and concern when drawing up development policies that will ultimately affect Union citizens.

Mr President, strategic environmental impact assessment is an instrument which allows governments to assess whether policy proposals, plans and programmes are compatible with the concept of sustainable development.

In this way, we can ensure that environmental concerns form a more integral part of the economy. Indeed, decisions at macro-economic level too should be accompanied by a preliminary strategic environmental impact assessment.

It is therefore important for public administrations to be very aware of the usefulness of this exercise in order to prevent environmental damage as far as possible.

It is equally important for us to clearly outline which plans require environmental impact assessments and which do not.

The Council has dealt with this extensively.

I am in favour of submitting policy proposals, including environmental impact assessments, to public administrations.

In that case, a public administration may decide to scrap a plan, programme or proposal, call these off in good time or replace them by environmentally-friendly alternatives.

On the other hand, there is a substantial risk of too many plans and programmes being subjected to environmental impact assessments.

If extensive studies are carried out of plans and programmes whose impact on the environment is negligible, then this is a waste of energy.

What is more, the instrument as such is being weakened.

So in this light, including all financial plans, as proposed by the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Protection would therefore be going too far.

Mr President, the best way to integrate environmental issues with all areas of policy is to get the environmental perspective in the picture at the earliest possible stage.

In this way we will avoid the problems we have at the moment with regard to harmonisation of the use of land, financial activity, and the expectations of the public.

There is in existence a strategic evaluation of the impact on the environment that applies not only to town planning but also agricultural, transport, travel and energy sector programmes, among others.

In order for us to be able to harmonise all these important aspects and proceed in an environmentally and socially sustainable way we need plans that are sufficiently long-term in nature: long-term inasmuch as they act as genuine guidelines for separate and independent measures.

In this connection I have to thank the rapporteur for her excellent work.

It is quite natural that Structural Funds programmes, plans and measures should be included in any examination of this issue.

It is also important that we take the proper course of action at different levels, and not act in too complicated or bureaucratic a manner, but take account of the new information we get all the time.

In this respect there has perhaps been too much anxiety about overlap, but I hope that, after this debate, this report will be as successful as possible as far as this is concerned.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, this is a new instrument and it accords with Article 6 of the Treaty of Amsterdam, which concerns the integration of environmental policies into other areas.

It is a delicate flower and we all want it to be a success.

I also want it to be well received by my electorate back home. Hence I sometimes ask myself the questions that they ask themselves.

When I look at the Council' s proposal, I assume that people will ask themselves this: how can the EU introduce an assessment regime that excludes the plans and projects financed by the European Union itself?

This is completely unacceptable, and that is precisely how I see it.

The scope of application must be extended to include areas that are financed by the European Union.

Secondly, the people of Germany, in particular, may well ask themselves why the assessments are to be carried out at state level, national level, regional administration level, and at local level, which will drag the procedures out.

This is indefensible in my view.

It is the real issues that count, not having the same thing assessed at every level.

Therefore we must make it clear that a duplication of effort must be avoided. Accordingly, Guido Sacconi' s Amendment No 31 has my unequivocal support.

A third question the people may ask themselves is this: why is nothing happening now that an assessment has taken place which may have raised certain issues?

Therefore we must make it clear that the regulation is binding.

We certainly cannot have a situation where an assessment is carried out and the findings are then filed away, never to be seen again.

We need a binding commitment to the effect that any findings will be acted on.

Therefore, I emphatically support Amendments Nos 17 and 18, which provide for us to make the transposition of environmental protection measures following assessment a little more binding in nature.

With this in mind, I wish Mrs Schörling' s report every success.

Mr President, I would firstly like to thank the rapporteur for her constructive approach and for being open to dialogue with all the interested parties - including the Commission - which I hope will finally enable us all to achieve a positive result in relation to this directive.

I would also like to highlight the quality of the report which we are debating today and I would like to talk about what I see as the most significant problems raised in the various amendments that have been tabled and the interventions of the various Members. My sincere thanks for all your comments and points of view.

Of the key questions, I would firstly like to mention those amendments which involve broadening the scope of the future directive.

The joint position clearly distinguishes the plans for which the strategic environmental assessment is obligatory from those for which it is necessary to make a selection, a screening.

The Commission is inclined towards this approach, provided that the joint position is improved, because we believe that otherwise it would be insufficient.

Firstly, there must be a balance between the plans for which the strategic environmental assessment is obligatory and those for which we have to make a selection.

Secondly, the scope of the directive must, in any event, be sufficiently broad and systematically include those plans which have a significant impact on the environment.

This is why the Commission enthusiastically supports some of Parliament' s amendments which broaden the scope of this directive and do so in a balanced fashion, such as, for example, the second and fifth sections of Amendment No 5, which have been mentioned by the rapporteur and also by some other speakers, such as Mrs González, which proposes also including extractive activities. We also support Amendment No 6.

Nevertheless, we believe that some amendments go too far and propose the strategic environmental assessment for plans which will not probably have a significant impact on the environment.

For example, section 4 of Amendment No 5 would make these assessments obligatory for all the plans for the sectors listed in the directive. The third section of Amendment No 10 would mean an unnecessary burden for the Member States.

Some amendments limit the directive' s scope even further and actually contradict what I have just said.

Certain amendments would reduce the scope, such as Amendment No 3, which limits the scope to the plans financed by the EU, or Amendments Nos 11 and 31, which allow States to choose the level or levels of planning with which these strategic environmental assessments will be carried out.

This would exclude many plans which have an impact on the environment.

Now, if Parliament were to adopt these amendments together with those which broaden the scope to plans with no significant impact, it seems to me that we would end up with a text which is inconsistent with itself.

These amendments seem to be inspired by the fear of the assessment being duplicated.

In my view, this fear is not sufficiently justified.

Planning is usually carried out at various levels and each one has its own specific characteristics.

The carrying out of assessments at various levels of planning is not a duplication of the assessment, especially given the safeguards contained in Articles 4, 5 and 10 of the joint position which are intended to prevent just the kind of duplication which Mr Lange, for example, referred to.

Thirdly, I would point out the amendments which establish the procedures for planning and programming the screening and the definition of the scope of the assessment - Amendments Nos 7, 8 and 13 - and which require the screening to be carried out on a case by case basis, with the participation of the public in all cases.

I believe that the objective of the screening and the definition of the scope of the assessment is to determine, quickly and efficiently, which plans and which environmental problems are the most relevant.

Establishing the best way to deal with these issues will require practical experience.

We therefore believe it is too soon to establish that all circumstances justify a screening and a broad scope.

We therefore believe that, by incorporating the provisions on the screening and the definition of the scope into their national legislation, Member States would be liable to exceed the requirements of the directive and, for that reason, we will not accept these amendments.

Nor will we accept the amendment which implies a rejection of the joint text - Amendment No 26 - which contradicts the other approaches.

I do not believe it is necessary to point out that this directive on the strategic environmental assessment is a key instrument for integrating the environment into policies and for promoting sustainable development in the European Union.

I believe that a rejection of the joint position would deal a serious blow to these principles which are at the heart of the Treaties and which must inspire all our policies.

I understand that this may seem insufficient to some of you, but we must appreciate that sometimes it is not always best to seek perfection.

I believe that we should seek something acceptable, which would be a step forward, rather than reach a deadlock.

Mr President, having carefully examined all the amendments, I can tell you that the Commission can accept Amendments Nos 1, 5 (sections 2 and 5), 6, 12, 28 (section 1) and 29.

Amendments Nos 9 (the part which refers to the requirement to justify that the strategic environmental assessment is not necessary), 10 (sections 1 and 2), 15, 17, 18, 20, 23, 24 and 25 are acceptable in principle, providing that there is some rewording of its content.

The Commission cannot, however, under any circumstances, accept Amendments Nos 2, 3, 4, 5 (sections 1, 3 and 4), 7, 8, 9 (in the part on the requirement to justify the need for a strategic environmental assessment), 10 (section 3), 11, 13, 14, 16, 19, 21, 22, 26, 27, 28 (section 2), 30 and 31.

The vote will take place today at 12 noon.

Port reception facilities for ship-generated waste and cargo residues

The next item is the report (A5-0213/2000) by Mr Bouwman, on behalf of the parliamentary delegation to the Conciliation Committee, on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a European Parliament and Council directive [C5-0348/2000 - 1998/0249(COD)] on port reception facilities for ship-generated waste and cargo residues.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, today we are debating a directive intended to fight marine pollution, and this will not be the only one this year.

I am, of course, referring to the Erika directives which are due at a later stage.

It would perhaps be a very nice start to the season and the French Presidency if this directive, along with the outcome of the conciliation between the Council and Parliament, in particular, were to be adopted today in Parliament.

That is why I would like to say a word of thanks to the representatives of the Council, as well as to the Portuguese Presidency, which had a role to play, and also to the French Presidency, the Commission and the members of the conciliation committee, who were involved at the last stage.

As we have already discussed, at the heart of the proposal is, of course, the duty on the part of ships to report and to deliver waste.

Ports are required to draw up waste-processing plans and to ensure that there are waste-processing plants or organisations that implement these plans.

This is to prevent the problem of marine pollution from escalating to an even higher level than that at which it already stands.

A recent study by KIMO Coast Watch has shown, for example, that there is still a growing volume of waste on beaches, that the sea is still being polluted and that state-of-the-art technology is being used to discharge sludge into the sea.

If we consider the waste processing plants which already exist in a number of ports, there is even a downward, rather than upward, trend in waste deliveries.

Officially, according to MARPOL and other conventions, waste is required to be handed over. In practice, however, it appears that this does not happen.

This was the reason why the Commission was right to come up with a directive which was the subject of conciliation not so long ago.

It might be useful, in this context, to highlight the outcome of the negotiations because, at the end of the day, we made a certain investment, and we must assess this investment jointly in order to be able subsequently to decide in this House whether or not we can go along with it.

Eventually, what mattered most was the fee system, which is, in itself, not unimportant.

It is important because we hope that by means of a fee system - leaving to one side the attendant obligations for a moment - ships will be coaxed into delivering waste.

This is why we have had long debates with the Council, and the Commission was a great help in ensuring that the financial incentives were incorporated into this system in one way or another.

Parliament' s suggestion was for a figure of 90%, which we would like to collect by means of port dues in one way or another.

During committee discussions, we took a more lenient approach but, ultimately, decided to start the negotiations with this figure.

For a long time, the Council had decided neither to incorporate the word "significant" in this sense, nor to include the percentage figure.

However, certainly in the light of the review clause which has already been the subject of discussion, it is important ultimately to specify the amount.

You may well ask yourself why this percentage would be of any significance?

For the simple reason that if we were to endorse and adopt the polluter-pays principle, each and every ship could then pay at the port but could also decide simply to dump the waste at sea.

In other words, this principle is not very effective in this case.

This is why we have abandoned it and believe that a fee system as explained should be introduced.

We support the percentage which has now been agreed upon, or at least the interpretation laid down in the Commission statement, namely 30%, certainly in the light of the review clause which has been adopted. In this clause, it is agreed that, three years after the entry into force of the directive, it will be examined whether the volume of waste delivery has increased or whether a situation has been created which requires either a higher percentage level or a review of the system.

We can go along with this.

It may be useful to indicate that we were able to reach agreement on the 25% of inspections to which we aspire, as well as a provision for delays which can arise when waste is being delivered. In the main, national legislation prevails in this context.

A few exceptions have been made for small ships, not so much on the basis of the length but on the basis of the number of passengers they carry i.e. twelve.

This means that, although they do not have a notification duty, they must, of course, deliver waste.

Small ports will need to make a considerable effort to accommodate this directive in the foreseeable future.

Finally, I should like to note that, with regard to traditional sailing ships, whose exemption we initially secured by drafting a specific list, we have now decided to apply the Marpol convention to them with regard to sewage.

I would like to thank everyone, and my fellow committee members, in particular.

Mr President, Madam Vice-President, ladies and gentlemen, the PPE-DE Group is very pleased with the end result - one reservation aside - because the new directive will ultimately enable us to make progress in marine protection, and in establishing a level playing field for the Union' s ports.

The significance of the directive resides first and foremost in the fact that all Member States will be obliged to ensure that port reception facilities are set up, within the next two years, in all ports subject to this requirement.

Captains will also be obliged to use these facilities.

We hope that the rationale behind these two commitments will lead to a reduction in the amount of ship-generated waste deposited illegally in the sea, thus strengthening the marine environment and also improving competition between ports.

I believe that the conciliation procedure was successful in the end, for we did at least manage to secure our demand for ships to have to pay a significant contribution towards the costs of the facilities, irrespective of how much they make use of them.

Parliament would rather have succeeded with its demand for 'significant' to represent at least 90%, as this would have satisfied us, and there would no longer be any financial interest whatsoever in simply dumping waste at sea.

After all, if ships had to pay anyway, then they might as well use the facilities.

Sadly, the Council could not bring itself to accept this logical, no special fee provision, hence our reservation against the directive.

And we hope that if it becomes apparent that ships are continuing to discharge waste into the sea, the Commission will propose an amendment at the revision stage in three years' time.

Having said that, Madam Vice-President, we are grateful to you for the fact that your statement - which is, after all, of crucial importance - does at least, in effect, secure a bottom line of 30% as the amount agreed by the Council and Parliament, and we are relying on the Council to act on your statement accordingly.

Secondly, as my honourable friend has already said, we have scored two other victories for marine protection and the citizens of the European Union.

Firstly, we have stipulated that 25% of all commercial shipping will in fact be obliged to undergo inspection, in order to ensure that waste disposal is being carried out in accordance with the regulations. MARPOL is all well and good but not when it stays on the bookshelf!

We will only be able to protect the sea if we actually monitor whether waste disposal has taken place.

Secondly, we have put pressure on the Member States to meet their obligation to actually set up these port reception facilities. We have ensured that Member States will be required to introduce compensation measures, in case ships are forced to remain in ports unnecessarily, simply because there are no waste disposal facilities available, or they are inadequate.

In this way, although the ships will have to pay, they will also be protected.

Mr President, on a final note, I would like, on behalf of my group, to thank the committee chairman, Mr Hatzidakis, and the rapporteur, Mr Bouwman, for their committed and successful handling of these negotiations.

Thank you very much, Mr Jarzembowski. I would have been surprised if Mr Piecyk had not wanted to speak for three minutes!

Mr President, and I would have been very surprised if you had not been the one to chair this sitting again.

After all, it is a good day for Europe' s seas, as it for you personally, Mr President, because I know you are a keen diver.

We would all be delighted if you had even cleaner waters to dive in in Europe.

But the sea is our primary concern.

I believe we are in a position to congratulate each other today.

We can congratulate both the rapporteur, Theo Bouwman, and the delegation, because we have succeeded in improving some crucial aspects of the directive, or should I say, the Council' s common position.

It had been watered down, and I believe Parliament has secured coherent measures for all concerned

Firstly, mention has been made of the fact that all ports will have to provide reception facilities for waste and cargo residues.

Secondly, all ships will have to pay, irrespective of whether or not they use the facilities.

That is the real principle that is being brought into play here for the first time.

The sums involved will not be small; they will be considerable.

It is true that we cannot be completely satisfied with 30%.

Nevertheless, the 30% introduces and establishes the principle of a 'no special fee system' .

Naturally there is room for improvement, but with this principle in place, every one will have to pay their way.

Thirdly, all Member States must carry out checks on at least 25% of shipping.

I believe we should urge them to exceed the 25%.

We should challenge them to increase the number of checks.

After all, on so many occasions, we have been forced to recognise that, where ships docked at ports are concerned - take the 'Erika' for example, or other ships - monitoring is one of the crucial issues.

If there is no monitoring, there is no point in having any regulations.

On balance, the point of this directive is that the criminal discharge of waste on the high seas will no longer be as profitable as it used to be.

I also feel that marine pollution should no longer be treated as a trivial offence.

Europe' s seas are becoming cleaner, which will benefit the flora and fauna, and not least, the fishing industry.

This directive will also have a very positive effect on tourism, in the long run, for it will scarcely be possible to sustain tourism if there are no clean beaches.

So it is a good day for Europe' s seas and also a good day for you, Mr President.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, since the entry into force of the Treaty of Amsterdam, the European Parliament has enjoyed co-decision power with regard to transport issues, for example.

In this way, differences of opinion between the Council and Parliament, which are a regular occurrence, need no longer be settled unilaterally.

This procedure has proven to be worthwhile in practice.

The conditions for the delivery of waste by ships at Community ports have been the topic of many a discussion.

On previous occasions, Parliament had stressed the importance of including certain elements and, fortunately, the Council has, sometimes after pressure has been put upon it, taken on board the significance of these points.

Right until the very end, however, there has been one main contentious issue, namely the ships' own contributions toward the cost of collecting waste.

The European Parliament was of the opinion that the user should cover the lion' s share of the costs that he has given rise to but made provision for a scale of different charges and made every effort to discourage illegal dumping in the process.

Accordingly, it came up with a percentage level for own contributions which far exceeded 50%.

The outcome of the negotiations is nowhere near the agreed percentage, which is regrettable.

However, I do believe that simply quoting a percentage is a step in the right direction.

This is why I will be backing this report, albeit not with much enthusiasm.

I would like to thank the rapporteur for having invested so much energy in this project.

Mr President, Vice-President of the Commission, this is perhaps the first time I have addressed the European Parliament without having to express any worries or concerns about the subject of the debate. I am fully in agreement with the outcome of the conciliation procedure and I would like to commend both Mr Bouwman and the other Members who sat on the Conciliation Committee and Mrs de Palacio and her services for ensuring that we worked together to achieve this positive outcome.

I think that the outcome of our work will finally help to improve the quality of our seas, tourism and the quality of life of the citizens of Europe.

I believe that we are now protecting the environment more effectively than hitherto, although I do admit this could have come about in a better way.

But, here we are. If we see that the new system is not working as effectively as we believed it could work, we can review it.

Since we had to go to conciliation, as Chairman of the Conciliation Committee, I would like to take this opportunity to say that I would prefer to avoid such procedures as far as possible.

But this requires the Council, which must abandon its tradition of secrecy, to cooperate better with the European Parliament and to speak more openly. Only in this way can the work of the Commission and our own work progress more quickly, especially in our own committee, where there are many issues that directly affect our citizens.

I hope that this tradition will change under the French Presidency.

In any event, we are all in favour of better cooperation and the speedier progress of the work of the Council, the Commission and the European Parliament.

Mr President, as a new Member of the European Parliament and as a permanent member of the Conciliation Committee for the first time, I have to say that I was satisfied with this procedure, which saw representatives of the main institutions of the European Union making every effort to achieve a happy medium, that is to say, between the possible and the feasible, bearing in mind existing conditions and possibilities, which are of course not the same for all Europe' s ports.

Especially with regard to fees, the important thing is that agreement was reached that the ships would pay part of the cost of waste disposal regardless of whether they use the port facilities or not. This will prevent difficulties arising for many ports and ships.

It is clear that this substantially reduces the incentive to discharge at sea. It also leaves each port the option of having its own charging policy.

Let us not forget that the European ports in the Mediterranean face competition from the ports of North Africa, whereas the Baltic or North Sea ports do not face any competition.

What is more, the possibility of amending the system to cover additional costs, should this prove necessary during its implementation, is guaranteed.

The essential thing is that, by approving the joint text under debate, we will have a directive that will protect our seas and coastlines from pollution caused by ships, and we will also have enhanced the image of the European Union as a standard-bearer for environmental policy and as an example for the rest of the world to follow.

Mr President, after a fight lasting many years, we are now to take the crucial decision on reception facilities which will make it possible, for example, to leave waste oil in port instead of dumping it in the sea.

This is obviously an extraordinarily large step in the right direction.

At the same time, it is worrying that, right up to the end, there have been those who have tried to thwart what is obviously the right step.

This is shown by the fact that a third reading has been required and that a conciliation committee has had to be set up, as well as by the lack of commitment on the part of large sections of the Council of Ministers.

It also has to be said that what we have achieved today is a compromise.

In the original proposal, almost all portions of the costs were covered by port fees in accordance with the system which has been in existence for a long time in parts of the Baltic.

This means that there was an economic motive for a vessel to leave waste oil in a port rather than dump it in the sea.

Now, only portions of the cost are to be covered in this way, while an extraordinarily large part of the cost is to become a further additional cost for the ship owner.

In my view, it remains to be seen what effects this will have.

I believe it is very important that we should be prepared to keep track of developments and make further decisions on this, if need be.

The evaluation envisaged in the Conciliation Committee' s proposal and the monitoring of vessels which is to take place are therefore extraordinarily advantageous.

Mr President, first of all I should like to thank the rapporteur, Mr Bouwman, for his efforts over quite a long period of time in negotiating this very satisfactory proposal which will - as all colleagues have said so far - significantly reduce the amount of pollution dumped illegally into the seas around Europe.

Let us pause and reflect on the scale of the problem.

Mr Bouwman quite rightly referred to Erika.

This was indeed a tragedy of enormous proportions, with significant and perhaps enduring consequences, but the amount of deliberate spills from oil tankers along all our coasts dwarfs the amount of oil that was spilled from Erika.

It is that problem that this particular proposal aims to tackle.

I am delighted that it will, by ensuring that the Member States provide adequate facilities at all their ports, that their ships and masters are obliged to use them, that the fees system is fair and balanced and above all that 25% of ships are inspected to ensure these requirements are met.

I particularly welcome the three-year review, because my only concern is that Member States should implement this legislation that they have now signed up to.

As Mr Jarzembowski will know only too well, on port state control several Member States still do not inspect 25% of ships.

If they cannot do it on that, what is to say they will do it on this?

That is our challenge to them: to make sure they adhere to the very worthy agreement that we are hopefully going to be endorsing this week.

Mr President, I would like to start by congratulating Mr Bouwman on the publication of this text, which had been uncertain for a long time.

This is indeed a very important date in maritime history.

A number of our colleagues have said that this text is a precursor to the Erika package and, in many respects, it aims to solve a problem that is even more serious. This problem concerns acts of ecological piracy, when ships discharge waste at sea, discharging hydrocarbons and a huge amount of waste onto our shorelines.

It is also a victory for Parliament over the Council' s reluctance to imposing a common-sense fee-paying system.

The principle of polluter pays is not working in the case in point, because the polluter cannot be identified.

If we want to settle this issue, we must move towards a universal fee system, which will be mandatory and not linked to the act of waste treatment.

I am among those who, in their capacity as French Members of Parliament, have made every effort to ensure that this text is published, even acting against the sympathies of their government towards this text or against its reservations.

I am among those who welcome this compromise.

But this compromise cannot be allowed to become a let-out. It must be implemented and its implementation must be strictly monitored at the level of the Member States.

In this connection, I would like to give you the position of a Frenchman who has worked so hard, despite the reluctance of his government.

It is clear that this text currently favours large ports and puts small ports, which are not equipped, at a disadvantage.

I therefore call on the Council to help Member States equip small ports, possibly in the framework of the Structural Funds, or in the form of some kind of loan, because small ports are also important elements of national and regional development and of regional and local economies.

And I believe that, if we provide small ports with waste treatment plants, we will secure the success of this directive.

Mr President, first of all, I want to congratulate the rapporteur on a commendable result.

I do not normally make a habit of doing this here in Parliament but, since there is good reason for doing so on this occasion, I would thank the rapporteur and the others who have worked on this report.

As Mr Stenmarck said, we are familiar with this system from the cooperation that has taken place in the Baltic.

Since March 1998, the Baltic Recommendation has taken such a system for granted.

I should like to say, however, that the agreement is in certain respects a disappointment in the perspective of what has happened in the Baltic.

I should also like to refer to the law we have passed in Finland which stipulates that the fee ought not to depend upon how much waste the vessel leaves at the port.

In Finland, we have had such a system for waste oil since 1 June.

In that respect, the agreement is a disappointment.

In the last few days, we have learned that, even when it comes to grey water and pollution which is eutrophic in its effects, intentional and unintentional discharges from vessels are the main sources of pollution in the Baltic.

We are used to the fact that the polluter-pays principle does not operate in the case of oil, but there are problems too when it comes to eutrophy caused in other ways.

We are aware that everyone has been exposed to tough lobbying from the port organisation in Europe which has consistently set its face against this proposal.

The outcome is, therefore, nonetheless a good one.

However, it will be extremely important to follow up the proposal.

The Commissioner is known to have a major interest in the sea and in obtaining a clean environment.

It is important that the follow-up should be carried out seriously so that any supplementary measures can be taken, if need be.

This is a first step, but I would observe that it is important that we should have stricter conditions for the Baltic, which is perhaps far and away the most sensitive inland sea in Europe.

Mr President, the report by Mr Bouwman, which is the outcome of a long process, has in the interim become even more topical in France because of the shipwreck of the tanker, the Erika, on the occasion of which the Minister for the Environment did not see fit to interrupt his holiday.

This report goes some way to preventing marine pollution because it deals with ships that discharge waste at sea.

These acts are not covered by the media in the same way as shipwrecks, but they nevertheless make up most of the pollution of our seas.

We must however recognise that Community legislation would not be necessary if the Member States of the European Union, who are all signatories to Marpol, the International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships, had taken the necessary steps.

Nor is it enough to accuse unscrupulous shipowners or captains; we must bear in mind that it is often impossible to discharge waste inside the ports, due to the lack of appropriate facilities. The problem of waste storage is also extremely difficult to solve, as this in turn gives rise to the problem of waste treatment.

Nevertheless, it is difficult to believe that, in an age when agricultural installations are monitored by satellite, it is so difficult to monitor a ship discharging waste at sea.

We will, however, vote for this report, because it seems to be moving towards better prevention of pollution and because, wishing to remain at a general level, it leaves Member States a certain latitude in their choice of implementation tools.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I am very happy to be here today to participate in the debate on the approval of the directive on port reception facilities for ship-generated waste and cargo residues.

Like previous speakers, I would firstly like to congratulate the rapporteur, Mr Bouwman, on the excellent work he has done.

During this time he has combined steadfastness with flexibility and intelligence to achieve a result which is acceptable to all the institutions and which will serve to make our seas cleaner.

I must tell you, for example, that this summer, one of the items in the news in the country I know best, Spain, involved the southern coastlines being affected by the pollution resulting from oil tankers cleaning our their holds in international waters.

This is one of the 100 000 cases which occur throughout the year on Europe' s coastlines.

What we have to do is find out how we can, if not end, then at least limit as far as possible, given the capacity we have, these harmful effects on our seas. In order to end it, we would have to reconsider Maritime Law which, to a large extent, originates from the maritime situation of the 17th and 18th Centuries, which bore no relation to the current situation.

I believe we have made a great deal of progress which will noticeably improve the marine environment in the face of the deliberate contamination by certain ships - because not all of them do this sort of thing - of our coastlines.

The current version of this directive has the support of everybody.

It has the support of the shipowners because it provides them with waste facilities, which already exist in some European ports but unfortunately not in all of them, particularly not in the smaller ports, where the Member States will have to make significant investments.

This version of the directive has the support of the ports, because it means that their investments in this type of facility will not put them at a competitive disadvantage, which has unfortunately been the case at times, since some ports have made considerable efforts and others have not.

It has the support of those sectors which are most sensitive to the problem of residues and the fight for sustainable development.

I believe that the whole of this House and also the representatives of the Council and the Commission are included in this group, not only the ecologists, but all those who are concerned about this type of problem.

We believe that issues such as the planning of residue management, the ships' delivery obligations, prior notification, the controls - 25% of the controls -, fees which incentivise the use of port facilities for cleaning the holds of ships, will necessarily contribute to a reduction in marine pollution.

This directive, of course, enjoys the support of the three institutions, the Commission, the Council and Parliament, because we know that it will mean something positive for our citizens.

It would have been very sad if we had been unable to reach this agreement, which was so longed-for by everyone.

I would like to thank the Council for its flexibility and its constructive will, and Parliament also, especially the rapporteur, for the work carried out over this period and during the conciliation procedure.

The Commission has obtained some commitments which have helped this agreement. These commitments enable us to specify that "significant" means that at least 30% of the costs of the cleaning of holds in ports must be covered in a general sense, whether or not these port facilities are used.

If over the next three years we see that the Member States' actions are not sufficient and the desired results are not obtained, the Commission reserves the right to present a new directive clearly establishing a minimum percentage which must be covered by the general fees or by an obligatory cleaning fee in the various European ports.

It is also the Commission' s responsibility to verify that that control of 25%, another key element of this directive, is carried out by the Member States.

I would like once again to thank Parliament for standing firm on the need for a strengthened mechanism for reviewing the fees system, which will undoubtedly allow us to move forward and make a detailed study of the current system which we have implemented and the consequences for the environment.

Mr President, it has already been said in the debates that we have suffered from the impact of the Erika tragedy, but the cleaning out of holds is equivalent to more than one Erika each year on Europe' s coastlines.

We are, therefore, taking a great step forward today.

This does not mean that we are not going to move forward on issues relating to oil tankers and safety in the transport of polluting materials, such as oil and its derivatives, issues which we hope will not only make progress in this House and the Council, but which will also be supplemented by means of additional initiatives which, as the Commission has stated, will be presented shortly.

Thank you very much, Mrs de Palacio.

The vote will take place today at 12 noon.

(The sitting was suspended at 11.55 a.m. and resumed at 12.00 noon)

Madam President, can I impose on your goodwill and Parliament's goodwill for a moment in welcoming to the diplomatic gallery a delegation from Kazakhstan?

They are in Parliament today and tomorrow to raise awareness of the former Soviet empire's nuclear testing programme which impacted not just severely but hugely on their country.

They had 607 nuclear explosions in the atmosphere between 1949 and 1990.

This has left part of their country completely devastated and I hope Parliament will give them a sympathetic hearing in the seminar they are holding here this afternoon.

They have a huge problem in raising world awareness of this former Soviet problem.

We shall also be discussing the problems of the submarine that sank, another part of the nuclear legacy that has been left by the Soviet Union.

Thank you, Mr Provan. I am very happy to welcome this delegation.

We have a speaker to oppose the motion.

Madam President, I cannot understand what the PPE wants.

I understand that some Members are against the directive we are going to vote on, but the vote in the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms was in favour of this directive by a clear majority.

This morning we held a very fruitful debate with the Commissioner and I believe that, almost a year after the Tampere Summit, not to approve the first proposed directive on harmonisation in justice and internal affairs in the field of immigration, presented to us by the Commission, would be inexplicable and there is no justification for it.

I understand that there are Members who are totally against the right of immigrants to live as families, but that is not the majority position of this House, as was reflected in the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms.

I therefore ask that we go ahead with the vote on this Commission proposal.

Thank you, Mrs Terrón i Cusí.

I will ask our rapporteur to express an opinion, if he wishes.

Madam President, I oppose referral back to committee.

I note that nobody from Mr Gollnisch's group at any point in the committee raised any questions about the definition of regroupment, or of family, or of control.

This matter has been debated fully in committee and debated here in plenary this morning.

I see no reason not to proceed to a vote.

I owe you an apology, Madam President, because I suspect you do not have in front of you the view of the rapporteur on all of the different amendments.

If that is the case I would very happily, before the vote, explain to the House my position on the amendments put forward by the committee.

But as for the amendments put forward for plenary, because they have been the subject of last minute debate, I will leave all of those to the wisdom of the House.

(Parliament rejected the request for referral to committee)

Before the vote on the Commission proposal

Madam President, forgive me for butting in at this point. I have a question for Mr Vitorino before we come to the final vote.

You said this morning that you would endorse Amendment No 19 at today 's vote.

I just wanted to confirm that you will indeed accept Amendment No 19.

Madam President, I would like to ask the Commissioner if he would advise us which of the amendments which have been adopted this morning he will accept before the final vote on the legislative resolution.

Madam President, given that a political group which did not participate in the negotiations of the text in question has signed the text, I would ask you, before the vote takes place, to give the appropriate instructions to the relevant administration service so that this kind of abuse does not happen again.

We must accept that all the groups have the right to express themselves in the House, but the text, in principle, belongs to the groups which negotiated it.

If anybody wants to attach themselves to it, they must have the agreement of all the groups which have produced the text.

Madam President, the compromise procedure is an ad hoc procedure that is not covered by the rules of our Parliament.

But once a text has been tabled, it is up to any Members who wish to do so to adopt it.

I therefore think that the objection raised by Mr Barón Crespo is not a valid one.

Madam President, the MEPs and groups have the opportunity to express themselves in the House, but the proposal belongs to those who produced it and must not be unduly appropriated, since this may give rise to confusion over such an important issue and over possible unwanted alliances with the far right.

Mr Barón Crespo, as you know, there is no Rule of Procedure that specifies this detail, but it is customary that those who have presented the text agree to sign it.

This has always been the case in this House.

(Parliament rejected the motion for a resolution)

Joint motion for a resolution on EU external action priorities

Joint motion for a resolution on the creation of a monitoring centre for industrial change

Before the start of the vote

Madam President, I would like to ask my colleagues in the PPE Group and the ELDR Group if they intend to maintain their motion for a resolution, which contains flagrant untruths.

The discussion we had yesterday evening showed that both the Commission and the Council support the creation of a monitoring centre for industrial change.

Moreover, Madam President, you yourself requested it at the European Council in Lisbon on our behalf.

We cannot vote on a resolution when the groups say that neither the Council nor the Commission approves of the idea of creating a monitoring centre for industrial change.

It is a flagrant untruth and I believe that it is only logical that both groups should withdraw their motion for a resolution.

I do not see any sign of them doing so.

Yes, Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel, you have the floor.

Madam President, the stir which the Bouwman report has caused shows quite well the chaos European decision-making finds itself in and what kind of complex compromises are being struck as a result.

Parliament was divided between supporters of two different solutions.

Eventually, a majority was achieved for one of the solutions, a majority which also encompassed the Group of the European United Left.

In normal administrative relations, this decision by Parliament would be final; not so in the European Union.

A conciliation procedure had to take place.

This procedure between the Council and Parliament resulted in a compromise which is rather noncommittal as long as it is not accompanied by a Commission statement.

This statement explains how the Commission interprets the word "substantial" in Article 8 (1).

Substantial appears to mean 30% here, but this cannot be made explicit in the text itself.

From the outset, there was a battle between a majority which supported 90% and a minority which was in favour of 0%.

This has now resulted in a percentage which is nearer to 0 than 90 and which may not be made public.

Everyone is now agreed that ship' s waste and cargo residues can no longer be discharged at sea but there is substantial disagreement about how this ship' s waste is to be collected and, more to the point, how this collection should be funded.

Around the Baltic Sea and the North Sea, preference was given to funding based on a general levy for each ship. This should prevent anyone from seeking financial gain by not delivering waste at officially designated sites.

Around the Mediterranean Sea, however, there was preference for payment according to the waste collected.

Instead of developing both systems separately to start with and comparing the respective environmental effects, attempts are now being forced through to arrive at one solution for all.

This is prejudicing the northern model.

It would be better if, instead of applying an overall EU solution, this matter could be regulated according to which particular sea was involved.

Without the European Union, it would have been easier to reach an agreement between groups of separate countries for each sea.

In this case, the presence of the European Union is not conducive to finding a joint, cross-border solution.

Despite this, my group has voted in favour because this regulation is better than nothing.

I hope a review will take place within the next couple of years so that the original intentions of the Bouwman report can be brought to bear.

Madam President, pensioners and the elderly like the sea to be clean and so, as representative of the Pensioners' Party to Parliament, I voted for the directive which aims to clean up the sea, especially in the vicinity of ports.

I still remember what used to happen when, as a child, I used to go swimming in the sea in Genoa, my native city. We would often come back up the beach covered in tar like the character in the washing powder advertisement, Calimero, who is always black all over and rightly complains about this.

This directive at last provides for waste collection from ships as they berth in ports, and this is a positive step.

I voted for the report, although it would have been better to regulate what goes on in the Mediterranean ports of the other States as well.

We give so much money to the countries which border on the Mediterranean through programmes such as MEDA: we should request that they set up waste collection systems in their ports as well!

I had the opportunity to express my views on this subject during the March part-session. At the time, it was a very topical subject, as the debate on marine safety in the wake of the wreck of the Erika was at its fiercest.

Today, the debate is calmer, but no less important.

The people of Europe are deeply concerned about the pollution of the seas and the coastlines of the Member States.

The European Parliament echoed these legitimate concerns and amended the directive proposed by the European Commission on the management of waste discharged by ships in such a way as to make Member States aware of their responsibilities.

As an alternative to the principle that the polluter pays, which has proved to be ineffective, Parliament suggested establishing a system whereby all ships would pay a fee whenever they called at a port, whether they used the waste disposal facilities or not.

This fee would help finance 90% of the cost of these facilities.

This system would encourage ships to deliver their ship-generated waste and cargo residues to the port reception facilities rather than discharge them at sea.

It was clear that the Council would not accept such a proposal.

The discussion was then continued, quite logically, within the Conciliation Committee.

Those negotiating on behalf of Parliament and the Council reached the following agreement: all ships calling at a port of a Member State shall contribute significantly (a statement from the Commission annexed to the text considers that this means at least 30% of the costs), irrespective of actual use of the facilities.

The share of the costs which is not covered by that fee, if any, shall be covered on the basis of the types and quantities of ship-generated waste actually offloaded by the ship.

In addition, the Commission shall, within three years of the implementation, submit a report evaluating the impact of the variety of cost recovery systems on the marine environment.

It will, if necessary in the light of this evaluation, submit a proposal to amend this directive by the introduction of a system involving the payment of an appropriate percentage, of no less than one third of the costs of port reception facilities, by all ships calling at a port of a Member State irrespective of actual use of the facilities.

I am satisfied with the compromise we have reached.

This directive is a significant step in establishing a more effective strategy to protect the marine environment.

We are now in the final stages of drawing up this draft directive. Although I am not entirely satisfied with the outcome of the conciliation procedure, I nevertheless accept this compromise which, I am bound to say, is to the credit of the European Parliament and to its skill and maturity in dealing with the legislative process of the European Union.

Aware of the unacceptability of discharging waste at sea and the behaviour of crews who profit from a dramatic accident to discharge their own waste with total impunity, thereby adding to the pollution of the seas, the European Commission proposed focussing its action on installing reception facilities for ship-generated waste in European ports.

All ports must be equipped with such facilities and, in addition, all ships calling at one of these ports must pay a fee towards the cost of collecting and treating this waste, irrespective of actual use of the facilities. Parliament took the view that this fee should cover 90% of the cost but, following the compromise reached with the Council, this was reduced to at least 30%.

This is just a first step. It recognises the polluter-pays principle.

It is a necessary step, but it does not go far enough.

Let us make no bones about it.

If we really want to clean up our oceans and preserve the natural balance for future generations, we must take more radical measures, especially concerning payment for these facilities and the need to avoid distortions in competition between ports.

In a word, we must establish a public service for the treatment of waste.

For the time being, I can only recommend that Parliament accepts the results of this conciliation procedure.

Madam President, I voted for the recommendation.

I went to Turkey as a tourist this summer to visit the city discovered by Henrich Schliemann, the mythical Troy of the Iliad. While I was there, an elderly Turkish pensioner who had recognised me approached me and, while we visited the ruins of Troy together, he asked: "But why is it that, when the Morillon directive was debated, the amendments requesting Turkey not to build nuclear power stations or, at least, to ensure that its nuclear power stations do not cause pollution, to resolve the Kurd issue and to abolish the death penalty were not adopted?

Why was it that these points were not incorporated into the document?"

This is my minor criticism of the document we have voted on.

Madam President, I voted against the recommendation because I feel that the provision of aid was not made sufficiently conditional upon a genuine renewal of the Turkish State, genuine safeguarding of human rights and genuine protection of minors.

Of course, countries who are in need of aid should receive assistance, but, on the other hand, it is appropriate to ask them to respect these principles first.

The European Parliament must insist on the three amendments:

on excluding nuclear energy in the earthquake region of Turkey, as far as the system of production is concerned;

on protecting cultural identity and abolishing the death penalty;

on contributing to the solution of the Kurdish problem.

That is why I voted for these amendments.

I believe however that the European Parliament should not have changed its stance on the amendments of the first reading: Article 5 (criteria for Turkey' s accession), Article 15 (suspension of cooperation with Turkey if there are obstacles to the issues of democracy, the rule of law, human rights, the protection or minorities), Article 35 (annual report on the protection of democratic principles, the rule of law, human rights and fundamental freedoms, compliance with international law).

Unfortunately, the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy of the European Union crumbled under pressure from the Council, which is promoting an unprincipled realpolitik with the Turkish regime, thereby depriving Turkish citizens of a boost towards democracy, which could be given by the European Union.

The integration of Turkey into the European Union is naturally of considerable interest to European big business, for which the European institutions, including Parliament, are the mouthpieces.

The European Parliament could at least take advantage of the parallel desire of the Turkish Government to enter the European Union to demand such basic measures as the abolition of the death penalty, democratic freedoms and the cessation of the repression of the Kurdish people.

But, even in these areas, the report uses wordings so toned-down that they mean absolutely nothing. Their avowed concern is not to 'offend any sensibilities' .

The sensibility that must not be offended above all is that of the Turkish government, which bombs, devastates and tortures the Kurdish population.

And, whilst the rapporteur of the European Parliament struggles to find a way of highlighting human rights without upsetting the soldiers who trample them underfoot, a Franco-German-Belgian consortium, as was recently reported in the press, is preparing to supply Turkey with a munitions factory.

This is infinitely more revealing of the true nature of the relations between European big business and the Turkish dictatorship than all the insipid claptrap on which we are asked to give our opinion.

During this part-session, the European Parliament has plumbed the depths of hypocrisy.

In the space of 24 hours, you are going to approve a financial package of tens of millions of euros for Turkey and condemn this self-same country for bombing the Kurdish populations of northern Iraq, in violation of another country' s airspace.

And when I say condemn, I greatly exaggerate the import not only of the text but also of your intentions.

What has happened to the respect for human rights, which must condition who the European Union helps or cooperates with, and which you adapt to suit your own ends?

In this particular case, it seems to have sunk without trace and your conscience seems to change with the wind.

It is time your deeds reflected your words.

That would be a pleasant change and, above all, it would give European policy greater coherence and authority.

Madam President, I voted for this report which introduces strategic environmental assessments and therefore provides for particular focus on environmental issues when public works are being built, for I support all that contributes to the beauty of nature and countryside etc., which is important for pensioners as well.

Nonetheless, the report does have some shortcomings.

When States decide to build public works, it should be left to the State in question to decide without excessive regulation whether a public works project is sufficiently environmentally friendly.

This is because public works need to be erected rapidly and elderly pensioners do not have time to wait too long!

This text has been lurking the procedural labyrinth for nigh on 5 years.

Although we did not support the amendment aimed at rejecting the Directive, our aim was clearly not to reward those who, in the Commission, the Council and Parliament, had worked on this text for years.

We are not here to legitimise the often strange desires of the technocrats in Brussels to legislate on anything and everything.

We rejected this amendment because companies need a clear framework within which to act.

The sticking point is the scope of the directive, that is, the very definition of the 'plans and programmes' .

The mandatory part of the scope applies to plans and programmes supporting authorisations for projects in sectors such as agriculture, forestry, fisheries, energy, industry, transport, waste management, water management, telecommunications, tourism, town and country planning or land use.

This mandatory part is supplemented by a selection mechanism, so-called 'screening' , undertaken on the initiative of the Member States (the non-mandatory part).

I acknowledge that protecting the environment and taking it into consideration when evaluating policies is a necessity and even an obligation.

But the Member States, in the name of subsidiarity, are in a better position to ensure that this is carried out properly. We will not support amendments aimed at enlarging the scope of application of the directive, as it must be limited to the plans and programmes that are likely to have significant repercussions.

How annoying it is when attempts are made on all sides to give greater powers to the European Union at the expense of the Member States.

In this case, under the guise of concern for the environment, the rapporteur wants to take charge of all the policies of the Member States.

The importance of taking the environment into consideration when evaluating policies is not in doubt, but to apply the same procedure to it, especially one that is imposed by the European Union, is inconceivable.

We have confidence in the Member States and we defend the common position. The 'environment' alibi is nothing more than the instrument the European Union uses to extend its control in all policy areas.

We are well aware of the powers of the Union, and we know its arsenal. It uses the environment to infiltrate everywhere; it uses our water pipes to spread its tentacles into national policy.

Like a number of other delegations, France has stated clearly that it does want the scope of application to be extended to national policies.

Madam President, I voted for this document, tabled by Mr Valdivielso de Cué, on the new regulation on the MEDA programme.

I am wholeheartedly in favour - and not just because I am here representing Italy - of all initiatives which bring the Mediterranean countries closer together. Better still, I would like to see an increase in the MEDA regulation' s financial appropriations.

In my own small way, I have created an association of pensioners' parties from the Mediterranean states in order to emphasise how important the Mediterranean is for Europe and the countries bordering on Europe, since countries in Africa and the East which are on the Mediterranean border on Europe too.

This is why I voted for this report.

European Union policy towards the countries of the Mediterranean is geared not only towards developing these countries but also towards increasing the influence of big business.

And these are indeed the purposes served by the MEDA funding programme.

The creation of a Euro-Mediterranean Free Trade Area has no other purpose than to make it easier for European industrial products to infiltrate the markets of these countries and to simultaneously place the riches of these countries under their predatory regimes.

Appeals to the consolidation of democracy, the rule of law and human rights are nothing more than the European Union' s customary excuse for meddling in the domestic affairs of other countries.

The structural adjustments that are reinforced from within MEDA are primarily aimed at imposing on these countries the laws of the marketplace and domination by the economically powerful.

The end result is that these countries sink even more deeply into the mire of underdevelopment and become satellites of the European Union due to unequal partnership agreements.

The Communist Party of Greece is a strong advocate of cooperation between peoples based on equal conditions and without interference by one country in the domestic affairs of another.

It especially emphasises the responsibility of developed, capitalist countries for creating the current situation in underdeveloped countries, which is a result of its continuous pillaging of these countries.

This is one more reason for developed countries to help underdeveloped countries to develop their productive base and to increase the standard of living of their inhabitants.

As both the previous MEDA programme and the proposed amendments fall far short of the above-mentioned objectives, the MEPs from the Communist Party of Greece will be voting against the report by Mr Valdivieslo de Cué.

Europe is going to expand eastwards.

This is written in Agenda 2000.

But Europe has a fluid border to the south, conditioned by its geography.

Boats and rafts arrive along its borders in southern Italy and southern Spain.

They are loaded and sometimes overloaded with Albanians, Turks, Muslims - men, women and children from all the countries around the Mediterranean.

It is a tidal wave that is going to grow year by year.

Europe is going to be submerged, even though at El Elejido in 1999 and in just a few other places, the settled populations have reacted against this flood of nomads.

Not wanting any roll back and unable to achieve containment, European leaders are logically seeking to prevent these nomads from leaving their home countries.

And this is the aim of the common-sense MEDA programme.

Sketched out at the European Summit in Cannes in June 1995, established by the Barcelona Conference of November 1995 in the form of a Euro-Mediterranean partnership, and implemented by the MEDA Regulation of 23 July 1996, this Mediterranean policy of the European Union is based on a few regional and national investment projects.

It is a meagre amount: EUR 3.3 billion from 1995 to 1999, from Morocco to Gaza and the West Bank, even if, by adding to it the EUR 3.6 million in loans from the European Investment Bank, the financial contribution is greater than the EUR 4.4 billion given by the World Bank.

It is a meagre amount, not only because, in reality, these EUR 3.6 billion in commitment loans are in fact reduced to a collective payment of just EUR 648 million, but also because this step is not commensurate with the size of the problem.

Admittedly, it is good to have moved from bilateral aid to a global, multilateral approach.

Admittedly, for 2000-2006, MEDA II will increase loans of less than 47.1% to arrive at a financial package of EUR 8.5 billion.

European farmers would be happy with an increase that was twice, three times less than that.

But that does not constitute a Mediterranean policy.

A Mediterranean policy is not more programmes and more officials in Brussels to manage them.

A Mediterranean policy that is up to the demographic, environmental, climatic, Islamic and cultural challenge is a grand strategic vision, establishing, integrating, stabilising and organising the Mediterranean around original and intergovernmental institutions with major common sectors to explore: water, the environment, migration, deforestation and so on.

Under these conditions, and with a method and integrated institutions such as a High Secretariat for the Mediterranean, one can talk of a budget, as there will be strategic projects and not tactical sprinklings of small amounts.

But we must act quickly, very quickly, before a colonised Europe has nothing more to share than the decline of peoples who have been deprived of their culture.

The partnership between the EU and the southern Mediterranean States comprises a range of positive elements.

It should be further developed and deepened.

However, the report on the reform of the MEDA programme does not set the right tone on a number of counts.

The European Union is fixated with the idea of concluding free trade agreements with the southern Mediterranean countries, although, paradoxically, they only have a one-sided liberalising effect.

Such agreements have a particularly negative impact on the financially disadvantaged, as existing free trade agreements have shown.

The report concedes that free trade agreements carry this risk.

Why else would it describe, and call for, support measures, with a view to alleviating the negative impact of free trade?

If the risks attending the free trade strategy are acknowledged, but it is pursued nevertheless, then the social, environmental and cultural components of the programme will only ever have repair and damage limitation status, when they ought to be the guiding principle for such agreements.

Furthermore, in order to qualify for subsidies, the MEDA countries must satisfy the Bretton Woods institutions (for example the IMF).

These self-same programmes are notorious for having anti-social strategies directed purely at liberalisation.

The aim of the EU-Mediterranean partnership must be to redress the balance between the northern and southern regions of the Mediterranean area, improve people' s quality of life and promote understanding between the inhabitants of the various regions.

But if free trade becomes the guiding principle, these goals will become nothing more than window dressing, and a handful of wealthy people will once again be the ones to benefit.

I also protest against the fact that the EU-Mediterranean partnership is being misused as an instrument in order to prevent people from migrating from this region to the EU.

For a while now, the European Union has had the 'fight against illegal immigration' and the 'repatriation of 'illegal' refugees written as objectives into treaties with the Mediterranean States, as well as into every agreement with one or more third countries.

In this way, each individual agreement adds one more brick to fortress Europe.

This report is another example of the EU policy of pulling up the drawbridge where immigrants and refugees are concerned.

The countries of the southern Mediterranean region have been declared as the forecourts to fortress Europe.

It is their duty to ensure that 'undesirable persons' do not get into the EU.

I ask myself how the EU can insist on the partner states in the Mediterranean showing respect for human rights and the freedom of the individual, when it does not respect the rights of immigrants itself, gives these people illegal status and wants to keep them away from Europe at any price, even if it leads to their being killed.

This report safeguards, once again, the free movement of goods, services and capital.

Once again, freedom and human rights are trampled underfoot.

I will therefore vote against it, despite the fact that it contains a number of positive elements.

I voted in favour of Mr Valdivielso de Cué' s report, because the Euro-Mediterranean partnership must be based on a MEDA programme that is fully efficient and successful.

As Member for a town that looks on to the Mediterranean, I hope that the Euro-Mediterranean partnership is given comparable resources for the period 2000-2006 to those given to the countries of Central and Eastern Europe.

In implementing the MEDA programme, the simplification proposed by the European Commission and intensified by this report are beneficial.

If we consider the appropriation of funds in the first MEDA programme, how can we justify the fact that only a quarter of the appropriations have actually been paid and that it takes an average of four years for payments to be made?

This kind of problem harms our credibility on the international scene and gives European taxpayers a terrible impression of the way in which Community institutions use public funds.

We cannot be satisfied with such a record.

The best we can do now is to back the amendments proposed by the European Commission.

Aid to Mediterranean countries must be provided quickly and efficiently, in line with the European Union' s political priorities.

Mr Valdivielso de Cué' s report, which proposes that the administration and management of projects should be decentralised, that the MED committee should be given new guidelines, and which insists on improving cooperation between the European Union and its Member States, makes a significant contribution to improving MEDA.

Increasing the European Parliament' s participation in MEDA' s decision-making process is another point that I believe to be crucial.

I also deplore the fact that, on an issue as important as changing the MEDA regulation, Parliament only has the right to state its opinion by means of the consultation procedure.

With the amendments that we are proposing in this report, the MEDA programme will have simplified, decentralised and transparent implementation procedures.

I now hope that the Community budget will provide this programme with financial resources that match up to the political ambitions that we are publicly stating for the Mediterranean area.

The European Commission has committed itself to increasing MEDA' s staffing levels, with a view to reaching similar levels of human resources enjoyed by other major programmes such as PHARE and TACIS.

When it comes to looking at the budget for 2001, the European Parliament must ensure that this commitment is translated into action.

With regard to the appropriations allocated to the MEDA programme, I hope that the financial package reflects the political will - which the Council and Parliament have both been trumpeting - to make the Euro-Mediterranean partnership one of our priorities for external action.

Amending the MEDA regulation with a view to improving the decision-making process and simplifying the procedure for implementing projects is an important stage in the Euro-Mediterranean partnership.

I shall do my best to ensure that the vote on the MEDA budget is another stage confirming the importance we attach to the Euro-Mediterranean partnership.

Varela Suanzes-Carpegna reports (A5-0194 and A5-0188/2000)

Madam President, I voted for Mr Varela' s report on the Republic of Guinea fisheries agreement, even if prawns and tuna will not look very favourably on this report which regulates catching them.

I gave Mr Fernández Martín my opinion when we were talking about the Canary Islands, and he quite rightly said: "Yes, but prawns do not vote, besides which I am a fisherman."

Madam President, this report has shortcomings, in that it gives money to the Republic of Guinea, on the one hand, to help replenish fish stocks and reduce the number of fish caught, and, on the other, to send European Union fishing boats to those seas to catch prawns and tuna.

Well, I think that this is a form of colonialism which must be stopped.

With regard to Mr Varela' s second report, on the Mauritius fisheries agreement, I did indeed vote in favour, Madam President, but I must emphasise that it was not an easy decision.

Because the Committee on Development and Cooperation tabled an amendment asking for fishermen' s wages and, I would add, their pensions to be monitored.

Unfortunately, this amendment was not adopted.

Now, with this document, we are about to conclude a trade agreement, and we are giving away Union funds but are not requesting to be able to monitor the fishermen' s contracts.

In my view, that is not a good move.

Madam President, I would like to explain the votes on behalf of the ELDR Group.

Our overriding objective was to get this very important report through as the first report communitarising European Community immigration laws and as a matter of justice to third-country nationals.

We have therefore shown solidarity with other like-minded groups and Members.

We supported the Socialist Group amendments to remove beneficiaries of subsidiary protection in the light of the Commissioner's pledge to bring forward a proposal covering them as well as beneficiaries of temporary protection.

We would have preferred beneficiaries of subsidiary protection to stay in as a matter of principle, because they are long-term legal residents, but we decided to assist the passage of the report.

Similarly, we abstained on matters concerning ascending relatives, because, wherever possible, we wish to remove objections so as to secure a clear majority for the report and recognise that the inclusion of such relatives raises particular problems for some Members.

Some of us in my group, however, would have liked us to express a more generous stance.

Mrs Malmström and Mrs van der Laan have asked me specifically to mention them in this connection.

My group has deliberately voted to include unmarried partners if the Member State concerned legally recognises such partnerships, as I think three currently do.

We think it to be only justice not to interfere with a domestic decision on legal recognition of such partnerships.

Madam President, I voted against the Watson report, as did the whole of the Group of the European People' s Party, not just because the amendments tabled by the group - of which I have the pleasure of being a member - were not adopted, but also because the pensioners are tired of seeing European Union territory increasingly filling up with third-country nationals who do not have the means to live.

This document lays down that relatives of immigrants who live in certain European Union Member States may come and join their relatives - which is excellent and I agree with this - if the latter have an income equal to the minimum social security pension.

But just one person living on the minimum social security pension goes hungry.

How can an immigrant with such a low income make all his relatives go hungry?

Although the Watson report on the proposal for a directive on family reunification is excessively liberal, it has just been adopted by the European Parliament, with a large majority of 323 votes to 212.

This vote shows just how European MEPs and the Commission, which drafted the original proposal, are both failing in their main duty, which is not to satisfy the whole world, but to protect Europe' s citizens.

This vote also confirms what we have always said about communitising immigration policy by means of the Treaty of Amsterdam, which is being applied here to the particular case of family reunification by means of Article 63(3) of the Treaty on European Union: the transfer of decision-making powers from national level to European level is being used not to strengthen nations, as some have claimed in order to deceive voters, but instead to demolish their defences more completely.

The proposal for a directive on family reunification, as approved by the Watson report, proclaims a Community-level law on family reunification which, in legal terms, does not yet exist at this level and which, in our opinion, should not be made law.

The truth is that the host State does not force the immigrants to move there.

This is a decision taken by the immigrant himself, and if he is received into that State, it is not his place to claim the right to bring in other people.

One notes, moreover, that the preamble to the proposal for a directive refers virtuously to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and to the international covenant of 1966, which recognise that "the family is the natural and fundamental group unit of society and is entitled to protection by society and the State" .

At the same time, the so-called Convention which is drafting a Charter of Fundamental Rights for the European Union is stubbornly refusing to take this principle into consideration.

It appears then that recognition of the family as the natural and fundamental group unit of society is useful when it serves to justify family reunification, but is no longer useful when it could serve to support European families.

The proposal for a directive approved by the Watson report is not content to proclaim this non-existent law.

It gives the title 'applicant' not only to legal immigrants but also to people who have refugee status.

Moreover, the beneficiaries of family reunification are not just the applicant's spouse and children under 18, but also the unmarried partner who is in a stable relationship with the applicant, which will include homosexual couples when the Member State' s legislation treats them in the same way as married couples for legal purposes.

The directive also includes children of full age who cannot reasonably look after themselves, as well as the relatives in the ascending line of the applicant, their spouse, or even of their unmarried partner.

It is quite clear that the floodgates are open wide and that the aim is to encourage immigration on a massive scale that will change the very nature of European societies.

The political classes in each country could probably not have voted for such a text, because they are too closely watched by the public.

They have therefore shifted the responsibility over to Brussels, which is now forced to do their dirty work behind closed doors That is the real job of Europe today.

The Danish Social Democrats in the European Parliament welcome the initiative concerning common rules for family reunification, although we have nonetheless voted against a number of points, including the one-year rule.

As a result of this and in view of the Danish reservation in the legal sphere, the Danish Social Democrats have declined to vote in favour of the final proposal.

The MEPs of the Left regret that, because of the Danish reservation, the Danish Government has not been able to influence the directive and is the only government not to have the right of veto, just as we regret the fact that, unlike other countries, Denmark will not make more demands of immigrants to Denmark who wish to reunite their families and require them to be self-supporting and to have somewhere to live.

The draft Directive' s proposal concerning the right to family reunification after one year would not be any problem if, in common with other countries, Denmark were to make such demands, as expressly laid down in the draft directive.

In that case, it would not be the local authorities' task to support and find homes for the people concerned, as it is at present.

As matters stand, the one-year rule cannot, however, be practised in Denmark without significant problems.

We therefore decline to vote on the report, regretfully because we should like to see a common policy, especially in the field of asylum.

. (FR) Following the progress made at the Tampere European Council in October 1999 on a European area of freedom, security and justice, and at a time when we are discussing the Charter of Fundamental Rights, the report we are debating today is of the utmost importance.

It concerns the issue of family reunification.

This right is currently only recognised by international legal instruments, specifically the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms of 1950.

At national level, situations are extremely disparate.

Family reunification enables the family unit to be protected and makes the integration of third-country nationals into Member States easier.

It was therefore crucial to incorporate the law on family reunification into Community legislation.

The European Commission' s proposal therefore sets out to establish a law on family reunification for nationals of third countries who are legally resident in a Member State, as long as they fulfil a certain number of financial and procedural conditions.

I welcome the work of my fellow Members of the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs, who have made a considerable effort to combat the extremely limiting and conservative vision of the first rapporteur.

They have produced a text that is close to the European Commission' s basic proposal which, in my opinion, is on the whole quite satisfactory.

Consequently, those belonging to one of the following categories will benefit from the law on family reunification:

third-country nationals who are legally resident in the territory of a Member State and who have a residence permit, which is valid for at least one year.

refugees, regardless of how long their residence permit is valid, or European Union citizens not exercising their right to free movement.

Those entitled to claim family reunification are:

the spouse or non-married partner of the applicant (including same-sex partners); although it should be noted that the provision covering non-married partners only applies in Member States where the position of non-married couples is comparable to that of married couples;

the children of the couple, whether they are married or not, and whether they are born within marriage, out of wedlock or are from a previous marriage;

the children of one of the spouses or partners are covered, on condition that the latter have actual custody and responsibility;

relatives in the ascending line, when these people are in the applicant' s care as well as children of full age who are also dependants.

I speak on behalf of myself and my 28 colleagues from the British Labour Party.

We have been pleased to vote and to support this report even though, for a variety of reasons, the United Kingdom Government has exercised its right to opt out of this initiative.

As members will be aware, the UK Government was party to the conclusions of the Tampere European Council.

There are, however, various practical points and issues regarding sovereignty which the UK takes very seriously and which means it is not appropriate or possible for the United Kingdom to be included at this time.

However this does not lessen the commitment of our Government to the principles of the report and the underlying values inherent therein.

Indeed it is the government's stated intention that the UK should not be seriously out of line with our European partners in this important area of immigration policy.

Labour MEPs have therefore voted in favour of this report and remain supporters of the principles of family reunification.

Of all the countries in the European Union, it is Luxembourg that has the highest proportion of foreign nationals amongst its population, i.e. 37%.

The majority of these foreign nationals, i.e. 87%, are from EU countries.

However, for some time now, the proportion of immigrants from third countries has been increasing more rapidly than that of EU citizens from the 14 other Member States.

Our labour market depends on the presence of immigrants, although the most severe bottlenecks in our labour market are offset by cross-border commuters from France, Belgium and Germany.

Almost a third of the work force, 80 000 people that is, are cross-border commuters.

Over half of the working population does not have Luxembourg citizenship.

These figures illustrate the interest my country has in a sound immigration policy, and, needless to say, in the important aspect of family reconciliation.

It is, of course, one of the Commission 's tasks, particularly following the entry into force of the Treaty of Amsterdam, to propose measures on the entry into, and residence, in the European Union, of third-country nationals, primarily with the undeniably admirable aim of bringing about an approximation of the legal provisions of individual Member States on the conditions governing the admission and residence of third-country nationals.

The Commission is right to comment, in its proposal for a directive on the right to reunification, that the presence of family members facilitates normal family life, thereby creating greater stability and enabling the individuals concerned to put roots down in the host country more successfully.

We are aware, and regard highly the fact, that the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and other international conventions recognise the nuclear family as the basic social unit, which deserves protection and support.

Against this background, and notwithstanding the fact that some international agreements do not make provision for the right to family reunification, in principle, I still welcome the Commission proposal for a Community legal instrument in respect of family reunification.

However, we do not want absolute chaos, and neither do we want to create new opportunities for gangs of human traffickers.

Above all, we must ensure that these provisions take the absorption capacity of each Member State into account.

This would certainly not be the case if we were to endorse the report of the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs, in its present form.

The rapporteur was entirely justified in withdrawing her name from the report, which was adopted in committee by 25 votes to 13.

A directive of the kind proposed by the majority of the committee responsible is simply unworkable, dangerous and counterproductive.

Only the amendments put forward by my group and the original rapporteur, Mrs Klamt, could have persuaded me to vote in favour of this report.

I am wholeheartedly in favour of family reunification.

But how is the family to be defined?

How many spouses, in the case of multiple marriages, how many children, partners, dependants in the widest sense of the word, or bogus spouses, should a single, legally resident third country national, be entitled to bring into the European Union? Ten, twenty, a hundred, depending on their own traditions and religion?

Humanitarian considerations should undoubtedly play a part, but the whole thing must still be manageable and controllable.

Above all, we must ensure that this European directive does not land the individual Member States in a situation which they are no longer able to control.

Naturally, where Member States already have more generous provisions, they should be able to retain them.

My main objective in drafting this statement was to warn against carrying matters to excess, and the unforeseeable consequences thereof, but without wishing to compromise the principle of family unity.

Nothing could be further from the truth!

The report mainly concerns two different groups : refugees and citizens of third countries, and their right to be reunited with their families in EU countries.

As Swedish Christian Democrats, we believe that these groups ought to be dealt with separately.

The right of refugees to be reunited with their families ought to be dealt with in the same way, but in a separate directive.

The family is our society' s most important building block, and we must therefore stand up for the right to a family life.

Above all, children' s right to be reunited with their parents must be protected, but the right to family reunification ought in certain cases (for example, when there are serious health reasons) to apply also to relatives in the ascending line, as well as to children who have come of age.

It is also only right that, following death or divorce for example, relatives should have an automatic right of residence in the host country, just as they should be given the right to work and receive an education in that country.

With these reservations and qualifications, we support the report.

- (DE) Despite the fact that it confines itself to refugees under the Geneva Convention, I intend to vote in favour of this report.

The Commission proposal will do nothing to advance the cause of the vast majority of homosexuals or refugees granted temporary or subsidiary protection.

However, particularly from a German perspective, it represents an improvement in the situation of those refugees who are in a position to facilitate the legal entry of others, under the 'family members' heading.

And that is not the only reason I will be voting in favour. Despite the fact that we Germans now hoist the flag against the extreme right almost on a daily basis, it is the German Minister of the Interior, Mr Schily, of all people, who has spoken out against this immigration-friendly legislation.

He is afraid that millions of immigrants will come to Germany if the directive comes into force.

In saying these things, he is playing into the hands of those who aim to drive these 'millions' of people out of Germany - dead or alive - using violent methods.

As a result, not only will our commitment to fighting the extreme right become a mask of hypocrisy; it will be turned on its head.

Madam President, could we not do as we used to, which was to name all those who wished to submit their explanations of vote in writing so that we could leave.

We are forced to hang around for half an hour after the votes to say that we are submitting our explanation of vote in writing.

We used to have a different system, which was better organised.

There is no need to get angry, Mrs Lulling.

As you know, it is extremely difficult to shout at the top of one' s voice to read out the names of Members who wish to submit an explanation of vote in writing.

Our staff check if the Members are indeed present and we note all written requests without having to read them out.

A check is made that the Member is in fact in the Chamber at the beginning of the explanations of vote and I therefore only call out the oral explanations.

You are therefore free to go.

I have been sitting here for almost half an hour waiting for my name to be called because I was informed by the services that I had to be present in order for my explanation of vote to be taken as written.

I do not understand the problem.

Why is it that our services cannot give us simple and straightforward information?

I indicated that I wanted to make my explanation of vote in writing and I was told that I would have to be here for the vote in the first instance and that I would have to wait until I was called to indicate that I wanted to make it in writing.

Why have I had to waste half an hour here?

Mr de Rossa, I have been told that this was a misunderstanding.

You were told that you had to be present for the vote.

I thought that this had always been the procedure, not that you had to wait for all the explanations of vote.

Madam President, I was told quite explicitly that I had to be present to indicate that I wanted to make a written explanation of vote.

When I was not here on a previous occasion I was rapped over the knuckles for not being here.

We cannot continue this discussion any further, but I promise you that we shall clear this up in the Bureau, first of all so that every President of the sitting applies the same rules for the explanations of votes.

I personally feel that the best approach is to check that Members are present for the vote so that they can leave if they are submitting their explanation in writing, and so that the explanations of vote in writing by Members who have not taken part in the vote are not counted.

I think that this is a good system, but first I would like to look into the matter with the other Vice-Presidents who, as I do, preside over the votes.

Creating a monitoring centre for industrial change

. (FR) I wish to express my support for establishing a new task, entrusted to a European Union agency, with a view to studying and more particularly to anticipating industrial change.

This would send out a powerful political message, demonstrating the will to react to these changes, which are caused by various upheavals, resulting particularly from economic and financial changes, the development of new technologies, international competition and the globalisation of trade.

It was at the Luxembourg Summit in November 1997 that we realised the importance of looking more closely into these phenomena so as to avoid suffering them again and to counter their negative consequences.

This idea led to a meeting of a group of experts, better known as the Gyllenhammar group, which was given the task of studying the economic and social implications of industrial change.

The conclusions reached by this group persuaded the Cardiff European Council in December 1998 to accept the creation of a monitoring centre for industrial change. We are finally debating this proposal today, and I hope it will be put into practice in the very near future!

Over the last few years we have seen a huge increase in the number of relocations, restructurings and mergers, which has greatly changed the face of European industry and which has had serious repercussions for employment and for economic and social cohesion.

Member States that are ill-prepared for these changes have experienced them too many times and have tried to pick up the pieces, as best they can, under the sometimes disapproving eye of the European Commission, which has not hesitated to condemn more than one Member State for some misdemeanour involving state aid!

The first victims of these unforeseen changes are, of course, the employees, who, in spite of increased growth and an improvement in the overall economic situation, still live in a climate of insecurity.

Indeed we have recently seen companies making redundancies even when they are making profit, because they have to restructure and merge, with no thought, of course, of fulfilling their obligations to inform their employees and to communicate with them!

I take this opportunity to appeal to the Council, which is blocking the proposal for a directive on informing and consulting workers!

To sum up, this monitoring centre must be used as an instrument for anticipating industrial change.

We will then be able to adopt the measures necessary to prepare employees better, particularly by offering them training with the aim of adapting them to the business sectors of the future! I support the proposal contained in the resolution which seeks to include the right to lifelong training in the Charter of Fundamental Rights!

The centre' s studies will, of course, be widely distributed.

I deplore the decision of the EPP, ELDR and the UEN to vote against the PES resolution to set up a European Monitoring Centre for Industrial Change.

Such a centre would serve to create a more proactive approach to medium and longer-term industrial change which would benefit all those concerned - Commission, European Parliament, social partners, government and local authorities.

Such a centre could be incorporated into an established body or foundation through the enlargement of existing competences, as proposed in the PSE resolution.

That some Irish members should vote against such a proposal is incomprehensible given that the European Foundation for Living and Working Conditions in Dublin would be in line to carry out such work.

The huge industrial changes of recent years that have resulted from the increase in globalisation, new technologies and social transformations have given rise not only to economic growth and new production sectors but also to a growing number of company mergers, closures and relocations, which have resulted in the loss of local markets, unemployment, the degradation of social and labour protection systems, greater social exclusion and enormous human suffering.

It is, therefore, extremely important that a European Monitoring Centre for Industrial Change should be set up with the aim of stimulating a more active and responsible approach to industrial development, with the participation of both sides of industry, with a view to helping to avoid the most irksome consequences of industrial change.

It is equally urgent, however, that the Commission should hasten the review of Directive 94/45/EC on the setting up of a European Works Council and Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89, so as to ensure greater participation by workers' organisations prior to decisions on the concentration and transfer of undertakings and a greater guarantee of protection and defence of workers' rights.

We will be voting against the joint resolution on EU external action priorities because we believe that it promotes even further removing from Member States any possibility of implementing their own foreign and defence policies and incorporating these policies into the common foreign and security policy that has taken shape.

And this, by means of a European Parliament resolution! The common foreign and security policy has already left its mark in the shape of political and military interference in the domestic affairs of third countries in order to further the imperialist interests of the European Union, contrary to every interpretation of international law and to the interests of the citizens of the European Union and other countries.

This happened just recently, in the case of Kosovo, and Yugoslavia more generally.

The militarisation of the European Union, the arms race, the harmonisation of military weapons and the war industry, the imposition of the will of the mighty in the jungle of 'globalisation' and the free market, are diametrically opposed to the visions and struggles of the people for peace, a political and peaceful solution to conflicts and the rule of international law.

It is clear that this policy goes hand in hand with the recent decisions taken by the Council to prohibit all access to documents concerning defence and security policies.

The general orientation of these decisions is to keep citizens of the Member States of the European Union from the centres of decision-making and to prevent them from interfering with developments. Barriers and hurdles are being placed in the way of the popular movement, national parliaments and the European Parliament alike, so as to prevent them from exercising any form of democratic control.

What particularly worries me is the fact that, through fundamentally violating its own treaties, the European Union is attempting to by-pass its own internal rivalries by indirect means.

It is seeking to support the interests of European big business, to conquer new markets, and to support the euro, even by taking military action.

The New Order is placing new demands on people and on the less developed countries in order consolidate its supremacy.

In practice, a policy is being promoted which faithfully serves big business, sides with the USA, submitting to its orders, and promotes the New Order against the interests of the people.

This makes it easier to understand why the European Union is not troubled by the barbaric invasion and continued occupation of 38% of Cyprus and by Turkey' s bombing raids in Iraq.

The issue for me is not only whether and how the joint actions will be funded by the community budget, but to stop this policy, which is disastrous for people and peace alike.

The issue is not whether Mr Solana or other representatives of the CFSP will make annual announcements to the European Parliament, but for the people of Europe to take their fate into their own hands and to intervene effectively to impose peace, brotherhood and international cooperation based on the common good.

The joint resolution restricts itself to the two issues I have mentioned, which are of secondary importance, and comes to the arbitrary, and especially dangerous, conclusion that the 'intergovernmental system' which is at the root of the EU' s foreign policy, is the reason for the failure of the common foreign and security policy and that its success depends on its communitisation.

This disorients people and makes them prey to the unaccountable dictates of big business.

For all the above reasons, we believe that the 'joint' resolution in question demonstrates most dramatically how urgent it is for people to organise joint resistance and their opposition to this criminal policy, and to take the initiative and act.

Madam President, I voted for the Veltroni report also and above all because, as representative of the Pensioners' Party to the European Parliament, I am aware that pensioners and elderly people spend a lot of time watching television.

However, I would have liked this report to include a recommendation for the establishment, at last, of a European television programme.

The citizens of Europe have the right to see that Europe exists, and we have the means to show them - easily - through European television programmes.

Moreover, it would be appropriate to regulate the television companies of the States of the European Union in order to allow all the political bodies in the different States freedom of expression, for this is not always the case at the moment.

Madam President, I voted against the motion because this policy still contains worrying elements of statalism and welfarism.

There is no genuine opening for competition and, most importantly, provision is continuing to be made to subsidise the cinema industry without taking into account what it produces.

Thus, we will continue to give money to directors who produce appalling quality films which nobody wants to see but who nonetheless receive payment even from those who refuse even to watch the trailers.

The Veltroni report on behalf of the Committee on Culture, Youth, Education, the Media and Sport is certainly an improvement on the Commission communication on the 'principles and guidelines for the Community' s audiovisual policy in the digital age' .

The important aspects of the intervention of the European Union are:

1) The global competitiveness of European industry, especially in relation to the USA, must be combined with a guarantee of pluralism and cultural diversity.

2) The increased effectiveness of the measures contained in Directive 89/552/ÅEC on 'Television without Frontiers' , concerning the promotion of European works.

3) The promotion of linguistic diversity.

4) The protection of minors using new programme control methods.

5) The creation of a European forum on cooperation in matters of transparency and the development of strategies to address market concentrations.

6) The support of the public audiovisual sector with the option of broadcasting on a global scale.

7) The promotion of an internal market for the cinema with the issue of a new directive.

I shall be voting for the Veltroni report, as it is a considerable improvement on the Communication from the Commission. But I do have two reservations.

The first has to do with the notion of rivalry, which may justify major concentrations and groupings of audiovisual media in the name of becoming stronger than the Americans, and may extend the Berlusconi phenomenon. The second concerns the lack of compliance and control mechanisms to ensure that the political aims of the European Parliament do not once again remain mere wishes, which is often the case with the successive amendments to the 'Television without Frontiers' Directive.

I am extremely pleased with this report on the Commission communication, which seeks to lay down the principles and guidelines of Community audiovisual policy, in order to adapt it to the digital age.

Such adaptation is actually crucial, given recent developments in digital technology.

We will only achieve this if we respect the principles governing this field, which are:

to achieve this task, I once again stress the fact that, as provided for in the protocol annexed to the Treaty of Amsterdam, public service broadcasting plays a central part in safeguarding pluralism as well as cultural and linguistic diversity.

the possibility of targeting intervention to provide strategic support for services of general interest:

the public must be guaranteed access to audiovisual services on the basis of criteria such as universality, affordable costs and non-discrimination.

the maximum protection for those producing audiovisual works, and hence the possibility of providing better protection for intellectual ownership rights, copyright and related ownership rights:

the effectiveness of copyright protection is jeopardised in the digital age.

Respect for intellectual property is nevertheless a source of vitality in the audiovisual and cinematographic sector and the proposal for a directive on copyright and associated rights in the information society must therefore be speedily adopted, both to protect created works and to ensure that they are accessible and can circulate freely.

the increased protection for users, who will be covered by various safeguards depending on the different services that they use:

I approve of the idea of stepping up experiments with programme filtering systems and other methods of parental control for the protection of minors.

To conclude, I wish to stress that a revision of Directive (89/552/EEC) on 'Television without Frontier' is crucial.

We must strengthen the provisions on the circulation of European works and on independent production in order to make them more effective.

The obligation of public and private television broadcasters to allocate a proportion of their annual net income to investment in production and to the acquisition of European audiovisual programmes, including films, works aimed at minorities and ones made by independent producers, must be included in this piece of legislation.

Madam President, I voted for the Heaton-Harris report, which deals with the movement of university students within the European Union.

However, a survey has been carried out which highlights a factor which I consider to be extremely negative: precisely half the university students who had the right to benefit from the ERASMUS programme did not take up the offer.

This means that there is definitely something which is not working properly!

I would in any case like to stress that, in voting for the motion, I would also like to express the desire for a programme soon to be established in Europe, not just for the movement of young students between universities but also for the movement of elderly people who study at the university of the third age, who would welcome the opportunity to take part in exchanges with their sexagenarian, septuagenarian and octogenarian or even older peers from other States of the European Union.

. (FR) I am pleased to have the opportunity today to speak about this report, which was drafted in response to a request by the European Parliament in the framework of negotiations on the revision of the budget for the first phase of Socrates, in 1998.

This socio-economic investigation, which was carried out during the latter part of 1998, is based on the answers sent in by around 10 000 students who participated in "mobility actions" during 1997-98.

The Erasmus programme was set up in 1987 as part of the Socrates programme, and absorbs 40% of the total Socrates budget. Erasmus seeks to encourage the mobility of students by developing the European dimension of education and by enabling young people to carry out part of their studies in another Member State.

The Socrates programme entered its second phase with the decision of 24 January 2000.

It is, moreover, a pity that this report took so long after the Socrates II programme was formally adopted to publish its conclusions, which, as a result, could not be taken into consideration.

Everyone is agreed on welcoming this initiative, thanks to which 90 000 students every year take up the opportunity to study abroad.

More than nine out of ten of those students claimed to be very satisfied with their stay abroad, both from the educational and the socio-cultural points of view.

It must be admitted, however, that the participation rate is still low, given that this programme involves 18 Member States.

This is what the Commission inquiry has shown: only 1% of students took part in Erasmus mobility programmes in 1998.

We therefore still have a great deal to do if we are to achieve the target of 10%, which the programme is aiming for.

We must therefore try to discover the reasons for such a low participation rate.

The survey does provide us with some answers.

We see that more than 57% of Erasmus students encounter financial difficulties.

It is nevertheless young people from privileged backgrounds who go abroad, which is an unacceptable form of discrimination, which we must combat by allocating special aid to the less well-off socio-economic categories.

Many problems remain in the field of the recognition of qualifications.

As Member for a border area, I regularly meet graduates who are distraught because the courses they have studied in another Member State are not recognised.

I shall conclude by appealing to the French Presidency to include all of these factors in the study paper that it has asked the Vision group to undertake on transnational mobility in education. This study paper should lead to the presentation, at the Nice Summit, of an action plan which seeks to overcome the obstacles to this mobility.

We are delighted that this report, to which we contributed several amendments, has been adopted.

We now hope that the Commission and the Member States will take the necessary steps to make the Erasmus programme more accessible to students from economically less well-off groups, particularly by optimising coordination between national financial support for higher education and Erasmus grants, with a view to promoting social equality in access to the programme and the widest possible take-up.

We cannot continue to accept that the overall participation rate in the programme is barely above 50%, and that even so, some 57% of Erasmus students have been affected by worrying financial problems.

As the report points out, it is regrettable that the Erasmus programme has essentially benefited students from social groups whose parents have a high level of qualifications, are relatively well-off, and/or come from countries with higher levels of government support for students.

Hence the need for measures to help achieve its initial objective of enabling 10% of all Community students to spend part of their degree course in another Member State, and not just 1% as happened in 1997/1998, making it accessible to students from economically less well-off groups.

Madam President, 'in cauda venenum' as the Romans used to say: 'the sting is in the tail'.

I voted against this report, and I was right to do so. An amendment was rejected which I had tabled, which called for disabled people, the blind and partially sighted, the hearing-impaired, seriously ill people and the very elderly, who as such receive benefits and pensions from the Member States, not to be treated according to current European Union regulations which stipulate that if they go to a Union State which is not their country of residence then they cannot receive their pension.

In practice, a disabled person cannot travel within the European Union - from Italy to the United Kingdom, from France to Germany etc. because, if he moves and changes his country of residence, he will no longer be entitled to the benefits on which he depends to live.

When will we put an end to this injustice?

It is our view that all immigrant workers living and working in any European Union country must have the same rights and freedoms, particularly the freedom of movement, as European Union nationals.

Despite the report' s limitations in this respect and although we do not agree with the entire text, we did vote for the report because the measures it recommends represent progress in relation to the current deplorable situation of immigrant workers and migrant workers who are European Union nationals.

I would add that the extreme right' s fiercely racist opposition to this report confirms our views in this direction.

Since 1957, the Treaty establishing the European Economic Community has contained provisions designed to guarantee the free movement of workers within Community territory.

Various Community instruments have enabled this right to become a reality.

In 1990, two directives (90/364/EEC and 90/365/EEC) have extended the right of residence by defining general principles and rules for workers who have stopped work.

A third directive (93/96/EC), adopted in 1993, contains specific provisions for students.

Since 1993 and the Treaty of Maastricht, any Member State national has the right to move and reside freely in the European Union (Article 14 of the EC Treaty), and this right forms part of European citizenship (Article 18).

The report we are discussing today seeks to provide an overview of the implementation of the directives on the right of residence of students, pensioners and other non-economically-active members of society as well as to study the special measures concerning European Union citizens' moving and settling for reasons of public order, security and health (Directive 64/221/EEC).

With regard to the first section, we must admit that although the directives in question have been transposed, in some cases painstakingly, into national legislation, many obstacles remain, which must be overcome by adopting a raft of specifically-targeted measures.

To mention one problem with which I am very familiar, that of students, I think it is crucial that we provide them with better information on their rights if they wish to study in another Member State.

We also need to solve the problem of the recognition of diplomas, which is proving to be a significant issue in certain professions.

With regard to the second section, there are many problems in the way Directive 64/221/EEC has been implemented.

The Treaty allows Member States to impose limits on the free movement of persons for reasons of public order, public security or public health.

The Commission is aware, however, that Member States are interpreting these concepts in a totally different way, often too broadly, and it stresses that they must be applied in accordance with the principle of proportionality.

The Commission also stresses that these concepts must only be applied in the face of a genuine and sufficiently serious threat, which would affect a society' s fundamental wellbeing.

In any event, these concepts must comply with the European Convention on Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms.

It appears that, in order to resolve these difficulties, we will need to adopt a framework directive to organise and guarantee the unimpeded exercise of freedom of movement and residence.

An overall redrafting of the existing texts will make this possible and will have the advantage of putting an end to the current inequalities of treatment in the various Member States.

Only when these conditions are met will we enable nationals of Member States to gain awareness and to give substance to this concept of European citizenship, which for many is still nothing but a hollow shell.

The approval of the report that the rapporteur has presented to Parliament is heartening, but I cannot say the same for most of the proposals for amendments that have been raised in the House.

The principle of the free movement of persons, included in the Treaty of Rome fifty years ago, still encounters many difficulties in its practical implementation.

As mentioned in the report, the implementation of the directives on the right of residence of students and retired people (90/364, 90/365 and 93/96) is clearly unsatisfactory, and the same is true for the directive on migrant workers.

Workers in 'atypical' employment - part-time, short-term, etc. face residence problems in the host country.

In addition, as the rapporteur points out, there are at present millions of third-country nationals residing lawfully in the European Union who often find themselves deprived of the right to free movement and residence.

Hence it is essential that the Member States and the Commission take the necessary steps to ensure that the rights of migrant workers are upheld and to improve their situation.

With regard to students and retired people too, it is essential to speed up the bureaucratic process and to facilitate the free movement and residence of these citizens of the European Union in any Member State.

I have no objection to our attempting to resolve the outstanding problems associated with the right of residence of EU citizens, who are, after all, at liberty to move freely throughout European Union territory and reside wherever they choose, particularly when they are pensioners or students.

However, I am unable to support this report in principle, because it takes advantage of the situation, with a view to demanding freedom of movement and establishment for all third-country nationals who have the right of residence in a Member State.

There are millions of third-country nationals who fit this description, and it is completely unacceptable to saddle other Member States with the consequences of giving freedom of movement to millions of people, without taking the individual Member States' absorption capacity into account.

Many people have doubts about admitting Malta to the European Union.

If the demands made in the Boumediene-Thiery report in respect of freedom of movement for third-country nationals were to be met, this would have a far more serious impact than if we were to grant the citizens of the candidate countries in Central and Eastern Europe freedom of movement and establishment, without a transitional period, which is something no one in their right mind would consider.

If we really want to fan the flames of xenophobia within the Community, then I can think of no better way than to support the excessive and unreasonable proposals contained in the Boumediene-Thiery report, which thank God, was adopted in committee by only 23 votes in favour to 15 votes against.

It is asking too much of the other Member States as it is, for the German Government to allow several million third-country nationals resident on its territory to hold German citizenship in addition to their own.

In so doing, with a single stroke of the pen, it creates several million new EU citizens entitled to freedom of movement and freedom of establishment, and in fact they even have the right to vote at local and European elections. Yet at the same time, your colleague Mr Verheugen, is calling for a referendum on eastwards enlargement.

What about our right to a referendum against Germany' s being able to decide completely independently, and without reference to the other Member States, to present us with several million more EU citizens?

We cannot cope with the consequences of such generosity, as well intentioned as it may be, because it will be open to exploitation, particularly by gangs of human traffickers.

I say 'yes' to a rational immigration policy that we can sustain, but 'no' to the chaos that the Boumediene-Thiery report would inevitably cause.

Approval of the Minutes of the previous sitting

The Minutes of yesterday' s sitting have been distributed.

Mr President, in the approval of the Minutes it says that I said I had been deliberated misquoted.

It was just a possibility, not a statement.

I would not say that the transcription was deliberately badly done in any case - that was only a possibility.

In the Minutes it sounds as though I am making an accusation.

I would not dare to say so, because I have no proof at all.

We take note of your observation and, of course, as you know, it is the verbatim report which testifies to what has been said.

It will therefore clarify whether you said one thing or another.

Mr President, in fact I was trying to amend the verbatim report of proceedings because in the Minutes it said only that I spoke, nothing else.

Concerning the verbatim report I put the accent on the fact that there was an expression that I had not used.

You can write to the services to correct your words.

Apparently the services understood something else.

But you are entitled to correct your words.

Mr President, colleagues were shouting and so it was very difficult to hear what I was saying.

Right now there is no problem.

At the time Spanish colleagues were shouting so it was very difficult to hear.

That is why I cannot say...

Mr Gorostiaga Atxalandabaso, the plenary does not adopt the verbatim report of proceedings.

So if you have a problem ...

(The President was interrupted) Please, respect the presidency.

We take note of your remarks on the Minutes.

You can write to the services to correct the verbatim report.

The next item is the Commission statement on telecommunications mergers.

Mr President, on behalf of my group and all my colleagues I would like to welcome Mr Monti to the House today for what is a very timely discussion on the regulatory regime for telecom, bearing in mind that we are now moving into the very important consideration of the telecom package.

I want to briefly pick up on some of the crucial points that he made.

It is quite clear to all of us that the whole world of electronic communications is presenting us with a regulatory challenge, but it is clearly presenting you, Commissioner, and the competition authority with unprecedented challenges, given the speed with which technology is advancing.

Many of the ideas related to market share are also changing very rapidly.

In the telecom field, it is clear that market share can change hands much more quickly than in some of the major industries that have been regulated in the past.

I was delighted that your approach is to try and avoid putting a brake on innovation by excessively firm controls.

I would like your assurance that you will be developing the expert capability to what is undoubtedly going to be an increasing workload in looking at future mergers.

We understand from the Peers Group report that you are going to be awarded an extra 92 posts.

It will be interesting to hear how you envisage your service developing in this direction.

The second point which will come through in our consideration of the telecom package, is that in this very fast-moving world there is concern within the industry and amongst investors that excessively rigid targets in terms of market share thresholds for investigation - and that can be too much or too little in many cases - should not be allowed to inhibit your consideration of areas where there is a genuine competitive issue at stake.

Could you perhaps address these points when you respond to our debate later on?

Mr President, could I start my contribution by offering my congratulations to Commissioner Monti and his officials for the scrupulous and professional way in which they dealt with the proposed MCI Worldcom - Sprint merger.

I would particularly to thank him and his officials for trying to see trade unionists from all over the European Union and indeed from the United States of America, who had an opportunity to put their views.

Without doubt, one of the consequences of mergers and takeovers is the effect on employment and I know that the Commissioner, within the confines of the Treaty, is sensitive to this.

What also needs to be stressed is that there are special technological reasons why a concentration of ownership, the potential abuse of a dominant position, is so serious.

In most other industries such a concentration or potential abuse might be temporary, but in this field if any one company does secure such a strong position it will almost certainly have it, if not forever, then at least for a very long time.

In your presentation, Commissioner, you mentioned the danger of one company gaining control over these markets.

This really is a dilemma for Parliament and for the Commission.

We accept the near inevitability and in many cases the desirability of mergers and takeovers, but we also see the potential and actual dangers.

Parliament is consistent in its view that we do not want to put any obstacles in the way of competitiveness and innovation.

We welcome the position that you have taken on this particular issue.

One other small point: much of this competition is between the European Union and the United States of America.

I know you are well aware how crucial it is for Europe to lead in the two important spheres of third generation mobile telephones and digital television and I hope that you will continue your efforts to keep that lead, which is so crucial to jobs, employment and prosperity in the European Union.

I would like to take up the subject just touched upon by the previous speaker, namely the transatlantic aspects of telecoms liberalisation and particularly paragraph 6 and 7 of the draft resolution, which refers to the unfortunate initiative by Senator Hollings to restrict the transfer of licences to telecoms companies which are more than 25% state-owned.

This seems an ironic lurch towards a protectionist position at the very time when here in Europe and in this Parliament we are about to embark upon a debate on the latest raft of measures which, in my view, would make the European Union telecoms market the most liberalised and the most open market in the world going way beyond many if not all of the commitments into which we entered in GATT and the WTO.

This is politically if not technically an unbalanced situation which merits the attention of this House.

Whilst I have some philosophical sympathy with Senator Hollings and his colleagues who consider that state-owned companies have some hidden and sometimes explicit advantages over their privately-owned competitors, the way in which Congress in the United States is trying to address this issue is contrary to both the spirit and the letter of US multilateral commitments.

I would ask fellow Members, when considering the latest raft of telecoms measures in the weeks to come, not to allow this to go unnoticed or for that matter unchallenged.

Mr President, Commissioner, I remember how, around the middle of last year, when the merger of the American companies Time Warner and America Online was announced, there were people who described that event as an early beginning of the third millennium as far as its cultural and technological aspects were concerned.

At that time, comparisons were made.

In the United States, 40% of homes had access to that network of all networks known as the Internet, whilst in the European Union, that figure hardly reached 20%, and that percentage was only surpassed in a few of the Union' s Member States, which were more advanced in terms of technological development.

I believe we need to make progress and take more action specifically on that issue. We must not have two types of society, second- and first-class citizens, those who are technologically advanced and those who are technologically backward.

We must provide all citizens with access to this new information society.

However, as we make more effort in terms of the concentration of companies and of developing the European market, we must take account of the dangers caused by a lack of security in telecommunications.

I am thinking of the Echelon affair, which is very much related to this kind of issue.

In Europe, we must ensure that there is security, because that is a human right.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, we welcome the fact that the Commission and the US Department of Justice have blocked the proposed MCI Worldcom - Sprint merger, and were also delighted to hear that the US Government is not inclined to approve the AOL - Time Warner deal.

The Internet must continue to be a means of communication for all.

We must therefore prevent the telecommunications and media giants from being able to occupy a dominant position.

Competition law is an effective tool to this end.

However, mergers also have an impact on employment and social cohesion.

Telecommunications and media are not crisis-ridden industries; they are an expanding sector.

Objectively, this makes it easier to take account of sociopolitical and employment policy aspects in merger decisions.

Since the mid-nineties, the Federal Communication Commission in the USA has, in the case of several merger decisions, secured commitments from the companies concerned to increase the number of employees, improve quality of service, and do more to look after the public interest.

Therefore we fail to comprehend why, in the welfare state of Europe, competition law should rule the day.

We are calling for the EU to introduce binding social clauses into the mergers approvals process.

Apart from the competition law test, we need additional criteria for the purposes of merger decisions, for example: firstly, the companies should give a binding commitment to preserving or raising the level of employment.

Secondly, they should improve the quality of service for large sections of their customer base.

Thirdly, they must implement to the letter, the mechanics of the European social dialogue and the provisions of the directive on informing and consulting workers, as they make the transition to the new merged company.

Fourthly, the merger must bring added benefits when it comes to furthering the public interest.

This relates to such matters as the need to safeguard a comprehensive and modern universal service, and requirements in terms of data and consumer protection.

That is the only way to guarantee that competition policy will also strengthen the European social model in the new economy.

Mr President, at the outset I would like to say that I welcome the Commission's publication of the new telecom directives and regulations on 12 July.

This is part of the ongoing framework programme to improve the quality of telecommunications services in Europe.

Parliament and the Commission are right to be adamant that the Union must improve its telecommunications network.

It is fair to say that the United States is possibly three years ahead of the Union as regards the use of the Internet.

On the back of the new directives which are being enacted in the telecom sector, the European Union will catch up with the US sooner rather than later.

This is also in line with the conclusions of the recent European Council meeting in Portugal.

EU leaders pointed to the need to improve our overall telecommunications services.

I support the recommendation that all schools in Europe must be equipped with the Internet.

From an Irish perspective, I am particularly satisfied that this programme is advancing at a very swift pace.

There has been much talk in national and international media about the auctioning of third-generation mobile phone licences in Europe.

Certainly, the auctioning of these licences in Germany and Britain has secured large amounts of money for the respective national exchequers, but who ultimately is going to pay for these phones?

I strongly believe that consumers, once again, are going to be forced to bear the high cost of these licences.

Commissioner, I do not envy you your task in general, let alone in a new sector such as the telecoms sector whose dynamics are so unpredictable that it is particularly difficult to make decisions regarding competitiveness and mergers which, from a traditional perspective, do not always work to the advantage of the companies of a sector such as the telecommunications sector which has to develop in Europe to make its companies more competitive, and frequently do not work to the advantage of consumers either.

For example, in the case of Microsoft, when it was considered that Microsoft had reached the most dominant position possible, another operating system such as Linux would threaten its monopoly without any interference from the U.S. Department of Justice at all.

I would have liked to talk about the Vodaphone/Mannesmann case and its rather problematic implications for the France Telecom Orange case, and express my fear that the Community authorities, certainly including Parliament, might be tempted or give way to the instinct to intervene officially and issue excessive regulations to govern the sector.

Today Parliament - and I call upon the Commissioner to take note of this - adopted, with very little opposition, including our own, a document calling upon the Commission to promote the establishment of a body to prevent market mergers liable to prejudice pluralism.

The resolution was on multimedia, but the telecommunications and multimedia markets are one and the same and I feel that we should exercise extreme caution when intervening in the concentration and restructuring processes taking place in this sector.

(The President cut the speaker off)

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I would like to thank the Commissioner for firmly quashing the WorldCom-Sprint merger, which was the right thing to do.

These cases have increased dramatically in number recently.

In ten years the number of mergers has risen fivefold and there are about three hundred of them a year now.

Mr Harbour presented the telecom package.

It just shows what a furious pace this industry is moving along at.

It demands a lot from all of us in terms of skills.

The telecommunications and IT sectors are special.

It is not just a matter of pushing a cart; it is a quite exceptional field, because information is at present the most important tool of production.

In addition, it involves, as we know very well from the Echelon case and others, the possibility of monitoring, and thus the possibility of the monitoring of people, which has also become a very important business.

The other aspect to consider here is globalisation, which crosses state and cultural borders.

These are in a way beyond the control and vigilance of everyone.

Quite the opposite, as through them these companies can create a dependency, as that part of this business happens in people' s brains.

It is an important new territorial conquest, and, for that reason, I would ask the Commission to be particularly careful with regard to these mergers.

While we are aiming at deregulation here, Commissioner, companies are tending to re-regulate: to make new agreements about the market that bypass the democratic monitoring and control systems.

As Mr Clegg said, there are obviously problems too between the European Union and the United States, such as the restriction on mergers in the case of Deutsche Telecom, which obviously has to be looked into.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, Mr Clegg has already expressed his broad support, on behalf of the Liberal Group, for the Commission' s proposals, and his concern about certain specific aspects relating to the United States, as has just been mentioned.

I would like to highlight the concern about an aspect which appears in the Liberal Group' s original motion for a resolution, whose first section refers to the need to reject any political interference in the Commission' s competition policy.

If we apply this to the issue in question, the telecommunications sector, it is a well-founded concern given the cases which arose in Spain, a few months ago, involving the merger of Telefónica with a Dutch company, in Portugal and in other sectors in France.

It worries us that there is still government interference in the actions of companies who are seeking appropriate dimensions and competitiveness at a European level.

We therefore support the Commission' s proposals and we would like to draw attention to this aspect.

May I welcome the Commissioner to Parliament today on behalf of all of us.

We all appreciate the importance of your task in the competition department of the Commission.

It is perhaps the most important task of the Commission to maintain free competition and make the market work across the European Union.

In the telecoms context it is vital to ensure that consumers get all the benefits the free market can offer them, particularly the low-cost Internet access.

The way to deliver that low-cost Internet access, vitally important for the creation of a European E-economy to the people of Europe, is through liberalisation and free competition.

We used to regulate the telecom sector through national regulators, but these will wither away in future because we are moving towards a single, global regulator, namely the market.

The market is the most effective regulator, providing the best protection for consumers and giving consumers more power than any number of Commission consultation groups.

In future we shall want to give the competition mergers department, more work, because the market should play an even bigger role in telecoms than it does at the moment.

We want to see an end to the advantages inherited by some of the old state monopolies.

I hope you will apply competition law and merger law toughly, but always ensure that you look at each merger on its own merits.

Just because it may produce a big player or a big corporation it is not necessarily wrong for the market or anti-competitive.

We have to remember that Europe probably will need some large corporations if it is to reap the benefits of the Internet revolution.

Mr President, I would like to take up what Mary Read had to say in her intervention, when she discussed the impact on jobs and employment.

It is simply not the case that the workers in our regions and constituencies are forever waiting with bated breath for us to liberalise previously protected sectors.

We are going to have to answer a whole host of employees' questions about local public transport operatives over the next few weeks and months.

We, the representatives of the people, must provide these answers, and not the Commission, which will talk to the union leaders if need be.

One thing is for sure, unrestricted liberalisation and the opening up of markets, are no panacea.

However, market opening in the telecommunications sector itself, demonstrates that market opening can bring benefits for consumers in the form of falling prices and access to new services.

It has brought about rapid advances in technology, which, at the end of the day, will lead to an increase in jobs, even high-quality jobs in the major sectors.

The globalisation of our national economies has had a major stimulating effect on the liberalisation of telecommunications markets in Europe, and, conversely, has furthered development at international level.

It goes without saying that we need a certain number of commercial giants to be able to hold our own as a global player.

But this must not of course lead to new monopolies in markets and market sectors.

We need to adopt a rigorous competition policy with regard to commercial organisations, in order to ensure that no single company gains a dominant hold in the new market block formed by the telecommunications and multimedia sectors.

That is why we should support the Commission' s decision in matters such as WorldCom and Sprint.

We also hope that it will adopt a similarly rigorous approach where Time Warner and AOL are concerned.

Above all, though, the Commission must use its efforts to modernise competition law, particularly in respect of the regulation on merger control, as an opportunity to adopt an extremely rigorous approach to its reform undertakings too.

We hope this will not prove to be to the detriment of competition policy.

Mr President, Commissioner Monti, ladies and gentlemen, it is natural of the market that companies in the telecommunications industry, which right now requires its players to invest billions and embark on enormous basic infrastructure projects, should try to seek partners in the free market, all the while honouring the rules and regulations.

It is of overall benefit to society that an operational environment should be created in Europe, in which companies, that is to say, the private sector, are themselves able to attend to these infrastructure projects that vitally need the information society.

As these same companies at the same time employ more and more people, as we heard today in your presentation, Mr Monti, and are therefore boosting economic growth in Europe, I do not really understand the fears that have been expressed over there at the other side of the Chamber that these mergers, which are fully beneficial to society as a whole, should have a detrimental effect on employment in Europe.

Politicians and trust busters, such as Mr Monti, must not interfere in this current development in the market other than when the Commission has proper grounds to believe that a particular merger may cause distortions to the competition situation, so harming the interests of consumers.

Mr Rapkay, you may be sure that nobody in this Chamber wants monopolies or oligopolies in the market.

This must really be restricted to certain cases; in other words, we need logic and consistency in this.

On the other hand, the Commission must actively monitor whether free access to markets is being realised in all sectors, as stated in point 3 of Parliament' s joint motion for a resolution.

Global competition must be examined, and there have been problems recently, at least with regard to the Deutsche Telekom - Voice Stream deal.

I hope, Mr Monti, you will comment on this plan by the US Congress, which totally contravenes WTO regulations, to ban licence transfers to firms owned by foreign companies.

Mr President, I would like to thank the Members of Parliament who spoke for their interest in these issues, for the appreciation they have generously shown for the Commission's activities and for their support.

Please excuse me, for I shall have to be extremely brief in my answers.

Mr Harbour, you identified one crucial point, namely preventing market trends from disrupting innovation.

This is indeed one of our key concerns.

You referred to the outcome of the Commission's peer group preview.

I am delighted that the peer group has understood the needs of competition policy so clearly.

We are beginning to form ideas about how to deploy additional resources within the competition DG but we must first secure the support of the budgetary authority.

Mrs Read, among others, supported the decision we took in late June about MCI WorldCom-Sprint.

That decision was based on a great many considerations, including some input from the trade unions, although this in no way led us to depart from regulations.

Mrs Read and other Members of Parliament mentioned some sectors in which Europe has a lead, for instance third-generation mobile telephony and digital TV.

One particularly effective way to maintain a lead is to make the market run efficiently.

That is why we insist so much on rigorous enforcement of competition policy in the light of the market situation in Europe, irrespective of the nationality of companies.

When companies establish or consolidate a dominant position without proposing the necessary remedies, we have no option but to block a merger and recently did so in a case involving two European companies, Volvo and Scania, which, indeed, are based in the same Member State.

We would have done the same in another case in which one company was European (Pechiney) and the other North American-Canadian (Alcan), but the merger was withdrawn.

In addition, we took similar action in the recent MCI WorldCom-Sprint case, where both companies were American.

We have established excellent cooperation with our American counterparts at the Department of Justice and the Federal Trade Commission.

Talking of the US, several Members have drawn attention to the risks of the Hollings Bill.

This is simply a proposal, and I hope that it will not become law, although this depends on your American opposite numbers.

However, if it were to be adopted I would consider it a disturbing sign of protectionism It would be unfortunate if liberalisation, which has taken such giant leaps forward in the US, Europe and elsewhere over the past few years, were to start going backwards in the US.

Moreover, the bill is, in our view, clearly incompatible with the USA's WTO obligations and other basic telecommunications agreements and the Commission through my colleague Pascal Lamy has certainly made this very clear to our American counterparts.

The Commission also resolutely opposes any such legislation in our Member States.

To dispel Mr Gasòliba i Böhm's anxieties, the Commission alone has the power to consider Community-scale mergers.

When a Member State wrongfully intervenes, the Commission is ready to challenge such an intervention, as it proved in one case last year in a decision addressed to the Portuguese Government.

Mr Ortuondo Larrea, Mr Markov and Mr Rapkay referred to the very important AOL-Time Warner case.

You will appreciate that I cannot say very much now.

The deadline for the Commission's decision is 24 October.

The hearing on this merger is taking place today and tomorrow in Brussels.

We expressed our concerns on 22 August when we issued our statement of objections to the parties.

There is nothing else I can add at this stage.

Mr Gallagher and another honourable Member referred to the allocation system for third-generation mobile telephone licences.

The auctions will increase the number of mobile telephone operators in the Union.

More players mean more competition, so we can only welcome the outcome of the auctions from a competitive standpoint.

We will obviously make sure that the consortia put in place will not lead to concerted practices because membership will vary from country to country.

It has been pointed out that the sums paid to EU governments to obtain licences are too high and that making it necessary for the operators to recoup their initial investment would lead to higher prices for consumers and perhaps limit the development of new advanced mobile telephone services.

But this is not a competition law issue as such, whereas trying to introduce restrictions on competition in order to make it easier to recoup the cost would be sanctioned by competition law.

However, irrespective of the system used - auctions, beauty contests or whatever - the precise rules of a beauty contest or an auction can require scrutiny to ensure, for example, that incumbents are not favoured and that non-discrimination, transparency and proportionality are guaranteed.

So even though Member States are free to choose either a beauty contest, an auction system or a mixture of both, they must still comply with competition law and the sector-specific telecommunications legislation on licensing and with the state aid rules.

In this context I could mention that the competition DG is currently looking into a complaint against the Netherlands, jointly with the information society DG.

They are also looking into a complaint against France, Belgium, the Netherlands and Germany and finally, we are also investigating a UMTS auction under the state aid rules.

So we are trying to be vigilant as all of you urge us to be.

Mr Della Vedova is afraid that the Community authorities will attempt to overburden the development of this sector, which is going to become so important for the European economy, with regulatory constraints.

I can assure him that, as far as regulations are concerned, the Commission is trying to keep constraints to a minimum and, that it is for precisely this reason that it considers that it is important for competition policy to play a major role.

As far as pluralism - also mentioned by Mr Della Vedova - is concerned, I can only point out that, under the current European system, Member States can adopt measures to protect pluralism.

This is recognised in the merger regulation as one of the legitimate grounds for Member States to intervene, provided, of course, that the purpose of the intervention is to protect pluralism.

I note that Mrs Villiers urges us to apply competition law toughly.

I hope we will live up to your expectations in the future, without being prejudiced against size as such.

We have to examine situations case by case.

Even smaller operators can create competition problems and then we have to intervene.

Finally, several Members - Mrs Read, Mr Markov, Mrs Ainardi, Mr Rapkay - have recognised and stressed the beneficial impact of the development of this sector on employment, but also expressed some concern about the social impact of mergers.

I must be very brief at this stage.

As to the general effect on employment, I firmly believe that if competition is maintained employment tends to benefit.

This has clearly been the case in the telecommunication industry.

Even though incumbents may have laid off some workers, liberalisation has created a large number of new entrants which are creating new employment.

The Commission is extremely keen that workers' rights should be safeguarded.

The whole deployment of Commission policy instruments and the assessment of concentrations is limited purely to the aspects covered by competition law.

However the Commission welcomes the involvement of workers' representatives in the merger control process.

Representatives have a right to be heard at all stages of the procedure.

I know from experience that their views are a valuable input for my services.

I am increasingly convinced that rigorous competition is a key component of a social market economy, be it in the traditional sectors or in the new sectors and - I stress both adjectives - social and market economies.

Thank you very much, Mr Monti, for your detailed reply.

I have received 4 motions for resolutions, in accordance with Rule 37(2) of the Rules of Procedure, to end the present statement.

The vote will take place tomorrow, Thursday.

The next item is the Commission statement on human cloning.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, recent progress in the field of life sciences provide considerable prospects for their application, but also raise ethical questions which are of great concern to the general public.

It is becoming increasingly important to anticipate these ethical questions so that they can then be integrated into a broader dialogue between science and society.

In its statement of January 2000, the Commission highlighted the fact that a genuine European research area can only become a reality if we also promote a European area of ethical values, which are shared throughout Europe.

With this in mind, the Commission plans to adopt initiatives such as strengthening the links between ethics committees across Europe and the exchange of good practice in the ethical assessment of research projects.

Therapeutic cloning, or to be more precise, the use for therapeutic purposes of embryo stem cells obtained by cloning techniques is one example of the ethical questions raised by the rapid scientific advances that have been made in the life sciences.

This technique for therapeutic cloning is a particularly sensitive issue, for obvious cultural, religious and ethical reasons.

The report by a group of British experts, published on 16 August, recognises the considerable importance of research into human embryo stem cells and their therapeutic application.

This report recommends authorising research in this area, and particularly the use of embryos produced by cloning, using the technique of nucleus replacement, whilst recommending a clear legal and ethical framework.

The publication of this report has led to many people across Europe expressing their views and has enabled a genuine debate to be held at European level, beyond the scientific circles concerned.

As President Prodi announced recently in a press statement, the Commission, far from remaining silent, hopes that an enlightened debate will ensue, in close cooperation with the European Parliament.

Respect for the national identity of Member States led the Treaty on European Union to give Member States the prerogative to legislate on ethical issues.

Legislation and gaps in legislation vary greatly, which reflects the range of very different sensibilities in the countries of the European Union.

Community action in the field of biotechnological research is nevertheless increasingly based on the most rigorous fundamental ethical principles, out of respect for national sensibilities.

This applies to Community legislation on the patentability of biotechnological inventions, which is expressly based on respect for the fundamental principles that guarantee human dignity and integrity. This legislation also affirms the principle that the human body, at all stages of its formation or its development, including germ cells, as well as the simple discovery of one of its elements or of one of its products, including the partial sequencing of a human gene, cannot be patented.

This legislation does not allow for the patenting of reproductive human cloning and the sale of embryos or parts of the human body.

Whilst the directive regulates the conditions in which an invention based on biological matter may benefit from the protection of a patent, its aim is not, however, to set the conditions in which the research itself may be carried out.

With regard to research, the European Commission has, for many years, given its support to the field of biomedicine.

The fifth framework-programme, which was adopted using the codecision procedure, respects fundamental ethical principles and is based on the opinion issued by the European Ethics Group prior to the adoption of the framework-programme.

Research involving cloning techniques for reproductive or therapeutic ends is therefore quite explicitly excluded.

Animal cloning is also limited to ethically justifiable purposes, to ensure that operations are carried out without causing unnecessary suffering

The framework-programme, which also has a proactive role, is currently supporting the studies in bioethics looking at the potential risks and benefits of cloning technology.

Furthermore, complementary approaches to therapeutic cloning attempting to develop new techniques for cell therapy are underway, particularly through major projects using adult stem cells.

This research is being carried out with respect for fundamental ethical principles and for the relevant national regulations.

I should like to emphasise that the ethical aspects are, as a matter of course, taken into account when proposals are assessed and that a thorough ethical review is undertaken for proposals involving more sensitive ethical issues.

The Commission looks forward to hearing the opinion of the European Group on Ethics this November on the use of adult stem cells.

This group has shown its independence and its considerable competence in issues that are both highly sensitive and also extremely technical.

Like previous ones, this opinion will, of course, be extremely important for the framing of Community research policy.

In more general terms, the high level group of experts on life sciences, recently established at my behest, must help us to construct a genuine dialogue on the life sciences between the world of research and society at large.

The symposium, which is being held by this group on 6 and 7 November in Brussels and to which, of course, I invite all Members of this Parliament who may be interested, represents an important stage in establishing this dialogue.

Therefore, although the Commission has no plans to legislate or harmonise in the field of ethics, it does wish to contribute to the debate, fully respecting the diversity of Europe' s cultures and sensibilities.

This is also one of the objectives of the European research area, which is gradually being developed.

At 5 p.m. in other words, immediately after the debate on enlargement.

Comments by Mr Verheugen concerning enlargement

The next item is the communication on Mr Verheugen' s statement on enlargement.

I welcome President Prodi to the Chamber and I thank him for being present.

I must warn you that President Prodi will have to leave us at 4.35 p.m. to travel to New York for the Millennium meeting.

We are nevertheless grateful to him for having made the effort to take part in this debate and, without further ado, I shall give him the floor.

Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, I wanted to make a personal statement before this house, together with Commissioner Verheugen, in order to clarify the political significance of the interview with him in the Süddeutsche Zeitung of 2 September and the political significance of a number of ensuing press statements.

Mr Verheugen will shortly explain to you exactly what he said and why he said it.

For my part, I want to reaffirm solemnly before you, Members of Parliament, the full commitment of my Commission to the great task of enlargement.

I have repeatedly stressed that enlargement is the Commission' s single most important task and that the Commission is committed to starting the process off along the right track.

There is a pressing need for this new page in the history of the Union to be completed, in accordance with the objectives set by the European Council and the Commission itself and frequently presented before this House.

As you are well aware, this is a highly complex issue from a political point of view, and with your strong, unwavering support, the Commission is conducting the negotiation process transparently and objectively, with rigorous adherence to the conditions laid down in its mandate.

The democracies of the countries which are going to join the Union are making a huge effort, which we are in constant danger of underestimating.

However, this effort must be matched on our side by considerable political generosity, expressed in many different ways.

The Union' s first act of generosity, and I must stress that once again, must be to be ready to open its doors to new Members by January 2003.

In order to put our house in order, therefore, the Union' s main concern must be to agree in Nice, at the end of the year, upon a high-quality institutional reform which will prevent our system from being watered down.

There is another side to the political generosity which it is our duty to display: we must all make every effort to win as many citizens as possible over to supporting the enlargement process.

For my part, I fear that the public is not yet sufficiently convinced.

In seeking democratic support for this historic enterprise, we are certainly not attempting to delay the process but to reinforce it.

It is clearly up to each individual Member State or candidate country to decide which ways and means to use to ensure support from its citizens.

In particular, the national procedures for ratifying enlargement are purely national issues.

It is certainly not the intention of the Commission or Commissioner Verheugen to interfere in this matter.

Nevertheless - and this is a different matter - we must all play our part in making clear to our citizens what is at stake.

I have always found Parliament, before which I sit today, to be fully committed to doing just this: explaining to our fellow citizens, over and over again, that enlargement is not a threat but a historic opportunity in all respects, and, above all, a historic step towards establishing peace in our continent.

The loyal commitment of all the Commissioners to the Commission' s policies is a hallmark of my presidency, and, as this House is aware, I do not lack the means to enforce that if necessary.

In this particular case, I am entirely confident that Günter Verheugen fully supports the Commission' s policy, which this House has approved on many occasions.

I therefore have every confidence in his ability to bring the enlargement negotiations to a swift, successful conclusion.

(DE) Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, I am very grateful that we are having this debate, because it gives me the opportunity to offer a word of explanation - and therefore have the final word, as I see it - on the interview that unleashed this furore.

I made the point, in this interview - in a personal capacity and in a purely German context - that referenda can help to involve the public more closely in major European projects that change the constitutional nature of the State.

I cited the Treaty of Maastricht as an example of this, and not enlargement.

Finally, I also said that the German constitution makes no provision for this.

No one regrets more than I do the fact that this statement was taken to mean that I was calling for a referendum on enlargement.

I hereby declare that I did not raise such a demand, either for Germany or for any other country for that matter.

If you read the text with complete impartiality and do not rely on second-hand reports, you will come to no other conclusion.

But what was the real message?

The message was this: 'we want enlargement and we want it to be implemented as quickly as possible and as comprehensively as is necessary.'

A huge number of Members of this House know that for a year now, I have been trying, with a passion, to get a direct message across to the citizens of the candidate countries and the Member States, to the effect that we really do want these new Members.

What I am trying to do, is to breathe life into a process that could easily slip into pure practicalities.

We want to secure peace and stability throughout Europe.

We want to give young democracies the chance to participate, on equal terms, in Europe' s political and economic development.

We want to boost Europe' s role in international competition.

Since the Prodi Commission took office, the outcome of the enlargement negotiations has been positive.

The progress reports that the Commission is due to submit in the autumn will reveal that the candidate countries have made an enormous amount of progress and are approaching the stage when they will be ready for accession.

The Commission is intending to propose new elements for the negotiating strategy in the autumn, which should make it possible to proceed even more rapidly with negotiations and to tackle the key issues that arise at the negotiating table.

I might point out that it will only be possible to make this kind of headway in close cooperation with the Member States and the European Parliament.

I would expressly like to thank the European Parliament for its outstanding cooperation and for the unconditional support it has given me, so far at any rate.

I also warmly commend the European Parliament and its Members for their positive role in the efforts being made to raise awareness of this historic project amongst the people of Europe.

I have always advocated that we should obtain the broadest possible support amongst the public, and highlight, in a wide-ranging public debate, the major benefits that the accession of new Member States would bring.

We must convince people that enlargement will be politically and economically advantageous to both sides from the very outset.

We need to have a wide-ranging , democratic debate on this historic project.

These were the basic ideas I wanted to bring out in the interview.

(Applause) The Commission has absolutely no intention - and it was most certainly the very last thing I intended - of introducing any new political conditions into the negotiating process or the decision-making process.

The strategy has been laid down by the European Council. The Commission pursues this strategy with vigour.

And as President Prodi has already said, it makes perfect sense for the accession treaties to be ratified in the individual Member States in accordance with their respective legal systems.

Three conclusions can be drawn from this, to my mind. Firstly, we must wage a broadly-based communication campaign in the Member States and the candidate countries.

The Commission has already made the necessary preparations to this end.

Secondly, we ought not to dismiss any fears or concerns people may have, rather we should talk openly to them and help them....

(Applause)... to seize the new opportunities and rise to the new challenges.

I am thinking, in particular, of the border regions.

The Commission is working on a programme here too.

And thirdly, when it comes to issues beset with fears and emotions - and they are there in the enlargement process; take, for example, the issue of immigration - we must proceed with the greatest caution and keep a sense of perspective as far as we possibly can.

But there are ways and means of solving these problems.

And these must, and will be, decided on when the time is right, and in the appropriate manner.

Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, I wish we did not have to have this debate today.

It centres on a grave occurrence, a serious political error.

I hope that in the light of what President Prodi and Commissioner Verheugen have just had to say, the record will have been put straight by the end of this debate.

It was not the President, but the Commission whom we asked for a statement.

But I am extremely grateful to President Prodi for the fact that he deemed the occurrence so important as to address us in person today.

Commissioner Verheugen, I have read your interview several times.

Before I get to the real crux of the matter, I would like to draw your attention to the following sentence, which has left me totally bewildered and dismayed.

I am being completely matter-of-fact when I say this, because I believe deeply in every word that I calmly utter here, and because it reflects my convictions.

Mr Verheugen said in the interview: "One of the almost tragic developments of the past few years has been that Parliament has found itself unanimous in only one respect, namely in opposing the Commission."

Mr Verheugen, what is your understanding of Parliament' s role?

You would not be in office if we had not given you our blessing.

On behalf of my group, I would assert - and President Prodi is aware - that, in principle, we regard ourselves as the European Commission' s ally when it comes to safeguarding the Treaties, involving Mr Patten in external policy, and when we are having trouble getting secretariats.

We are on the Commission' s side and would ask you to take note of this and not accuse us of opposing the Commission in principle, and only finding ourselves unanimous in one respect.

I simply refuse to accept this.

I refuse to accept this because I want people to understand that the work we do is in support of the Commission.

We have a joint task to get to grips with for Europe.

Turning now to the facts of the matter.

You said that anyone reading your text with impartiality could reach no other conclusion.

I believe - and in fact this is a pan-European debate - that even if you take an impartial view of this text, you simply cannot help reaching the conclusions we have introduced into the public debate.

Mr Verheugen, I am grateful to you for, and highly appreciative of your statement to the effect that no new conditions should be created.

In so doing you have made it clear, once and for all - as the President of the Commission said - that you are no longer advocating that a referendum of the kind you have in your country, should form the basis for enlargement of the European Union.

After all, quite a few people have been left wondering if there is a strategy underlying Commissioner Verheugen' s comment.

In fact only today, certain other individuals - and I would not wish to make a party political issue of this - amongst whom an important character from Germany, who is close to you politically, have called for a referendum on this issue.

But I am pleased that the matter has been cleared up today.

I am delighted that we have been able to reach a consensus on this issue and discuss it, because the issue of enlargement concerns the future of the European continent in the twenty-first century.

The Commission and Parliament must tread the same path if we are to approach the future with confidence.

We must now join forces and urge the national governments to make a success of Nice.

We must do this together, in a spirit of good will and cooperation.

What matters most - to that extent, I sympathise with some of your comments, which we fully agree with - is to win public support for the enlargement of the European Union, so that we take the people in our countries with us.

As Members of the European Parliament, we are committed to this on an ongoing basis.

After all, it was the people of Europe that brought about the change in, and downfall, of Communism.

The reunification of Germany would not have been possible without Solidarnosc in Poland.

Let us now - and I call upon the Commission and the assembled delegates to rise to this challenge - tread the path of Europe together.

Parliament is agreed that we must tread this path together.

Mr Verheugen, I would urge you to take this to heart.

In principle, we are on the Commission' s side when it comes to the future development of Europe, the unity of our continent, and enlargement, because the people of Central Europe want to be part of the community of values that is the European Union.

It is our political and moral duty to do everything we can to make enlargement a reality as soon as we possibly can.

It is in the interests of the security, peace, and freedom of our European continent.

Madam President, President of the Commission, Mr Verheugen, you said just now that your comments in the interview were made in a German context, but it is far from being an internal German issue.

And even though Mr Poettering has just spoken, and now I am taking the floor, do not think that this is an all-German debate.

The comments you made, Mr Verheugen, provoked amazement, irritation and also anger amongst the Socialist Group.

This is not about the worth or lack of worth of referenda in terms of democracy, or involving the people in the decisions of the European Union.

Nor do I intend, as speaker for my group, to go into the internal German debate on such referenda and similar issues.

Naturally, each Member State will decide on the accession of new States according to its own constitutional law, and the same applies to Germany.

But precisely because the German constitution makes no provision for a referendum of this kind, your comments were interpreted as a call for a referendum to be introduced, and as such, as an attempt to postpone the eastward enlargement of the European Union.

I know this was far from being your intention, Commissioner, but that is the impression people got and it must be dispelled!

(Applause) The Socialist Group wants the European Union to honour the commitment it has entered into with regard to Eastern Europe.

We want the negotiations to be resolved speedily and diligently.

We reject any attempt to put new obstacles in the way of accession.

But the same applies to comments made by certain members of your group, Mr Poettering; for example with regard to the PPE' s attitude towards accession to the Economic and Monetary Union.

My group, the socialist group, welcomes the fact that President Prodi and Commissioner Verheugen have made the necessary clarifications here today, and we are grateful to you for this.

You have clarified matters to our satisfaction.

Now, of course, we could say: "Romano" locuto, causa finita.

(Laughter)But of course things are not that simple, because the fundamental problem, Commissioner Verheugen, is one we all face: i.e. the Commission, MEPs, national governments, and the parties in our Member States.

The fundamental problem is how we go about informing EU citizens about the accession of East European States, how we convince them and win their support for these accessions.

However, we are all to be found wanting in this respect.

The only way to achieve this aim is to impress on the people that the size of the task is commensurate with the size of the opportunity presented to us all in Europe.

That is the message we must drive home.

To this end, you, President Prodi, and you Commissioner, and all of us, must stop getting bogged down in bureaucratic detail and doubts.

Let us give our work the epoch-making status it deserves!

The political generation of the fifties - Adenauer, Monnet, Schuman and so on -, had the courage and vision to resolve the centuries' old conflict between Germany and France in a European Community, and to make a start on unifying the people of Europe.

Our generation of politicians, ladies and gentlemen, yours and mine, now has the opportunity, for the first time in a thousand years, to bring all the people of Europe together in one Community, based on free will, peace and democracy.

We must not allow anyone to wreck this opportunity, nor must we waste it.

Madam President, today offers an important corrective opportunity and an important step forward in this debate.

I am extremely pleased to see the President of the Commission here and I hope that Mr Prodi, as President of the Commission, will assert his presidential leadership on a regular basis in that way on strategic issues such as enlargement.

I therefore especially welcome his statement today.

I accept Commissioner Verheugen's explanation that he was speaking in a German context and in a personal capacity.

However, as the Commissioner responsible for enlargement, he does not now have the luxury of speaking in a personal capacity.

The fundamental problem when we give mixed messages or perhaps poorly expressed or ill-judged messages is that we risk conveying the wrong message.

From the way in which this interview was received and commented upon that has clearly happened here.

On the matter of a referendum I accept his explanation.

However the underlying thesis is correct.

We do need to take the public with us and if that was his point it is a valid one.

As to Member States leaving the Commission to do the dirty work, I hope that does not refer to the work of enlargement.

I am sure that implication was not intended.

If, Commissioner, you meant that some statesmen in our governments like to go on central European tours and announce that enlargement is on its way but then leave the details to the Commission, you should say so plainly and we will back you up when you confront the Council with this.

(Applause)I would ask the Commissioner in fairness to withdraw his remarks on the European Parliament finding itself unanimous in only one respect, namely in opposing the Commission.

The Commissioner's relationship with our Parliament and its committees has always been constructive and positive and it should remain so.

Such a slur on our interinstitutional relationship must not be allowed to stand.

Madam President, I would like to thank the President of the Commission and Commissioner Verheugen for having consented to this discussion with us.

This is an excellent opportunity for us to embark on a serious and honest debate on the issue of enlargement, and we can also consider together how we can include our citizens in the discussion.

Nothing is more important than this.

I can understand how the Commission might be rather irritated by the way the Council sometimes approaches the issue of enlargement.

The Council has been incapable of proposing a concrete enlargement plan and in this it really has to rally its forces.

Neither is it of any benefit if state leaders travel to applicant countries and make hollow promises that membership is just around the corner.

This is not serious enlargement work.

Obviously, public confidence can be restored, but it will mean that first the entire negotiations process must be made more open.

Furthermore, national parliaments must be involved in these discussions, and we now have a good opportunity to say that we too in the European Parliament debate this matter regularly.

And then we have the idea that we might organise referenda on the results of enlargement.

It is certainly not quite the right time to contemplate this, as we will really have to have the courage to tell people that eight years have passed already since the present applicant countries were invited to join the European Union.

Eight years have passed, but hopefully we will be bold enough to tell the people that this process is now far advanced and is irreversible.

A referendum in itself is an absolutely splendid way of involving the people in making decisions.

I would like to thank Commissioner Verheugen for having had the courage to utter the word.

Even in Germany they should, in my opinion, consider dismissing historical fears that referenda might be generally dangerous.

Now let us just consider this Charter of Fundamental Rights.

At present, a Charter of Fundamental Rights is being drafted, but does it contain one single genuine right of involvement on the part of the ordinary citizen?

Why have we not started to discuss pan-European referenda or, for example, the right of citizens' initiative, which, for example, they have automatically in Switzerland?

I can understand why the Swiss do not wish to join the Union before such fundamental rights are also guaranteed to them as citizens joining the European Union.

This is a task we can embark on together, so that we can really establish a People' s Europe.

It is also the best way to dispel idle fears, because people have to enlighten themselves, they have to talk, and they have to acquire knowledge and information.

In other words, people' s direct rights are vitally necessary in general, but in this case I do not think we can start to vote on enlargement now.

Madam President, opinion differs in my group as to the proposed enlargement of the European Union.

Personally, I see it as an historic necessity and opportunity, which must not be put at risk either by rashness, undemocratic procedures, and bureaucratic or national small-mindedness, or politicians ' lack of consideration for the social dimension.

Commissioner, I do not doubt your personal commitment to enlargement.

Yet if you tell us, as you have done today, that we simply misinterpreted the interview, and I then read, in tomorrow 's edition of die Zeit, your own comments to the effect that the interview was your annual flop, then I am bound to wonder what is going on here!

I would urge you once again to clarify the situation for us.

In July, you dropped some very vague hints about the difficulties.

Despite being asked to do so, you were not prepared to be more specific at the time.

You are absolutely right to say that the people must be involved in the decision-making processes.

But that means of course, that the democratically elected representatives should be given these opportunities too.

I believe we must see an end to the excessively secretive brand of diplomacy employed by the Council and the Commission towards Parliament.

There is a second problem. I emphatically support your view that national governments must not overwhelm the people with existential decisions, as happened - I would agree with you on this point - in the case of the euro.

But a German referendum must never be allowed to determine the weal and woe of enlargement.

That would be insensitive and unacceptable to my mind.

Aside from that, you will receive our unswerving support if you are serious about democratic participation. However, I also recall that you yourself dismissed out of hand the idea of having a referendum on the Treaty of Maastricht, in Germany at the time.

Thirdly - and this is the most important point - if we are to win the people' s support for enlargement and accession then their hopes and fears must be taken very seriously.

As I see it, there is more to this than launching a PR campaign costing EUR 150 million; it means highlighting the democratic, social and employment dimensions of enlargement.

There has been precious little sign of this so far, either in the debate on a Charter of Fundamental Rights, in EU reform undertakings, or in the accession negotiations.

Commissioner, please use your considerable and acknowledged ability to help make eastward enlargement a project for joint security and social solidarity, and one that can be jointly decided on and shaped by the people of Europe.

Then you will have us all on your side.

Madam President, President Prodi said 'Public opinion is not sufficiently convinced' and other Members have said the same thing.

The truth of the matter, which is serious, appears to be that the public is not sufficiently convinced because Europe is too concerned with specific issues concerning the individual States and is not doing enough to combat the major problems such as unemployment, migration, human rights, the renegotiation of the world's financial system, the financial bubble, relations with the United States and Europe' s capacity to build a healthy economy and exert its own influence in the world.

We have to realise that the European citizens are afraid.

Therefore, if we want enlargement to work to the ultimate benefit of present and future Member citizens, we will have to start involving the citizens in political and institutional processes, not unconditionally as you said in your speech, President Prodi, for there is one condition and that is that enlargement becomes a genuine benefit both for those citizens who are currently Members of our European Union and for those who, we hope, will join us as soon as possible.

Mr President, Commissioner, the Italian Radicals are certainly not going to criticise anyone for proposing to organise a referendum on an extremely important issue.

It was, of course, a mistake, which has caused problems for the Commission and for all of us as the European Union, in the face of the legitimate hopes of the peoples of Eastern Europe who, after 50 years of Communist dictatorship, which we did nothing to combat, now, I believe, have the right to be part of the European Union.

I would now like the Members to carry out an examination of conscience, and I would ask both the Commission and Parliament what is going to happen at the Biarritz and Nice Summits, whose agendas contain such major issues about which absolutely nothing is being done.

No progress is being made on the matters of the institutional reforms; most importantly, nothing is being done to make good the commitment we have made in past years to extend enlargement to the countries of southern Europe - I refer to the Delors I and II packages.

Then we want to achieve enlargement without spending a penny more than our current budget, which is already less than sufficient for the 15.

These are major issues and your interview, Commissioner, caused some consternation.

I hope that these statements will set us off along the right road again, but the real problems remain unsolved: what reforms and what financial means are we going to use to bring enlargement to Eastern Europe with genuine success?

Madam President, I had understood that Mr Verheugen was going to give a full explanation of the interview that he gave to the Süddeutsche Zeitung.

One important point he made was that he felt that, in his opinion, there should have been a referendum in Germany on the introduction of the euro.

Well, it is not too late.

Does he still think that German public opinion should be tested on the euro and what does he think the result would be?

Madam President, first of all, I would like to answer a number of specific questions that have been put to me.

I will firstly answer the questions put to me by Mr Poettering and Mr Cox, whom I would like to thank for their fair-minded contributions to the debate.

I am very pleased to note that you have formed a different impression of the relationship between Parliament and the Commission, to the one I very briefly described.

I must confess that I have also found this to be absolutely true in my own experience.

I have been asked to withdraw this evaluation. I am only too pleased to do so.....

.... because this debate has shown that I was obviously mistaken, and I have no difficulty whatsoever in admitting this!

I would like to address Mr Cox again. You picked up on a particular German word that I used, and for which the English translation is 'dirty work' .

I would just like to explain that in the part of Germany I come from, this word implies nothing more than painful and hard work.

I did not mean anything else by it......

.... and the interpretation you gave it certainly comes very close indeed to what I really think.

There is no need for us to have yet more discussions on the decision-making process regarding the introduction of the euro to Germany.

At the time, I was chairman of the special committee of the German Bundestag, which prepared for the ratification of the euro in Germany.

This process was concluded as early as the end of 1993.

There are no further decisions to be made on the subject, the matter is closed.

People said at the time that the public had not been sufficiently involved.

Any one of my German colleagues would testify to that, and that is what I brought out again in the interview.

Incidentally, to sum up, I would like to point out that as I see it, this debate has revealed, firstly, that there is a very large and broad consensus of opinion between the Commission and Parliament on the key question as to how necessary, important and irreversible enlargement is, and, secondly, that we are also very much in tune as to the need to work together to secure the people' s support for this momentous project.

If there are no further interventions, this debate is closed and we shall continue the debate on human cloning.

I wish to thank Commissioner Verheugen once more and to welcome back Commissioner Busquin.

Mr President, Commissioner, I believe that every person who is motivated by faith in man, right from the very first moment of his existence, must be guaranteed the unconditional respect which is morally due to the human person in its entirety.

Therefore, we must state, loud and clear, our opposition to experiments which involve the destruction of human embryos. An embryo is already a human person with a very specific identity, and every action which is not intended to benefit the embryo is an act of violence against the right to life.

Parliament must reiterate what it has declared many times in recent years, including last May.

It is immoral to use human embryos for research, for those very operations to which the President of the United States, Bill Clinton, has allocated public funding, those operations which have been approved by Tony Blair' s British Government.

Sadly, it would appear that commercial interests are driving scientists to explore types of research which involve shortcuts and disregard all consideration for the protection of human life, which we consider to start at the moment of conception.

The human body is not a possession, it is nothing to do with 'having' , it is to do with 'being' , with being a living person, and it cannot therefore be reduced to a machine made up of components and gears, materials and functions.

What people are trying to achieve is almost an attack on life; it is the opposite of the ethic of love of man and his body, even in that initial stage of being alive, of being in the world, the human world, with that body which is himself.

To the extent that those who take human embryos and disembowel them, removing the mass of cells inside and extinguishing their life, contrive to say that there is no-one inside, for if there were somebody inside they would be worthy of love or, in a loveless world, they would at least have the right for their human dignity to be respected. Otherwise, the world would consist of violence, brutality and cynicism.

Ladies and gentlemen, to oppose destructive research on embryos is not just to adhere to religious principle, but to uphold a principle of civilisation as well: the absolute ban on one man being master of another which should still be at the very heart of our civilisation.

We cannot allow man to have such great power over his fellow man.

But this does not mean that we are against research, quite the contrary.

Alternative research is possible: research on the stem cells present in adults and on cells removed from the umbilical cord immediately after birth, for example.

In addition to all this, research is indeed being carried out on adult cells and looks likely to yield results.

Many research scientists are involved in alternatives to cloning and they are about to form major national research groups to work in this specific area.

Lastly, we propose that a temporary committee be set up to study these issues.

We would like there to be in-depth studies of new issues thrown up by the life sciences, on the condition that it is clear that the positions adopted by Parliament cannot be renegotiated.

It is those positions which the Commission must take as its starting point to assist us in producing well-founded recommendations.

Mr President, Article 1 of the draft Charter of Fundamental Rights states that the dignity of the person must be respected and protected.

Article 3 states that in the cases of medicine and biology, the following principles must be respected: the prohibition of eugenic practices, specifically those that are aimed at human selection; the prohibition of making the human body or any of its parts a source of profit and the prohibition of the reproductive cloning of human beings.

Such formal statements are not necessarily sufficient.

The speed at which scientific research progresses is sometimes difficult for average humans, and even for politicians, to comprehend.

This rhythm of progress in the techno-sciences, that is, in the marriage of science and technology, raises ethical questions that have major consequences.

This applies above all to the new mastery of living mechanisms.

In this respect, the British government' s proposal to refer legislation which seeks to authorise some scientific research into therapeutic cloning, including the human embryo, to the parliament at Westminster has led to all sorts of reactions and comments, both positive and negative.

Certain political groups in this Parliament are proposing a vote on a supposedly 'urgent' motion for a resolution.

The Socialists are of the view that such issues are too important for the future of medicine, biology and human society, and because they are so important, this Parliament should carry out a more thorough job than a resolution adopted at top speed.

This is not the gunfight at the OK Corral: This is not about being the first to draw.

This morning' s discussions on the monitoring centre for industrial change showed that this Parliament is capable of voting on everything and its opposite in the space of a few minutes.

The Socialists are unhappy with this type of vote, which looks more like Russian roulette than serious parliamentary work.

We would like to see a calm discussion of a vital problem, covering the opportunities opened up by genetic engineering and also the lines that cannot be crossed in this field.

This raft of issues concerns various standing committees in this Parliament.

This is clearly a cross-sector issue, which deserves to be dealt with by a special temporary committee, which has the task of calling in experts and of holding hearings of opposing views so that we can have an objective debate, which is not skewed in advance by deeply-embedded prejudices.

I shall end, Mr President, by asking you, by asking all of us, to take this task seriously.

We are prepared to withdraw our motion for a resolution if the other groups do the same and to try to work constructively together.

I welcome the Commissioner's statement and particularly its measured and considered nature.

The ELDR resolution that has been tabled takes the same view.

We do not want a quick, ill-conceived reaction to events that have taken place in my country and the announcement made by the British Government.

These are serious matters and reflect our citizens' deep concerns but we should appreciate the full context of the UK announcement, acknowledging the subsidiarity principle to which the Commissioner referred.

It is only a proposal, not a decision, and it follows a very careful and considered report by the chief medical officer's expert group on cloning.

The matter has been under consideration for two years - too long, say some commentators, when measured against the lives of people with cancer, Parkinson's disease or organ failure who might be aided by this research.

The experts' group merely proposes an extension to existing UK rules on the purposes for which embryos can be used in research.

I emphasise this is an extension to existing rules and controls in this very, very delicate area.

We must respect the there are deep and genuine public concerns on both sides of this argument and this is what our resolution tries to do.

The British Government has recognised that in its proposal because it will be the subject of a free vote, possibly later this year.

I believe, although it is not my party's government, that the British Government has been measured and considered in its response.

I ask this Parliament to be measured and considered in the way it deals with this important issue.

Mr President, once again we face a fundamental ethical debate on developments in biotechnology as applied to humans.

There are two opposing views in play: the first refuses to turn the human being and more specifically the embryo into a tool and is concerned at the potential risks for human society of the widespread use of certain techniques such as cloning.

The second view considers that the right of those suffering from serious and hitherto incurable illnesses to be able to benefit from the potential of medical research takes precedence over any other consideration.

The British Government, without any prior consultation with other countries - and I emphasise this point - has apparently opted for the second approach, by declaring itself to be in favour of therapeutic cloning.

The idea behind this decision is that therapeutic cloning, that is, the cloning of embryonic cells that are undifferentiated from human embryos available for research and production is a promising way forward.

Even if this idea is well-founded, it is nonetheless true that this option gives human embryos the status of stock cells for medical use and involves the production of embryos, first for research purposes, and then, probably, for production.

I feel that it is extremely important to make two observations at this point.

First of all, I would remind you of the Council of Europe's Convention on Human Rights and Bio-Medicine, adopted in Oviedo, in April 1997.

It is probably fair to criticise this convention for its vagueness on a number of points, but in Article 18, it states quite clearly that the production of human embryos for research purposes is prohibited.

There has been consensus on this point throughout Europe until quite recently, but this consensus has just been broken by the position adopted by the government of the United Kingdom.

My second observation is that, according to several experts, and as Mr Busquin, Commissioner for Research mentioned earlier, there are other routes open to respond to the legitimate expectations of those who are suffering from serious genetic illnesses.

In particular, there are routes that do not require the production of embryos by cloning, but which use adult cells. Why then, given this scenario, should we immediately rush into something that is ethically and socially questionable?

To conclude, I believe that the knowledge that has been acquired in gene therapy could be promising for humanity, but that they are also full of potential risks and are open to serious abuse.

We therefore need a rigorous legal framework and clear legal guidelines.

Upholding the ban on human cloning, rather than establishing it in the first place - I am talking about upholding the ban - is crucial in this respect.

Our Parliament has the responsibility of restating this, not by rushing into anything, but simply by remaining consistent with our earlier positions.

Mr President, two hundred years ago, Doctor Cabanis, a philosopher of the Enlightenment, proposed to dare to reconsider and improve on the work of nature. His idea was that, having demonstrated such great curiosity about how to make the animal races more beautiful and better, how shameful it was to completely neglect the human race, as if it were more crucial to have big, strong oxen than vigorous and healthy people and to have sweet-smelling peaches rather than wise and good citizens.

Mr Cabanis' dream is today close to becoming reality.

His dream has a name: eugenics.

This dream is in fact a nightmare.

This nightmare takes on many guises, each one more monstrous than the last, whether it involves prenatal diagnoses, for example, which serve to destroy embryos affected by Down' s syndrome to avoid the trouble of eradicating the disease itself; whether it involves the production of excessive numbers of embryos that pile up in freezers; or whether, finally, it involves the cloning of human beings.

These embryos are human beings, whose lives are sacred.

It is our duty to respect their dignity. What good are our grandiose declarations on human rights if we then treat human dignity with such scorn, and in the secrecy of our laboratories, at that?

There is no doubt at all that the cloning of human beings would mark the birth of a new form of slavery, in which test tubes take the place of chains and laboratories the place of galley-ships.

Our bleeding hearts will, of course, reproach us for refusing to give scientific research the resources it needs in order to progress and even worse, to cure our illnesses.

I do not accept this form of intellectual terrorism.

Furthermore, I am almost inclined to think that in the minds of all these people, research is nothing but an excuse to conduct experiments befitting a sorcerer' s apprentice.

As the wife of a doctor, I am extremely concerned that such research should be allowed to develop.

In this respect, it would probably be more appropriate to ask scientists to conduct further research into the possibility of obtaining differentiated stem cells for therapeutic purposes, particularly from adult organs.

In order to combat those whose dream is to conquer the mystery of life, we have the right to protect the dignity of all human beings by strictly prohibiting the cloning of human beings.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, in his speech just now, Mr Fiori made things very clear: he stated clearly that this is a matter of likening religious principles - his own - to the principles of civilisation.

For my part, I believe that what the institutions must affirm is the principle of secularity, and they must confirm that what may seem morally unacceptable to some must not by virtue of this be legally discounted.

We must make the difference between the law and religious principles clear.

If we do not observe this principle, then I fear that there will be no hope for us.

Mr President, to return to the matter in hand, we are aware that, in the face of new ideas - even new ideas which seem promising in terms of treatments for illnesses affecting millions and millions of people - the normal, conventional reaction always kicks in: to ban, to crusade, to shout 'Barbarians!' without even stopping to ask whether the ban can work, whether it would work or whether we are in a position to ensure that it is observed or to monitor it.

It is the same reaction as that which has been aroused by normal social phenomena for a long time now, in matters of abortion, migration or even drugs.

We declare a ban and then we wash our hands of the matter.

It is my opinion, however, that the responsibility of policy-makers - which may be more difficult, more complex - is to regulate certain issues, set limits and avoid situations out of a western.

This is the mandate of the institutions, independently of the religious consciences of any of their Members, where applicable.

It is for precisely this reason that we, the Radicals of the Bonino List, feel that we can just about support the compromise of the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party.

We want to try and reduce the gap between science and politics, to endeavour to govern new phenomena secularly together with the pragmatism of experimentation and successive approximations, without immediately launching into prohibitionist campaigns which we already know to be ineffective.

What we are doing now, exactly as we did in the case of illegal abortion, is merely sparking off, once again, the medical tourism of millions of people who will seek treatment on the black market elsewhere.

What I am saying is extremely serious and fills me with concern. Watch out: when applied to science and social phenomena, prohibition has never worked.

I believe that it is our responsibility to set the limits, or take on board the risk of setting the limits, of successive approximations without trying to impose any ethical principles - in the case of those who have any - or principles of civilisation.

The real civilisation of the institutions is the civilisation of secularity, experimentation and discussion.

Mr President, I must apologise for my absence earlier. I had notified the services that I would be temporarily unavailable.

Mr President, my group disapproves of the decision taken by the British Government on the cloning of human cells. In our view, it does not take account either of European legislation on this matter or of the opinion that the European Union' s ethics committee is in the process of drafting on the consequences of research in cloning.

We wish to state our support for prohibiting any research into human cloning and we oppose any commercial exploitation of biotechnological inventions that involve cloning.

Having stated these general positions of principle, the debate is only beginning on the attitude we should adopt towards biotechnological research, both in order to fully weigh up its ethical implications, but without running the risk of slowing down work which is likely to bring about improvements in human health.

Given the extremely sensitive nature of these issues, which concern civilisation itself, my group does not wish to see resolutions adopted in haste.

Instead, we have from the outset stated our support for the establishment of a temporary committee on cloning and on biotechnological research so that we can hold the hearings necessary for adopting a position with a full understanding of the issue when the time comes.

This is why my group has not signed any of the compromise motions for resolutions that have been submitted to us today.

At this stage, each of us will speak according to his or her conscience about the principles that I have just stated.

Mr President, in January 1998 we held a debate on the Council of Europe' s Protocol which contained a ban on human cloning.

I then expressed the fear that countries such as the United Kingdom and the Netherlands, which refused to sign the protocol at the time, were probably not in favour of imposing an outright ban.

This is less than two years ago.

Meanwhile, the British Government would like to permit therapeutic cloning of embryos for research.

I cannot help thinking that the boundaries are forever being extended.

Initially, there was a complete ban; now cloning is allowed on a therapeutic basis but not for reproductive purposes.

As if this would explain and justify everything.

What then is the big difference between therapeutic and reproductive cloning of human embryos?

And what do we do if we are put under pressure soon to apply the research findings in the pharmaceutical field, or to clone for reproductive purposes?

As far as I am concerned, every new human being is a gift of God.

Any form of human life should be treated with respect.

This is also the only way to safeguard human dignity.

The treatment of the human embryo as a consumer article, supposedly justified by the argument that this is in the name of research, fills me with disgust, especially because there are other ways of cloning stem cells.

I do wonder why this option is taken, despite all the ethical concerns which exist worldwide.

I would urgently call on the British Government to reconsider its far-reaching decision and would ask the British Parliament not to back this proposal.

Mr President, a proud man wants to play God.

He refuses to acknowledge that he is only a creature.

He wants to be the creator.

The issue before us today is a battle between creation and man's discoveries.

There are scientists so arrogant today that they are already patenting their discoveries, as if they had stumbled upon their own creation.

Dr William Hesseltine, the chief executive of Human Gene Sciences Inc., has already patented 100 human genes and his company has submitted applications for 8000.

They argue that human cloning is about the promotion of health.

I am arguing today that human cloning is about the wealth of certain scientists and their companies.

Some scientists have taken the lunacy of Hitler's fascism from the battlefield and are prepared to validate it in the laboratory.

Parliament needs to reject this and as a member of the British Parliament I will be voting against it in my own Parliament.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, the PPE-DE Group was dismayed to hear of the British Government' s plans with regard to the cloning of human embryos.

Hitherto, all those in positions of responsibility within the European Union were agreed that the cloning of human beings should be rejected out of hand.

During the fifth research framework programme, the Council - inclusive of the British Government - voted unanimously in favour of a form of words that rules out cloning, as well as so-called therapeutic cloning.

Parliament and the Council voted in favour of a text for the Directive on the patenting of biotechnological discoveries that completely rules out cloning of human beings, because this type of technology offends common decency and is an affront to law and order.

Commissioner, over the past few days, a number of articles in the press, as well as your speech, have given rise to some confusion regarding the fifth research framework programme, and especially concerning the Patenting Directive.

The impression has been given that only reproductive cloning is banned.

I was involved in the careful drafting of both texts, and both directives rule out therapeutic as well as reproductive cloning.

Take a close look at the documents, Commissioner, and clarify matters, or else you will have the European Parliament to deal with.

And I do not think that is something you would want.

Now this consensus between the States of the European Union and the institutions has been disrupted by the government of one Member State.

We as a Parliament must withstand this attempt to shatter taboos.

But it is not just a case of making our feelings known, we must also ensure that action be taken as a result.

Hence the PPE-DE Group has called for a strict ban on the cloning of human beings at all stages of their development to be incorporated into the Charter of Fundamental Rights.

Finally, I urge the Commission to ensure that there is strict compliance with the fifth research framework programme' s call for no support to be provided for any form of human cloning.

This also means boycotting the cross-subsidisation provided by research institutes in Great Britain.

The best way to achieve this would be to ensure that those institutions involved in the cloning of human beings no longer receive any financial support whatsoever from the European Union.

Mr President, you should listen to the Commissioner!

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, there is no doubt whatsoever that biotechnology and genetic engineering are highly significant fields these days.

They will continue to gain in importance in research, and in terms of their many applications.

But is this difficult field, with all the hopes and fears it brings, being handled in a manner that is beyond reproach?

Today' s debate is positive proof of this suspicion.

As a Parliament, we are reacting too hastily to a legislative proposal in a Member State of the European Union, which caused consternation amongst the public a few days ago.

And what form has this reaction taken?

A quick glance at draft resolutions on the table reveals that all Parliament has been able to do, in its haste, has been to reiterate its already frequently expressed stance on critical fields of research and the application of biotechnology and genetic engineering.

That is all very well, but it is not enough!

We must make biotechnology and genetic engineering, but above all bioethics, one of the European Parliament' s key concerns.

I am not alone in calling for this; I have the backing of my group.

The people of Europe want to see more foresighted commitment from us in this area.

We cannot afford to be overtaken by events any longer.

We must no longer be in the position where - huffing and puffing to catch up - we find ourselves commenting on developments that are already at an advanced stage.

The European Parliament must point the way, so that biotechnology and genetic engineering develop for the benefit of mankind, rather than being to its detriment owing to the transgression of ethical boundaries.

Therefore we should vote overwhelmingly to adopt the proposed committee, which will form the basis for far-sighted legislation.

We must be aware that biotechnology is bound up with what is presumed to be the greatest revolution in medicine and technology.

This revolution must not be attended by irresponsibly conceived legislation.

We must appoint the best experts to advise the Council and ensure that there is consistency in the legislation across the Member States.

The ethical issues and the need to protect human dignity, in particular, are so important that we cannot afford to leave them at the mercy of fragmented, possibly even contradictory pieces of legislation introduced by individual Member States.

We must get to grips with all the ethical issues raised by medicine, technology and science, as a matter of urgency.

The appropriate parliamentary committee must therefore get down to work as quickly as possible.

Our vote will set this in train.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, biotechnology is currently one of the most promising technologies which can bring about a breakthrough in the medical world.

Putting an end to cloning techniques in Europe will only shift research elsewhere, for example to the United States or, in the worst case, to countries whose ethical standards are worse than those in the European Union.

As a result, expertise, research activities and employment will drain away to overseas countries.

Furthermore, the products will end up back on the market in the European Union anyway.

Who are we to deny people the right to recovery?

Would it not be too easy to ban promising technology with great potential on ethical grounds?

Is not every person entitled to health and welfare?

Who has the right to put the label of ethics on it?

I can tell you that I, along with the Liberal Group, will be giving this resolution my wholehearted support.

Mr President, we have the awful situation where one EU Member State permits therapeutic cloning, which we have always been critical of.

The people of the European Union are expecting the European Parliament to take a stance on this.

I think it would be irresponsible if we were draw a veil over the issue by saying: 'just to pacify you, we will set up an interminable debating society, or a temporary committee.'

We must take a stance on this decision, which is to be taken in the course of the next few weeks - yes as soon as that- without further ado, and then of course we must state our position on the issues we can expect to deal with in the future.

But on no account must we gloss over this by failing to make our feelings known and by trying to conceal things in committees, which will disconcert the public.

I believe that what is happening now is of crucial importance.

If we accept therapeutic cloning, then we will be opening Pandora' s box. It would bring the nightmare scenario of cloned and made-to-measure human beings that much closer.

The arbitrary distinction between reproductive and non-reproductive cloning is semantic sleight of hand.

The term 'therapeutic cloning' is equally problematic, because there is no question of it being a therapy.

Cloning, including therapeutic cloning, is the first step along the way to human beings being regarded merely as biological material.

It is indefensible to deliberately - I repeat, deliberately - create life in order to use it as research material.

We are also dividing up the concept of human dignity when we deliberately produce embryos in order to have a ready supply of spare parts.

That is why Parliament must use its power to act.

Commissioner for Research, I am also expecting you to make an unequivocal statement today, on how you propose to proceed when a Member State disregards the resolutions of Parliament and the Council.

We need a clear signal, and I feel it would be a sad day for politics if we were to cast aside all our ethical misgivings out of loyalty to Blair.

Mr President, Commissioner, it goes without saying that human cloning which seeks to reproduce a human being similar to another with the sole purpose of improving it must be clearly prohibited.

This has always been this Parliament' s position and I think it is useful to restate this.

Today, however, we are discussing the use of cloning techniques for therapeutic purposes and this has many implications.

These implications are, in themselves, medical.

We must make the distinction between therapeutic cloning, which must be clearly differentiated from reproductive cloning.

Cell therapy today represents great hope for many patients suffering from genetic or degenerative illnesses such as Alzheimer' s, Parkinson' s and cancer.

There are also ethical and philosophical implications. What status does the embryo have?

In order to answer this question, we might refer to the many debates that we have had on abortion or on in-vitro fertilisation. What is the status of unwanted embryos, produced by in-vitro fertilisation and condemned to be destroyed?

Could they not provide new life?

There are economic and social implications.

This debate concerns the whole of society. What is the American or Japanese point of view on these issues?

Europe must take a global view and take account of the potential for research offered by therapeutic cloning.

There must be an in-depth debate.

You have called for one and we agree.

Perhaps it would be useful to define in advance what is prohibited and to produce a strict framework for acceptable practice.

These issues are viewed differently from one country to another, according to their culture.

This is why the European Union' s action in this field must be guided by major fundamental principles alone.

These principles exist and are: respect for the person, respect for life and for freedom but also for progress that will benefit everyone.

Mr President, cloning and patentability are and must remain illegal wherever human beings are concerned.

There is no difference between cloning for therapeutic purposes and cloning for reproductive purposes. The end cannot justify the means when human dignity is at stake, for human dignity must be respected above all things.

The use of human embryos to produce organs can therefore in no way be justified.

In fact, when an embryo is used in this way a potential human being is eliminated, which clearly contradicts the value attached to the declared goal of saving other human lives.

It would certainly be a different matter if mere stem cells were to be used rather than embryos.

In our opinion, it is ethically wrong to attempt to alter the nature of the fundamental rules of the origins of life.

We must stop and reflect on the possible implications of upsetting the laws of nature.

The precautionary principle must be invoked and applied to the possibility of cloning for therapeutic purposes.

Indeed, it is no coincidence that the 1998-2002 fifth research and technological development framework programme excludes the financing of projects which involve the cloning of embryos for reproductive purposes and does not provide for funding research into cloning for therapeutic purposes.

In respect for the differences of opinion on the matter, we feel that it is vital to lay down ethical standards based on respect for human dignity in the biotechnology sector.

We call upon the European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies to take the risks of going beyond certain limits into due consideration, for once these limits have been passed anything appears legitimate if human dignity is not respected.

I hope that, as President Prodi maintains, Europeans will be able to unite on the basis of common values.

To this end, the Commission must facilitate an open debate aimed at finding the right balance between ethical inflexibility based on the refusal to exploit the human body for commercial ends and the obligation to meet the need for medical treatment.

We call upon the Council to take up the initiative of organising an international convention on the use of live tissue to prevent human embryos being marketed and used for unnatural purposes.

It is important, Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, that we do not create another species of human being in the same way that we appear to be provoking natural and environmental disasters.

Mr President, it is a pity that none of the British delegates who support the government' s stance have taken the floor.

It would have been interesting to hear their arguments too, because I am quite sure that they must have had a few thoughts on the matter .

In Great Britain, it has been permissible, since 1990, to experiment on embryos up to fourteen days old.

I believe this is the next logical step.

Why does Great Britain behave differently to the continent?

That is certainly an interesting question.

The difference obviously does not depend on which government is in power.

It was a Conservative Government before, and now they have a Labour Government, and yet nothing has changed.

Why is public opinion in Great Britain unlike that on the other side of the Channel?

It would be entirely appropriate to discuss this kind of issue during this debate, because we have the privilege of being in the company of delegates from the four corners of the European Union.

That was the first comment I wanted to make.

Secondly, I wanted to say how impressed I was with Mrs Bonino' s comments.

It really struck a chord with me.

I too would advocate that we should allow ourselves to be guided by the laity in matters of principle.

The State is not religious, but it has a duty to respect religion.

I too have respect for whether someone is Catholic, Evangelical, Jewish or whatever.

But I also want my opinion to be respected.

However this is only possible within a lay context.

Claims of infallibility have already done Europe untold damage.

We should endeavour to leave this behind.

No one has a monopoly on ethics.

People who see things differently are ethical too.

Incidentally, we have seen time and again how bans are watered down in practice.

Everyone could cite examples of this.

That is why I am firmly convinced - whatever we decide here - that in a cosmopolitan society performing research from a variety of perspectives, knowledge will out.

At the end of the day, we will have no choice but to deal with this knowledge in a responsible manner by trying to circumscribe it.

Mr Wurtz, a ban on any type of research may be called for, but it would be extraordinarily naïve to believe that this ban would be observed.

In the final reckoning, we will have no choice but to lay down boundaries.

I feel as many other people do about this issue.

The thought of embryos being meddled with and experimented on makes my hair stand on end.

But practical experience has shown me that at the end of the day, it will probably not be possible to do a great deal more than simply circumscribe everything.

There is no need for us to take action at present.

We need to think very carefully about how we are going to proceed in this matter.

We have committees for this purpose, and sometimes reading a good book has its uses.

An important European value that we all, whether lay or religious, purport to share is that any experimentation on a human being should only be for their exclusive and direct benefit.

We depart from that principle at our peril and here we clearly have departed from it.

We cannot experiment on human beings at any stage of their development and we certainly cannot mass-produce embryos for experimentation.

The next stage will be commercial exploitation, which our own bio-patenting directive allows for.

The UK authorities argue that in spite of ethical doubts the cloning of human embryos is necessary because it is the only way to help patients suffering from various diseases.

Many scientists dispute this and recommend more research with adult stem cells to achieve the same results in curing diseases.

Can we not get together and find a way of dealing with stem research without experimenting directly on human beings?

I hope this House agrees that this is a value that Europe was built on.

This is an emotive subject, not least because of the title 'Human cloning'.

Stem cell research would be a less tendentious title.

But my purpose is to ask for calm reflection and consideration of the facts and the implications for us the human race, for our health and well-being, for the future of science and the health industry in Europe and, by no means least, for our spiritual well-being.

So let us get some facts straight.

Fact: human reproductive cloning is banned in the UK.

There is no intention to change this and the UK industry has no intention of carrying out human reproductive cloning now or in the future.

The research use of embryonic stem cells is a short-term response to a scientific need to discover ways of reprogramming adult cells.

Fact: stem cell research is tightly regulated under a stringent act of Parliament by the highly respected and rigorous Human Fertilisation and Embryology Authority.

It would perhaps be a good idea if other Member States were to have something similar.

Fact: there have recently been interesting advances in adult stem cell research, but there still remain significant disadvantages compared with the unique characteristics of embryonic stem cells.

The aim of research in embryonic stem cells is to find ways of using adult stem cells which overcome these disadvantages.

So we come down to the basic dilemma.

Is an embryo up to 14 days old a living being with the full rights of a living person or of a foetus?

Rightly or wrongly, the UK and the US legislation have permitted this type of research for ten years and many benefits have resulted.

And after consulting world-wide for many months the Donaldson report recommends extending such research for therapeutic purposes.

You have to be true to your conscience and your faith but also consider the future well-being of your neighbour.

Caring for your neighbour is also a Christian enjoinder.

He may have Alzheimer's or Parkinson's or diabetes.

Mr President, this is a serious and complex subject, which has been brought to the fore by the British decision.

It should also be pointed out that national legislation on this issue varies enormously, which can lead to uncontrolled practices, but these practices, as Mrs Grossetête said just now, may make us question the value some countries place on the reality of the principle of respect for human life from the embryonic stage, stated in Article 18 of the European Convention on Human Rights, which forbids the production of embryos for human purposes.

The difference between provisions shows how complex the debate is and raises several questions that merge into one another.

What does respect for life mean?

What does the pre-embryo mean in relation to the embryo?

Do we have the right to authorise research into the embryo for therapeutic purposes? Where do the stem cells come from?

Do stem cells come from foetal tissue as well as from adult tissue?

Do we have the right to create embryos for any purposes other than for life itself? In the face of serious illnesses, which are currently incurable, do we have the right to prevent research being carried out, which we are told may bring hope?

All of these questions are laden with consequences and concern the meaning of life itself.

This is why we must have dialogue, especially within the European bodies, and I regret the fact, Commissioner, that President Prodi gave a sneak preview of his interventions on Monday to the press before he shared them with the European Parliament.

I must say that his comments were very cautious and carefully measured on this issue.

Secondly, I think that in order to hold this debate, Parliament should create an ad hoc Parliamentary committee which, could, in the first instance, quickly take the initiative of hearing experts from all disciplines, both from Europe and from across the Atlantic.

This debate must also, however, be held in the public domain.

That is why I propose that European 'assises' for bioethics be launched and there should finally be a provision which allows us to frame practices in this area at a time when we are pointlessly establishing monitoring centres.

I propose that a European Agency for reproductive and biotechnological medicine be created.

. (FR) Mr President, I feel that I should respond, because Mr Liese asked a specific question during the debate.

His question concerned the fifth framework-programme.

On this issue, it is quite clear, as Mr Liese surely knows, as it is clearly stated in the fifth framework-programme, since it is subject to a codecision procedure, that research involving cloning techniques for reproductive and therapeutic purposes are quite explicitly excluded.

As a result, in the framework-programme, this is clearly completely excluded at the moment.

I simply wanted to clarify this point, Mr Liese, since you asked the question.

With regard to the debate, on the other hand, as I said in my introductory speech, the Commission would like to enter into a debate with Parliament on these issues which are, as we have seen, very complex and very interesting.

I have received eight motions for resolutions pursuant to Rule 37(2).

The vote will be taken tomorrow at 12 noon.

Subject: Cooperation with drug counselling networks Cooperation between the Commission and the networks it promotes has deteriorated significantly since 1998: contracts between the networks and the Commission are often not concluded until the projects have already been under way for months.

The Commission nevertheless insists that the projects should begin on the strength of nothing more than a provisional written notification.

Payment of instalments by the Commission is sometimes delayed for years.

All the networks are affected by the ever-growing bureaucratic burden and, above all, by the Commission's failure to make repayments, and are very much hampered in their work.

Some associations have even had to close down because of delays in payment by the Commission.

Why has the Commission not succeeded in recent years in providing the networks it supports with contracts and instalment payments rapidly and in parallel with projects?

The Commission shares the concerns of the honourable Member about the problems relating to contracts and payments for the drug prevention networks subsidised by the Community action programme on prevention of drug dependence.

Firstly, it is clear that there has been a human resources problem in the Public Health Directorate in Luxembourg, which deals with this work.

In short, the staff complement has been insufficient to deal with complex procedures and often inexperienced beneficiaries proposing too many small projects.

This situation was aggravated last summer when a decision was taken in the light of the report of the Committee of Independent Experts to end the contract with the technical assistance office which helped in the implementation of this programme.

Secondly, a large number of small projects are implemented under the anti-drugs programme, placing additional strain on the already limited human resources at our disposal.

During the last five years, the average size of projects in terms of co-financing granted by the Commission has been EUR 180,000.

Thirdly, experience shows that participants in the network have had little understanding of the Commission's contract and payment procedures.

In many cases, therefore, the Commission has had to make repeated requests to the drug prevention networks for missing documentation needed to finalise contracts or produce payments.

Fourthly, in the light of experience with subsidies from the Community budget and the criticisms of the Court of Auditors, greater rigour may have been brought to bear on the documentation relating to contract costs, resulting in knock-on effects on the timing of payments.

In responding to these problems, I am taking a number of steps.

The Commission's proposal for a new public health framework and strategy highlights the need for clearer objectives and more efficient management with a greater impact on key priorities.

Therefore, fewer but bigger projects will be co-financed in future, making for more efficient use of the human resources needed to manage implementation of the programme.

As the budgetary authority repeatedly stresses, we must match resources and priorities more realistically in the future.

In addition, as you are aware, following the Commission's recent review of its staffing needs, a request for additional posts is being put forward to the budgetary authority, including a significant increase in posts for the health and consumer protection DG.

If the budgetary authority agrees, a number of these posts could be allocated to tackle the kind of problems which we are discussing today.

The inexperience of contractors regarding financial control requirements will continue to necessitate significant advice and other inputs from already limited staff resources.

The Public Health Directorate intends to carry out an information campaign to help contractors to understand the Commission's procedures and requirements more clearly.

On the issue of red tape, the departments concerned are currently reviewing their documentary requirements with the aim of simplifying and speeding up payment procedures without neglecting the necessary financial control measures.

As a result of the measures already taken, the situation has been improving, and I expect it to improve further so that contracts can be agreed more quickly and payments made in accordance with the Commission's 60-day rule.

Should you have any specific points to make, perhaps you could provide me with the relevant information in writing, and I will certainly raise them with my staff.

Commissioner, I am pleased to hear that certain measures are to be taken.

Nevertheless, I call into question the fact that when the Commission encounters problems with the partners participating in particular projects, it attributes at least half of these problems to the partners themselves.

I have information to the effect that even small project partners are in full possession of the facts about the contracts and know exactly what they have to submit.

I have had a case described to me where the same paperwork was submitted on three separate occasions, but the Commission still maintained that it had never received this paperwork.

I therefore wish to put in another request for the application procedure to be attended by extremely clear guidelines laid down in advance.

I have encountered problems of this kind before, not just in the drugs sphere, but with many other partners that work with the Commission and seek co-financing.

It is not only in the drugs sphere where the application procedure takes such a long time and is so complex, and I believe the problem does not lie wholly with incompetent, small project partners, but can also be put down to the fact that the requirements set by the Commission are not clearly formulated.

The question remains as to whether we really want to cut back on the small organisations within the European Union, when it is important to support drugs projects - including those in the regions - using a whole range of approaches, specifically in this area, but also in general.

I believe it would not be in our interests to only give large organisations a chance to move things forward in this sphere, rather our aim must continue to be that of promoting a variety of organisational structures.

That would be a wholly misguided attempt at a solution to my mind.

In relation to the first issue raised, I do not suggest that the problem lies wholly with, as you say, incompetent project partners.

What I am saying is that is the reason for some of the problems that have arisen.

It is something I am concerned about and am seeking to address by making sure that there are clear guidelines, as you suggest, so you and I are fully in agreement on that point.

With regard to the size of projects, since 1996 a total of 149 projects have been selected for over EUR 25 million, with an average amount of EUR 180 000 per project.

Under the new health strategy we will reduce the number of projects and increase their value and impact, thereby using our limited human resources more effectively.

It does not always follow that smaller projects are better than bigger projects, but if human resources are applied efficiently it will be for the betterment of the projects concerned.

Subject: Scientific advice concerning phthalates Will the Commission now release the statement agreed on 25 November 1999 by the CSTEE (Scientific Committee on Toxicity, Ecotoxicity and the Environment) on that committee' s view of the misinterpretation by the Commission of the scientific advice on the subject of phthalates, the statement being referred to in the minutes of the Scientific Steering Committee' s meeting of 10 December 1999?

Will it indicate who in the Commission is responsible for this failure to follow accepted practice on the publication of all minutes, reports and agreed statements by scientific committees, and will it indicate who was responsible for delaying the publication of the main minutes of the CSTEE meeting of 25 November 1999 until April 2000?

Thank you for giving the opportunity to clarify the issue that is the subject of your question.

As referred to in the minutes of the plenary meeting of the Scientific Steering Committee of 10 December 1999 the chairman of the Scientific Committee on Toxicity, Ecotoxicity and the Environment informed the SSC about the SCTEE's intention at its plenary meeting of 25 November 1999 to attach a statement to the minutes of the meeting, clarifying the interpretation of its opinion on phthalates in toys.

The minutes of the meeting under discussion would normally have been adopted at the occasion of the next SCTEE plenary meeting which took place on 4 February 2000.

However, at that plenary meeting several committee members considered that the minutes were in general too long and requested the secretariat to follow the format of other scientific committees.

Following this request the committee decided to postpone the adoption of the minutes to the next plenary when the draft of a more succinct version would be available.

This inevitably delayed the process of adoption until the subsequent plenary meeting held on 11 April 2000.

Once approved its content was immediately made public on the Internet - in the course of that very week in fact, as is the usual Commission practice.

There has accordingly been no failure in publishing the minutes.

I am grateful to the Commissioner for his reply although I have to say that five months is a long time to wait for minutes.

What I say now is no reflection at all on the Commissioner himself, but I hope that he would accept with me that science must inform our decisions on risk and how to manage it.

In this case the science was less than adequate.

It was not validated by peer review and so on.

So when it came to the Science Committee and the chairman's views it was significant that his advice - in his words - did not justify a banning action.

The resulting ban on other phthalates had nothing whatsoever to do with children's toys or teething rings.

This exercise brought into some disrepute the precautionary principle.

That principle only holds good if the decisions are scientifically irreproachable.

It was not a happy experience and I hope the Commission would agree that both the Commission and Parliament have a lot to learn from this experience.

I fully agree with the honourable Member when he says that science must inform our decisions and that is what happened in this instance.

The relevant committee produced its report, as it is required to do in its area of responsibility which is of course risk assessment.

That information was passed on to the Commission, since it is one of the EU institutions responsible for risk management.

The Commission took the view, having regard to the advice contained in the documents sent by the relevant committee, that phthalates or toys designed to be placed in the mouth posed an immediate and significant risk to babies under the age of three.

The Commission made a clear assessment of this issue.

I submitted emergency proposals to the Commission as I am entitled to do under the General Product Safety Directive and my colleagues agreed that this was the appropriate to action to take in the circumstances.

My colleague, Commissioner Liikanen, has adopted a more long-term approach to the whole issue of phthalates and placticisers in toys and so on.

I wish to say once again that I agree that science must inform our decisions, and that, in my view, is what happened in this instance.

As the author is not present, Question No 43 lapses.

Subject: Water needs in the Middle East The constantly increasing demand for water in the Middle East is set to play a significant part in relation to the outlook for cooperation and understanding among the peoples of the region.

After a three-year break, the Steering Committee of the Multilateral Working Group on Water Resources (MWGWR) for the region began work again in 1999 and adopted specific programmes on the saving and use of water resources in the Middle East, with EU funding.

The issue of water in the Middle East was also discussed in the context of the EU-Israel Association Agreement, and the Israeli side has also raised the subject of further funding for such programmes.

What policy will the Commission pursue on this matter, with a view to promoting cooperation among the peoples of the region and averting conflicts arising from water needs?

Water will be a crucial issue for the Middle East in the coming decades.

The region has the lowest per capita availability of water anywhere in the world and it is steadily decreasing.

Water is indeed one of the main issues of the Middle East peace process, not only in the negotiations between Israel and the Palestinians but also between Israel and Syria.

The Commission's policy focuses on the various dimensions of the water question in the Middle East, the security as well as the economic, environmental and social dimensions.

Just and comprehensive water agreements between Israel and its neighbours, sustained by effective regional cooperation, are necessary for lasting peace in the region.

The Commission is an active participant in, and a main donor to, the multilateral water working group of the MEPP.

As a concrete contribution we have committed another EUR 4 million in 1999 for the completion of the regional water data banks.

We also promote the concept of a regional cooperation structure.

The Council's special taskforce on water in the Middle East has met with the Israeli, Jordanian and the Palestinian water commissioners and is actively coordinating EU water policy.

The Commission's policy aims at helping the region to achieve a sustainable management of the scarce water resources in combination with assistance to explore new resources.

Current water management and consumption in the Middle East cannot be sustained.

Estimates suggest that in the overall Mediterranean region agriculture absorbs over two thirds of total national water consumption, while accounting for only one third of GNP and labour.

This discrepancy is even sharper in the Middle East.

Therefore assisting reform of domestic water policies in the countries of the Middle East is a priority.

Indeed the Euro-Mediterranean Foreign Ministers Conference in Stuttgart in 1999 decided to make water a priority for the partnership.

As a first result the EUR 40 million action plan adopted by the Euro-Mediterranean ministerial conference on local water management in Turin in October 1999 would provide a further opportunity for cooperation in this sector.

A call for proposals will be published soon.

Thank you, Commissioner, for your answer.

In addition to highlighting the seriousness of the problem and its effect on the Middle East peace process, my question was aimed at regarding the lack of water resources as a serious political issue.

We all talk about the impending crises over water shortages.

Commissioner, what initiatives are you going to take to formulate rules of international law in the management of water resources so as to eliminate any hotbeds of local and regional political antagonism, seeds of crises and a peculiar type of imperialism?

Your answer to the Israel - Syria question should go somewhat beyond; to the Tigris and to the Euphrates, to Turkey and to Syria and elsewhere.

I believe that rules of international law must be established to manage water resources. These rules must contain clear conditions for all the countries involved, through which rivers that cross more than one country flow.

This must also apply to lakes that belong to more than one country.

The Commission is supporting crucial water projects in the Palestinian authority and in Jordan through MEDA.

The most recent example is Community support of EUR 5 million in grants for the project management of the Greater Amman water sector improvement programme, plus a substantial loan from the European Investment Bank.

Apart from the support we give to the multilateral water working group, I can mention the Euro-Mediterranean water information system three-year action programme.

The European Commission contributed EUR 1.2 million towards its implementation.

The Euro-Mediterranean conference on water management in Marseilles on 25 and 26 of November 1996 was organised on the initiative of the European Commission and the French Government, with the support of the city of Marseilles.

The International Office for Water took charge of the secretariat.

So the Commission is constantly involved in this project, has been for some time and continues to be.

I agree that it is a matter for concern that rules on the transport of animals are not being sufficiently enforced in certain areas.

While Member States are responsible for the day-to-day enforcement of Community legislation, the Food and Veterinary Office of my Directorate-General undertakes specific control and inspection missions to check that Member States apply Community legislation in an effective and a uniform manner.

These checks have revealed certain shortcomings in the compliance of some Member States with the Community legislation. As a result, infringement proceedings based on Article 226 of the Treaty have been opened against certain Member States and others are under evaluation.

I will shortly present a report to the Council and the European Parliament on the implementation in the Member States of the Community legislation on the protection of animals during the last quarter of this year.

The report will show that Member States currently have difficulties in fully implementing Community legislation.

As the conclusion to the report, I intend to present proposals to improve the transport of animals, address the difficulties I have referred to, ensure inspection by the FVO and provide for infringement proceedings if appropriate.

As soon as possible, several basic issues of the directive should be evaluated on a scientific basis, notably data concerning travelling times, stress related to loading and unloading operations and loading densities.

In this framework, measures to encourage the slaughter of animals closer to the places where they are raised also merit examination.

I conclude by assuring you that animal welfare is very high on the agenda of the Commission.

I look forward to further discussion when I present the report on transport in the next few weeks.

Mr President, Commissioner, thank you for your reply, but I would like to say very briefly that, now, as the EU is enlarging to the east in accordance with a very tight timetable, and they have been transporting horses from the Baltic countries, among others, into the EU area on journeys of up to a hundred hours long, I think it is quite odd that at the same time we are calling on applicant countries to adhere very closely to the guidelines and legal provisions.

In our own territory, however, we allow such violations that - as has been seen in public - are simply inhumane, considering we are supposed to be a civilised western Europe.

I would like to highlight this and ask what sort of timetable is now in place for real action, taking into account the fact that we have to put our own house in order before new Member States join the EU?

Although I cannot give you a specific timetable, I do assure you that infringement proceedings have already been opened and others are now being evaluated.

The situation is under constant review, I have had a number of discussions with the Director-General of my DG, who is an expert on transport, and I am drawing on his expertise.

You also draw attention to our relationship with the applicant countries.

The Commission believes that the most effective way to achieve a widespread improvement in animal welfare standards is to work towards an international consensus.

The long-distance transport of horses has been discussed with heads of veterinary services in the central and east European countries currently negotiating accession to the Union.

A protocol of action to improve the protection of the horses and donkeys transported over long distances was agreed in April.

The first results of the implementation of the protocol will be discussed at a specific meeting with all the competent authorities of the accession countries at the end of September this year.

So I can give an assurance that this issue is high on the list of priorities in my service and we will be monitoring it closely and pursuing it actively.

Mr President, it would be interesting to know if the Commission is intending to have research carried out in this field, based on the best practice model.

Are you intending to create incentives, with a view to ensuring that live transport is carried out in such a way that is actually tolerable for the animals concerned?

I am satisfied from the advice that I get from my service and the other information that is made available to me that any measures that are necessary are being taken.

On that basis, the directive is being amended to improve the protection of animals during transport, providing in particular for additional measures to protect the horses with a mandatory unloading and fixed resting period for commercial consignments of horses passing through a border inspection post of the Union.

I should like to ask a related question regarding the banning of Staffordshire terriers in Germany under their dangerous dogs law.

Many of my constituents in the United Kingdom are writing to protest against this German law banning certain breeds of dogs which appear to pose no threat to public safety.

Given the pets' passport project at European level and a right for pets now to move freely within the European Union as a result, does the Commission have any legal competence to intervene and protect animal welfare and, in particular, these domestic pets in Germany, of which there will be a needless slaughter potentially and possibly even extinction of a fine breed of British dogs?

Commissioner, in accordance with the Rules of Procedure, this is not a supplementary question.

We could invite Mr Tannock to ask this question during the next part-session, but if you wish to reply to it, you may do so.

As a matter of courtesy to the honourable Member I would say that had you given me notice of this question I would probably have been in a better position to give you a comprehensive answer to it.

I am the Commissioner responsible for animal welfare.

There is a competence to deal with these issues relating to animal welfare.

If such issues are brought to my attention and come within the relevant directive, then action can be taken.

The only practical suggestion that I can make to you is that if you would like to write to me and give me specific details of the issue that you have raised I will have my services examine it and deal with it.

Mr Tannock, you may express your opinion in writing on a bilateral basis or you may do it in public in accordance with the Rules of Procedure, and the Commissioner will reply.

Thank you very much, Mr Byrne, for your cooperation with Parliament this afternoon.

Subject: Communication on children's rights Following the Commission's statement to Parliament to mark the tenth anniversary of the Convention on the Rights of the Child in November 1999 when it indicated that it would be publishing a Communication on children's rights, can the Commission now give Parliament a definite timetable for the publication of the Communication?

Given that the United Nations General Assembly's Special Session (UNGASS) on children will take place in September 2000, what is the Commission's plan for coordinating EU and Member State input to the Special Session?

Is the Commission prepared to acknowledge that, in view of the special session, a Communication on children's rights is of the utmost importance?

I would refer the honourable Member to the letter dated 20 June which she and a number of her colleagues received from President Prodi on this very subject.

In his letter the President made absolutely clear the Commission's commitment to all measures which safeguard children's rights and mention a number of areas both external and internal where the Commission was active on these highly important matters.

However, the President also sought to situate the Commission's action in these areas, as in others, in the context of the Treaties' revision.

He acknowledged that competence for action concerning children remains primarily with the Member States given the lack of a clear legal basis in the Treaty for the Community to safeguard children's rights in terms that go beyond the existing framework.

In the current framework the European Commission has already undertaken a considerable number of initiatives to protect children's rights as in the Daphne and Stop programmes which fall under my competence.

The Commission is also pursuing action in the social and educational field with a view to improving the situation of children.

Further evidence of the importance we attach to this subject can be found in the fact that it was the Commission which undertook the initiative to include a specific article on children's rights into the charter of fundamental rights.

The draft article concerning the protection of children incorporates the main principles of the New York Convention as the right to such protection and care as is necessary for their well-being and consideration.

We will continue to insist that the charter foresees the prohibition of the employment of children.

In his letter the President also expressed the view that it could indeed be useful for the Commission to evaluate if all Member States have pursued the content of UN Convention on the rights of the child.

Although all the Member States have ratified the Convention, its implementation varies widely and the views of the Member States on how to best protect children's rights diverge to a considerable extent.

It is my conviction that such an evaluation might represent a useful contribution for the participation of the Union in the special session of the United Nations general assembly in September 2001.

The Commission believes that its ongoing actions in favour of children, its active advocacy for an appropriate inclusion in the charter of fundamental rights and its support for this idea of having an evaluation as described represents evidence of its commitment to this important subject.

As you know, I am a great admirer of yours and I am sure that you were as uncomfortable repeating your answer today as I was hearing it.

I know of your own personal commitment but actually you have not given me any clear indication of what the Commission is actually going to do in the UN conference which is taking place in a couple of weeks time.

Having listened to the extent of plans that the Commission has in relation to animal welfare, I can only wish that they had similar plans in relation to the welfare of children.

Accepting the legal limits within which you have to work, could you in fact give me any indication that anybody from the Commission for example is going to be present at this United Nations conference in September?

In what context and are they proposing to make any input into the conference?

As a matter of fact, we are both talking about the same thing, which is the United Nations Special Meeting of the General Assembly on Children's Rights in September 2001 next year.

Since we are talking about that my approach is that we should have a study to evaluate how the United Nations Convention on Children's Rights has been implemented in our Member States.

This study should be completed in time to be used as basis for the Union's participation in the United Nations Special General Assembly next year.

I am sure that we can count on the support of the incoming Swedish Presidency in the first six months of next year.

It has already made it clear, that it will be making children's rights a top priority.

So I think I have explained what action we propose to take and when we propose to take it.

Mr President, does the Commissioner agree with me that there seems to be a new and growing abuse of children which is within the competence of the European Union?

Children are being used by mothers from eastern and central Europe on the streets of our cities for begging.

They are mostly coming into the Union as refugees.

Either they should be taken into care or the begging is unjustified because they should be receiving social benefits from the state.

This is something perhaps which should be added to the list of child abuse which we as a Community ought to be looking into very carefully.

I share the concern of the honourable Member in the sense that begging is an activity where children are forced, sometimes by their own family, to act against their dignity.

As you know, the responsibility for protecting the dignity of children falls, above all, within the competence of the Member States.

Nevertheless we are now launching a debate on a specific legislative initiative to define the list of crimes against children.

I will consider your suggestions with an open mind.

Subject: Absence of passport controls in the Schengen area In the Commission's view, how has the absence of passport controls under the Schengen Agreement worked during the European football championship in the light of the mass arrests made in Brussels and Charleroi?

First of all, it should be pointed out that many of those involved in the incidents that occurred in Brussels and Charleroi, come from one of the European Union' s Member States, the United Kingdom, which is not a member of the Schengen area.

These are therefore people who, when travelling to see football matches at Euro 2000, were subject to checks carried out at the external borders of the Schengen area.

It should also be borne in mind that for the duration of Euro 2000, the Belgian and Dutch Governments made use of a safeguard clause in Article 2(2) of the Schengen Agreement, which lays down that, when public order or national security are threatened - and in my view, the fear generated by these cases of 'hooliganism' certainly meets these criteria - a Member State may decide that, for a limited period, national border controls, adapted specially for the situation, can be implemented, even at internal borders within the Schengen area.

The Belgian and Dutch Governments adhered to the prior consultation procedure laid down by the Schengen Agreement.

The controls that are envisaged therein were temporarily reintroduced at internal borders, but this was not carried out in a systematic way.

These were targeted checks, specifically based on information supplied by the Member States in the framework of police cooperation, concerning supporters likely to pose a threat to public order.

Establishing controls at the external borders and, temporarily, at the internal borders of the Schengen area is not the same as closing a border or systematically turning away people who wish to enter the territory in order to attend a football match.

In accordance with the Treaty establishing the European Community, the Union' s citizens have the right to move freely through the territory of Member States. Restrictions may be imposed, however, for reasons of public order and in individual cases only, i.e. when the person concerned represents a genuine and sufficiently serious threat to society' s fundamental wellbeing.

This is why I say that Community law does not allow for a collective restriction to be imposed.

Having the nationality of a given Member State and wanting to attend a football match are not sufficient grounds for being turned back at the border.

This is why an assessment of the measures for cooperation between the authorities of the Member States concerned is already underway and why this joint exercise aims to learn the lessons of Euro 2000, in order to see how police and judicial cooperation can in the future be improved in terms of combating hooliganism.

I should like to thank Commissioner Vitorino for his answer.

I supported Portugal as well as I could there at King Baudouin' s Stadium in Brussels, but France won in the end in a match in which it has to be said that France had the better team.

I was gunning for Portugal for as long as I possibly could, though.

As I say, thank you for your answer, but I should still like to ask a follow-up question.

A lot of people find it appalling that, here in Europe, there are riots, hooliganism, aggressive language and violence such as are unknown in connection with sporting events in, for example, the United States.

I know that Great Britain is not a signatory to the Schengen Agreement, but that day may come.

Do you think that the measures we are now taking are adequate, and what lessons can be drawn for the future?

Perhaps next time, Portugal will also be in the final.

I do not consider there to be any link, whether direct or indirect, between Portugal' s defeat and the outbreaks of hooliganism.

It is a fact of the game that sometimes luck is not on your side.

In any event, Portugal will be hosting Euro 2004, and that is why, for Euro 2000, the Commission supported several practical initiatives for police cooperation in order to try out new methods of cooperation and to learn lessons from them.

We are now in the process of assessing those measures.

As soon as the report is available, it will be discussed and legislative measures will be adopted at European level, which is our objective - to adopt measures at European level that are capable of supporting this police cooperation in the fight against hooliganism.

I am currently awaiting this report.

As soon as it is ready, it will certainly be made public and the debate on what initiatives need to be taken will begin.

I have a follow-up question also concerning the Schengen Agreement and exemption from the requirement to carry a passport.

As the Commissioner surely knows, the Nordic countries are to become signatories of the Schengen Agreement in March of next year.

It has emerged that, in future too, Swedish citizens who are to travel within the Schengen area will have to carry their Swedish passports with them because Swedish ID documents do not state the country of which they are citizens, as required under the Schengen Agreement.

What was promised as a union with exemption from the requirement to carry passports still makes the latter compulsory for Swedish citizens.

I wonder if the Commissioner can confirm that, once Sweden has entered into the Schengen Agreement, the latter' s regulations will, in the future too, require Swedes to have their passports with them when they travel to other countries within the Schengen area.

What are your views on this?

Mr Sjöstedt, I would say that this matter should be seen from a different angle: that of creating common standards for travel documents, whether they are passports or identity cards.

That these common standards should exist is laid down in the Treaty, and the Commission has a proposal at an advanced stage of preparation for the adoption of common standards for the instruments in question.

I cannot give you a fixed timetable, that is, I cannot guarantee that these documents will be adopted before the expected date for the integration of the Nordic Passport Union into the Schengen free movement area.

What I can guarantee is that we are working hard at formulating uniform standard models of documents that will solve problems such as the one the honourable Member has just indicated.

Question No 48 will be replied to in writing.

Subject: European police academy What stage has been reached in the plans for a European police academy, with regard to virtual networks linking existing bodies and the creation of an actual academy at a particular location?

The European Council of Tampere of October 1999 called for the establishment of a European police college for the training of senior law enforcement officials which should start as a network of existing national training institutes.

Considerable progress has been achieved so far.

The Portuguese Presidency submitted a draft Council regulation at the end of June 2000.

The French Presidency aims at adding a Council decision adopted by the end of this year.

This would make it possible to meet the deadline of having the European police college in place by 2001, as mentioned in the Commission's scoreboard on justice and home affairs.

A number of Member States are in favour of creating the European police college as a permanent network of national training institutes.

Other Member States regard the current presidency proposal for a network as a temporary stage on the road to an institution at a fixed location.

The Commission has, from the beginning, insisted that the European police college will become a fixed institution after having functioned as a network for an initial period in line with the Tampere conclusion. This has led to the draft regulation now containing the following approach.

From January 2001 the European police college is set up as a network of national training institutes, a virtual academy.

It will function in this form for three years.

After that period a decision will be taken on the form in which to continue with the European police college.

The Commission continues to take the position, however, that the draft regulation should contain a clear obligation for the European police college to become a fixed institution after having functioned for a few years as a network.

Mr President, I would like to thank the Commissioner for his precise answer and substantial input in this matter.

In the meantime, I have been appointed rapporteur for the subject and I am sure that we will work closely together with a view to moving matters on.

But the question I have is this: is the Commission still planning to conduct a study into the feasibility of making this college a fixed institution?

Because as you know, the European Parliament has called for this to be a fixed institution and not a virtual academy.

Are you proposing to conduct a study on the feasibility aspect?

You can rely on receiving our full backing for this.

There is a first study on feasibility by the General Secretariat of the Council which was the basis of this current draft resolution of the Council.

But we intend to promote our own initiative in the area just to make sure that we will have all the necessary information to take a further step ahead as soon as possible.

It is urgent to have that second step in order to make the European police college a fixed institution.

The Commission will not drop that idea.

Thank you very much, Mr Vitorino, for your replies this afternoon.

Question No 50 will be replied to in writing.

Subject: Social security in a stronger European economy One of the European Union' s main tasks in the 21st century will doubtless be to ensure that due importance is attached to the social dimension by comparison with the economic and political dimension.

Common social policy objectives must be defined and attained in order to ensure that the process of increasing integration and the forthcoming enlargement is supported by the European public.

Can the Commission say whether it will take action with a view to the increased harmonisation of social security systems, which still differ widely, and the harmonisation of professional qualifications in all areas?

Is it correct to assume that the EU' s extremely sparse powers in the fields of social policy and employment will be expanded in the future?

Mr President, the two basic issues are whether we intend to harmonise social policy and whether the power of the Commission will be extended to cover social policy issues.

I will start with the Lisbon Council resolution, which made clear reference to the need to combine the policies of competitiveness and social cohesion, the need to update the social model, to invest in people and to combat social exclusion.

Under the Treaties, it is naturally impossible for the Commission to put forward policy on issues relating to social policy But we feel that, in the wake of Lisbon, there is agreement within the Council, and the Council has unanimously decided to cooperate in the field of social policy and to extend the method of open cooperation to issues such as social exclusion and social protection.

I am bound to say that the agenda that was tabled in June, in relation to which there was special cooperation with Parliament and with the rapporteur of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs, Mrs Van Lancker, accurately describes the measures and actions relating to social policy under the Treaty, but it also categorically states that the harmonisation of social polices is not on the cards.

Harmonisation is deemed to be impossible.

But our objectives can be achieved using methods such as social dialogue, the Structural Funds, especially the European Social Fund, which has a large budget, mainstreaming, political analysis, research and, finally, legislation.

In July 1999, the Commission presented a communication entitled 'A Concerted Strategy for Modernising Social Protection' .

This put forward a two-pronged approach.

The first is to combat social exclusion and the second concerns future cooperation on issues of social protection and pension systems.

To achieve these goals, the Commission is giving priority to the enactment and implementation of social indicators, which are necessary to assess polices, to specify objectives relating to poverty and culture, which will be discussed during the course of the French Presidency, and to reach agreement on axes concerning the viability of pensions.

Commissioner, thank you very much for providing these clarifications.

Allow me to express the wish that is dearest to my heart in the form of an additional question: what special measures will the Commission endeavour to take in the future, with a view to working towards the harmonisation of the social security systems, professional qualifications and the social dimension in all areas?

It was extremely interesting to hear how matters stand in this respect, and to learn that the trend is more positive than it has been hitherto.

However, I believe we must convince the people of the European Union that freedom of establishment is not a hollow expression which ultimately applies in full to tourists, rather, they must understand that for people who work, or have worked - firstly in terms of the insurance system and then in terms of the pensions system - freedom of establishment is a reality, and not a hollow expression.

I believe we must join forces to this end, in order to try and persuade the Council to frame policy in this area that is more transparent, progressive and forward-looking.

Mr President, I would agree with the general approach taken by the honourable Member, but I would like to remind him of the margin for manoeuvre of these policies at a European level, especially since they are national policies. Secondly, according to our studies, there are such major discrepancies in the structure and organisation of pension and social security systems that it is impossible to talk about harmonising them.

Thirdly, regarding the rights of workers as they move from one country to another, there are already two regulations in existence.

In July, the Council of Employment Ministers held an in-depth debate on changing the regulations for workers living in one country and working in another. But I must emphasise that these systems are so different that the difficulties in bringing about the harmonisation you propose are virtually insurmountable.

Mr President, Commissioner, the harmonisation of social security systems would require harmonisation of the financing of social security, or, in practice, the harmonisation of taxation, not just with regard to its technical framework, but also its levels of taxation.

We all know that consensus has still not been reached on this as far as policy is concerned, and that that is not going to come about quickly.

For that reason I believe that a policy like this of taking small steps at a time is quite in order in this matter, and I would also ask how one aspect of this one-step-at-a-time policy is going, in other words the directive on a single market for additional pensions.

The directive was supposed to have come from the Commission for a reading in the European Parliament in July, and now we have heard that it is probably being postponed until September.

It may also be that it will not get discussed throughout the whole of the French presidential term.

Could you give an update on this directive on a single market for additional pensions?

Mr President, I would like to say that this directive, which is being prepared in collaboration with other departments and other Commissioners, such as the Commissioner for the Internal Market and Competition, is still being developed. I will be able to give you a more complete text at a future sitting.

We are currently at the debating stage.

Subject: European social non-governmental organisations The role of European social NGOs as an important link between Europe' s citizens and the Commission, Parliament and Council is increasingly recognised in areas such as social policy, trade, development and the environment.

What plans does the Commission have to propose a legal basis for civil dialogue between the EU' s institutions and organised civil society?

It is clear that, during the preparation of the White Paper on a new form of government within Europe entitled 'Spreading Democracy within Europe' , one of the basic issues is the role of civil society in the new forms of democracy that will be operating in Europe and in all Member States.

The level of cooperation and the forms of collaboration between the Commission and NGOs are of particular concern to all Ministers without portfolio whose programmes are implemented through NGOs and who have, I would say, a special burden to bear in the social field.

As you know, a dialogue is taking place today based on the working document submitted by the Commission on the Commission and NGOs and the construction of a stronger partnership.

This dialogue aims to enable us to come up with new proposals on issues such as the representativeness of these organisations and issues of a procedural nature such as their funding and operation.

Within the framework of this dialogue, on 30 March 2000 I met members of the platform of European NGOs and a dialogue took place, which focused on two categories of issues.

The first category covered the proposals they put forward, which were invaluable for the social agenda. The second focused on issues concerning the representativeness and the organisation of NGOs in the social arena at a European level, the financial problems they are faced with and the special procedural difficulties they have in obtaining funds.

Related issues included the quality and the specifications of the services they offer. I am bound to say that their contribution to this dialogue was extremely significant.

Just a short time ago, in June, a meeting took place between the official group of the Secretariat-General and the platforms of European social and developmental NGOs, and we believe this dialogue will soon come to an end. After assessing the current level of cooperation and the institutional framework within which the NGOs operate, the Commission will be in a position to put forward a new, integrated proposal, consolidating their statutory role and their ability to function.

Thank you, Commissioner and I certainly agree with the substance, particularly of the early part of your answer.

I welcome the fact that NGOs are funded through the exclusion and anti-discrimination action programmes.

But I have one specific question: why are only eight or nine NGOs, as far as my information is concerned, funded through these two lines?

Secondly, NGOs feel that they are being unfairly denied access to core funding.

My information is that they are being pushed into project funding and 18 environmental NGOs, for instance, are receiving from the Commission funding towards their running costs.

It occurs to me that two years after the 1998 budget freeze, it might be time now for the Commission to respond to what are very clear needs from the European-based social NGOs for core funding to cover their running costs.

As you know, concerning particularly social issues and NGOs, there were some rules concerning the size, the representativeness and the results of these NGOs.

We know that in this social field there is a huge number of NGOs and it is very difficult for the Commission DG to know with which of them they can cooperate.

Sometimes there is confusion at national level.

So we have decided to establish the criteria and to agree with NGOs the criteria on the basis of which we can select the NGOs we can work with.

This is why we must solve the problem of the issue of representativeness, and the issue of the network to be established at European level.

According to statistics provided by Eurostat, the unemployment rate in Greece in 1998 was 10.7%, whilst the European average during the same period was 9.9%.

For the moment, Eurostat does not have statistics on Greece for 1999 and forecasts for 1999 were 10.4%.

It is clear therefore that there are no appropriate statistics recording fluctuations in employment, which makes it difficult to assess the policies and measures being implemented. The new action plan for employment and the new measures announced by the Greek government based on this new action plan for employment are a move in the right direction.

There are significant undertakings concerning, firstly, the organisation and coordination of statistical services in Greece with those in other European countries and of Eurostat. It is clear that, without a statistical base, it is difficult for us to put in place specific policies.

Secondly, there is an undertaking to speed up the reorganisation of public employment and statistical services. This reorganisation will be completed by the end of 2001.

The Commission does not have any information on the number of unemployed who have found work through the various employment programmes in Greece. That is why there is also an undertaking to continuously assess the existing training programmes, together with the Commission, to ensure that those who pass through these programmes are adequately monitored.

I would just like to say that the tabling of your question coincided with the announcement of recommendations for all Member States.

The most fundamental recommendations concerning Greece are, firstly, to make changes to the statistics, the indicators, the studies and the employment services. Secondly, tax disincentives and other disincentives militating against the provision of community subsidies for entering the labour market will be examined in detail.

Thirdly, training and the participation of social partners in this process will be promoted.

Fourthly, business enterprise will be encouraged and procedures to create new companies will be simplified.

Finally, cooperation between social partners will be encouraged and the organisation of labour relations will be brought up to date, at the same time guaranteeing flexibility and security.

I have more or less the same statistics as you. Indeed, I am this very moment holding in my hands the latest Eurostat report of 5 September 2000.

The figures are more or less as you gave them.

What I would really like to highlight is the following: for many years now, Commissioner, long before you were appointed to your post, I have been trying to find out - even a rough estimate will do - how many people have found work as a result of these employment actions, and I still have not succeeded.

What prospects do we have of finding out at some point, albeit from one action if not more generally?

Secondly, you said we would have the results by the end of 2001.

But I think it is totally unacceptable that there can be a debate using these figures, which have been collated throughout the European Union, month by month, category by category, and only the column referring to Greece is empty.

I just wonder what we can discuss on this basis.

I apologise for having to say this, but I have run out of patience.

Greece is going through a period of transition which, I would say, equates with the first period of the policies concerning its accession to EMU.

It is clear that certain areas that have been mentioned have suffered delays in relation to other countries.

I agree with you that especially the part about statistics is extremely important, not only for the assessment but also for the implementation of policies. The undertaking in the employment action plan is a clear undertaking.

The recommendations make specific reference to this. The Employment Guidelines for 2000 give priority to the action plan.

It is one of the issues to which the Greek Government has made a commitment. I hope that this time next year we will be in a better position.

Madam President, personally I like you, but I have to say that I do not like the Greek Government, especially concerning its stance on employment. The results speak for themselves.

And I think that what you have said thus far also speaks for itself.

How can anybody shape employment policy when they do not know what employment is, when they do not know how many people have found work thanks to training programmes?

I want to focus on one thing. I want to ask you a specific question so as not to have a long discussion about this.

Specifically on training, what do you believe and what do you propose asking the Greek Government to change in the 2000-2006 period by comparison with the previous period, during which we all have the impression that things were not going well, despite the fact that the statistics were not accurate?

The information that does exist even shows that things are getting worse.

So what will change in the 2000-2006 period?

Before I start, I would like to point out that, for historical and political reasons, every country has a different starting point and that, in the framework of the Third Community Support Framework, the next five years will be a great opportunity for all countries to assess strategies and funds alike.

With specific regard to training, to which you made reference, as you know, in Greece there is the EKEPIS [National Certification Centre for Vocational Training], a certification centre set up with the approval of the Council, which has had very satisfactory results and has made some positive assessments. Over the next period it will complete its certification procedures.

In other words, it will certify trainers and programmes, which has hitherto not been carried out.

Secondly, training must be geared towards the choices made by a country in a service and information society. In other words, the fields covered by training must be linked to the choices made by the country.

Thirdly, the establishment of centres to promote employment must be completed.

So far, 24 have been established.

We must have at least 100, according to the plan that was drawn up at national level.

These centres must distance themselves from the classical provision of services for the unemployed and must come into line with the models that we already have in the European Union. These models relate to the individualised provision of services for the unemployed.

And of course the system of computerised employment cards must be implemented for monitoring to be successful.

The action plan for employment for 2000 contains these undertakings.

The funding is available for these programmes and my opinion is that, during the 2000-2006 period, training programmes must be geared towards the specific points I have mentioned.

As the author is not present, Question No 54 lapses.

Questions Nos 55, 56 and 57 will be replied to in writing.

Subject: Delay in issuing a 'certificate of specific character for foodstuffs' In 1994, after a long process of preparation, research and discussion in the Italian sector concerned, an application was drawn up in respect of whole virgin honey in accordance with Regulation 2082/1992/EC.

The file, accompanied by a request for a `certificate of specific character´, was submitted by the whole virgin honey association and forwarded to the Commission by the Italian Ministry for the Environment on 8 September 1995.

It was not until August 1999 that the Commission's approval was obtained, and then only thanks to various approaches by the Italian Government and the Minister, Mr De Castro, in particular.

Since then, however, the association in question has heard nothing more.

In view of the fact that eleven months have gone by since the Commission expressed its favourable opinion, and the regulation in question lays down specific time limits for issuing the certificate, could the Commission explain the problems that have prevented the official award of the certificate and what action it intends to take to resolve them?

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, unfortunately, the registration application in respect of whole virgin honey, which is at issue here, is not in accordance with the requirements of the legal provisions currently in force in the Community.

In particular, the application of this designation is contrary to 1974 Directive 409, which is presently in force.

Therefore, it has not been possible to date, to grant the Italian application for protection by means of a 'certificate of specific character' within the meaning of Regulation 2082.

However, as you are aware, there is a proposal to amend this directive.

As soon as the Council and Parliament have amended the directive, and a designation of this kind is permissible, it will at last be possible to bring the assessment of the application for the aforesaid honey to a successful conclusion.

I am very grateful for your precision, Commissioner but I have to say that I am not satisfied.

If I am not mistaken, as I said in my question, the Commission expressed a favourable opinion.

I am aware that, since then, the common position on the directive has been redefined and that Parliament is expecting to hold a debate on the subject.

However, it would appear that the reference to regulation 2082/90 may be a departure from the directive and that the directive and the regulation could be considered to be separate channels.

I would therefore ask you to clarify this point, or I will not be a bearer of good news for the Italian farmers.

Mr President, Mr Sacconi, that is easy enough to explain.

We cannot introduce protection of origin for a product, when to do so would be contrary to Community law provisions.

Therefore, it is absolutely essential for this amended Community regulation to come into force first, because this will rule out any conflict.

It will then no longer be a problem for us to grant the protection sought by the Italian Government, or the region concerned.

Subject: EU funding to Coillte According to a European Court of Justice ruling of August 1999, Coillte has illegitimately received EU loss of income forestry grants under forestry funding Regulation 2080/92 amounting to £6.5 million from 1993 to 1999.

The European Court ruled that as Coillte, the Irish semi-state company responsible for forestry development, was a 'public entity' , it was not entitled to such payments.

In light of this judgment, is it the view of the Commission that Coillte is not entitled to further payments of £30.5 million of funds as part of the next round of forestry funding under Regulation 2080/92?

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, Mrs Mckenna' s question boils down to whether Coillte is entitled to receive co-financed grants from the agricultural fund, specifically the guarantee section, in order to offset loss of income in forestry developments, under Regulation 2080/92.

I would like to point out that there has been no judgement from the Court of Justice on this specific issue.

However, it is true that the Commission classifies this company called Coillte as a state enterprise, because it is owned by the Irish State.

It is therefore not entitled to loss of income grants.

According to Article 2, paragraph 2, letter b of the Regulation on Forestry, these grants are reserved for farmers and other natural or legal persons under private law.

The Commission will therefore refuse to co-finance grants paid out, backdated to 1 August 1996.

A total of some EUR 4.8 million was paid out in 1997 and 1998.

The Irish Government contested this financial rectification in so-called mediation negotiations.

The arbitration body is still working on this and has not resolved the issue conclusively as yet.

The Commission has taken the stance during these negotiations that, to date the Irish Government has failed to provide any evidence that Coillte should be classified as a private company.

The Commission is unable either to confirm the sum of GBP 6.5 million quoted by Mrs Mckenna, or that of 30.5 million, which obviously relates to future payments.

However, the Commission will adopt the same stance it has adopted to date with any future applications.

I am very glad to hear the Commission's reply because the funding that Coillte has was set up by the state, it was the state that set Coillte up.

It is a semi-state company and it is responsible for forestry development.

Now it actually used the money it was getting from these interest payments on land that they were purchasing.

What is interesting as well as that the chairman, Ray MacSharry is a former European Commissioner for Agriculture and he is still refusing to acknowledge the fact that Coillte is a public entity and that it is not entitled to such payments.

At a recent meeting with Coillte I was told that the government is gong to challenge this decision.

I believe it is actually a waste of taxpayers' money to challenge it because I think it is quite clear to anybody with an ounce of common sense that they are not entitled to this money.

What is really devastating is that they have actually prevented the people who should have got the money from rural depopulation for ensuring that people who did lose income actually got the money and I would like to see the Commission ensure that Coillte get no more money because they were not entitled to it in the first place and that they have to pay it back.

They are now saying that the state will have to pay it back which is not acceptable either.

Mr President, there is really nothing I can add to that.

What Mrs McKenna has just had to say describes and elucidates precisely the Commission' s position.

There can be no question of a State as an entity, and in this case, as the 100% owner of a company, being a drawer of income, and therefore it cannot suffer loss of income either.

It is therefore evident that this money must be paid back, and that this company must not receive any fresh funding.

In addition, I would point out that this mediation procedure is not equivalent to an arbitration procedure, instead it merely represents the opinion of an institution that was set up by the Community.

However, the findings are not binding on the Commission, as we have already mentioned on more than one occasion here in Parliament.

On the other hand, each party is, of course, at liberty to go to the European Court of Justice, but we have no authority to decide on the matter.

As the author is not present, Question No 60 lapses.

Subject: Cost of enlargement and Mediterranean agriculture In view of the forecasts and the most recent legislative proposals for Mediterranean agriculture covering products such as cotton, rice, fruit and vegetables, tomatoes, shell nuts and olive oil, which will have a highly adverse impact on employment and social progress in these poor areas of Europe, and bearing in mind the budgetary plans with a view to EU enlargement, will the Commission say how it intends to ensure that Mediterranean agriculture does not in fact end up footing the bill for future enlargement?

Commissioner, perhaps you could give me a clearer reply to the following question, which is extremely important for enlargement:

Does the Community legislation applicable to candidate countries from the moment they join, the so-called acquis communitaire, include, in your view, the aid and financial support of the CAP?

Mr President, Mrs Izquierdo Rojo, I assume that when you talk about support, you are referring primarily to the direct payments provided for in the market organisation, and which constitute a major theme in the enlargement debate.

All Member States will have to respect the same acquis communitaire in the long run.

Therefore, there can only be one common agricultural policy and not two different ones.

But you yourself know only too well - and this has been the case hitherto for any country acceding to the EU, be it Spain or Portugal, or any other State - that the accession treaty, which does in fact constitute a primary right, contains transitional arrangements, which of course allow for departure from the acquis in some cases.

That is, after all, the point of having transitional arrangements.

As such, it will not be possible to answer the question as to when the Member States-to-be will actually receive their full quota of direct payments - as provided for in the common market organisation - until the enlargement negotiations have been concluded.

After all, it is precisely this issue that the enlargement negotiations are focussing on.

Subject: Subsidies for growing tobacco Tobacco growing in the European Union is subsidised to the tune of millions of euros per year while at the same time over half a million EU citizens die each year of diseases caused by tobacco.

The subsidies paid for tobacco growing should be redirected so that they encourage current tobacco farmers to go over to growing healthier crops.

How does the Commission propose in future to amend the basis for the allocation of structural fund aid so that large-scale tobacco growing can be halted in the EU?

What does the Commission consider would be a realistic timetable for carrying out the necessary changes?

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, Mrs Matikainen-Kallström' s question covers old ground as I see it.

I would remind the House that the Commission presented Parliament and the Council with a report on the common market organisation of tobacco as early as 1996.

The report pointed out that this sector makes a decisive contribution to maintaining the viability of certain regions within the Community, some of which are highly disadvantaged, and where there are few alternatives.

In the light of an inquiry at the time into the social and economic consequences of abolishing Community subsidies for tobacco cultivation, the decision was taken not to go down this path.

However, this was also because there was evidence to show that subsidising tobacco cultivation has practically no effect on tobacco consumption, and thus on the risk to EU citizens ' health.

This led to radical reform of the tobacco sector in 1998.

The key aspects of this reform were as follows: firstly, there was an improvement in quality, in particular, tobacco growers switched over to low-nicotine and low-tar varieties.

Secondly, research activities have been stepped up, financed by the Community tobacco fund.

The appropriations for said fund were doubled.

One of the main objectives of this research is to investigate the possibility of switching from tobacco cultivation to alternative activities.

Thirdly, with a view to encouraging farmers to go over to other crops, the reform measures also made provision for a mechanism whereby quotas are repurchased from farmers who are willing to give up tobacco cultivation.

In this way, these farmers are offered money, as it were, in order to facilitate conversion to other crops.

The provisions laid down in the tobacco market organisation can also be supplemented within the framework of the support measures for rural development.

On a final note, I would just like to say that the Commission will of course assess the reform measures taken.

We will provide the European Parliament with a report on the functioning of the amended market organisation by 1 April 2002.

Mr President, Commissioner, I am grateful for your replies.

This is a question of redirecting aid in support of other products.

I have made these comments on many an occasion, as nothing rocks mankind so much as tobacco, which kills so many.

Regarding the analyses you refer to, I would like to know on what sort of objective analyses they are based, as I am concerned about the health of all of us and, similarly, the livelihoods of tobacco farmers.

We should be able to change their means of livelihood and keep them at that economic level where they can produce health products for all of us.

Mr President, Mrs Matikainen-Kallström, I am sorry that there was no interpretation at the beginning.

To be brief: naturally I would be only too pleased to send you the analysis that was carried out at the time.

The social implications, and the effect on income were also assessed during this analysis.

I will gladly make the documents you have requested available to you.

Is the Commissioner aware of research at the Scottish Crop Research Institute in Invergowrie near Dundee that shows that tobacco plants can be genetically modified to accept the implanting for multiplication of potential anti-cancer vaccines?

Would it not be desirable to redirect the European tobacco-growing industry towards such benign purposes and to further promote this type of research?

Mr President, Mr Purvis, I have to be quite honest with you, and tell you that I have not been informed about the results of this research; perhaps because it was conducted primarily for health reasons, and therefore falls within the remit of the Commissioner responsible for health.

But I am keen to acquaint myself with them.

Only, irrespective of whether these results are positive or less than positive, as I see it, it is imperative that we - and we must never forget this - convince smokers of their importance, with a view to encouraging them to buy cigarettes that meet these requirements.

It is not the tobacco growers' problem, because they will inevitably grow the kind of tobacco the market demands.

Perhaps the best all-round solution is to carry on as I have been doing for the past 15 years - I too was a smoker in the past - and not smoke at all. Then the problem will only exist on a very small scale.

Mr President, preventive health care is a major priority for everyone here in this House.

We know that tobacco growers in the Member States have different priorities.

I would therefore like to ask the Commission the following question, although I have always been, and still am, a non-smoker: does the Commission not think that if tobacco cultivation were to be completely discontinued within the European Union with immediate effect - as called for by a fair number of people - people would just carry on smoking regardless because tobacco products would be imported into the EU?

(DE) Mrs Schierhuber, when you look at the balance of trade in the tobacco sector, you notice that the vast majority of products - and especially tobacco - used in the manufacture of cigarettes, are already imported.

The only difference is that, we are trying, as it were, with the aid of the common market organisation, to produce some of the tobacco that people consume anyway, ourselves, so that we do not have to import everything.

In so doing, we are giving some families the opportunity to draw an income from this type of cultivation.

I am absolutely convinced that the health problem, which undoubtedly exists as a result of tobacco consumption, can only be brought under control if we alert consumers as to the effect smoking can have on their health.

There will be no decline in tobacco consumption until we have succeeded in driving this message home to consumers.

We are deluding ourselves if we think we can control the problem from the supply side.

In economic terms, the only way to achieve this is to alter patterns in demand.

Thank you very much, Mr Fischler, for your replies.

Questions Nos 63 to 109 will be replied to in writing.

That concludes Questions to the Commission.

(The sitting was suspended at 7.25 p.m. and resumed at 9.00 p.m.)

The next item is the report (A5-0214/00) by Mrs Lienemann, on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee on the Council directive establishing a framework for Community action in the field of water policy [C5-347/2000 - 1997/0067 (COS)].

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I believe that together we have produced a useful piece of work in this water framework directive.

We have produced a useful piece of work; it may be a collective compromise, but it is a compromise which incorporates stringent requirements, which I think will clear the way for a qualitative and quantitative leap in water management.

In the long term, our fellow European citizens must enjoy high quality water everywhere, whether surface or groundwater.

This compromise was made possible by active commitment, by the balance of power that the European Parliament was able to create, by the participation of all the groups, in particular the shadow rapporteurs who assisted me, and by Mr Provan, the chairman of our delegation in this difficult conciliation procedure.

I would, however, also like to thank the other participants who are, of course, the Commission, which had to play the role of intermediary and technical innovator, and did so extremely rigorously and effectively, the Commissioner and also all the staff of the Commission.

I would also like to thank the Council, especially the Portuguese Presidency and their Minister of State, Mr Pedro Silva Perreira, who made this agreement possible.

I have all the more reason for saying this, because this directive certainly requires a greater effort on the part of the southern European countries than it does from other Community countries with easier access to water.

In which areas has significant progress been made?

Firstly, the directive is strictly binding in legislative terms.

Second, the implementation of measures concerning the issue that we in Parliament considered absolutely crucial, that is the elimination of priority hazardous substances and a complete end to discharges of such substances.

You are aware that this House wanted our directive to be compatible with the commitments given under international conventions, in particular OSPAR, as stated in the directive.

The arrangements introduced will clear the way for a list of priority substances to be gradually drawn up every 4 years, that is, priority substances which must be reduced in quantity, and priority hazardous substances, which must purely and simply be eliminated.

Third, there was the important and sensitive matter of groundwater.

We were faced with the problem of producing a rigorous definition of what we called good groundwater status.

In order for this good status to be specified, it was decided that a 'daughter' directive should be drawn up, that is, a directive that will implement the framework directive.

Parliament was rather afraid that the new directive would provide an opportunity to delay requirements to combat pollution and immediate measures to prevent the pollution of groundwater.

This is why we wanted, and secured, the stipulation, first of all, that if the directive were not approved by the Members of the European Parliament, the Member States would draw up rules guaranteeing good groundwater status.

If the Member States did not do this - it is a kind of Sword of Damocles - if 75% of the level laid down in the applicable pollution standards governing good groundwater status is reached, then the Member States will have to reverse the trend.

In general, the directive takes account of Parliament's determination to ensure that action by the Member States enables any upward trends in the pollution of groundwater to be reversed.

So you see, ladies and gentlemen, it seems to me that in this way we have come up with a system that enables us to make significant progress, and not just in terms of the main principles, but also in the overall effectiveness of the decisions that have been made.

Nonetheless, we shall all have to be vigilant.

Firstly with regard to all the daughter directives, which will implement the framework directive.

We shall be involved in the codecision procedure to determine the list of priority substances and priority hazardous substances.

A first report has already been examined by the Commission and a rapporteur has been appointed.

The second major task for this House will be the substance of the framework directive on groundwater.

In short, I think we have done the bulk of the work.

We will continue to work together, but I have a feeling that at the dawn of the 21st century, with this framework directive, Europe is entering a new age where the protection of water, that most fundamental resource, will become a priority in terms of policy and the behaviour of all those involved, whether they be farmers, industrialists or consumers.

In any event, this is the intention of our directive and I have no doubt that the Commission and the Member States will ensure that it is implemented.

Mr President, with the outcome of the conciliation concerning the Water Framework Directive, we are completing what, for the European Parliament, has been a tough but successful piece of work lasting ten years.

At the same time, however, we are, as a result, standing on the threshold of new tasks that are at least as important.

Since the end of the 1980s, a range of Commission proposals had been submitted to the House, aimed at revising existing directives and made necessary by scientific and technical developments.

When those of us in the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy initially examined the proposals, we found that no effort had been made to coordinate their provisions or the concepts behind them.

In June 1995, and at our group' s insistence, the European Parliament' s Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy held a hearing of experts on the European Union' s water policy.

The experts' statements confirmed our concerns.

The Council and the Commission complied with the call for comprehensive European water protection legislation to be drawn up.

The idea of the current Water Framework Directive was born at that time.

In February 1996, the European Commission tabled its proposals in the form of a communication.

In a very comprehensive report, our fellow PPE-DE Group member, Mr Florenz, has clarified the European Parliament' s aims and identified the current shortcomings.

In the light of the discussions between the Commission and the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, the Commission proposal of December 1996, which had been produced under great pressure of time, was supplemented in two stages in 1997.

The definitive, official Commission proposal was finally ready in February 1998.

By working together closely in this way, Parliament and the European Commission gradually moved towards a consensus, a process also helped by the intensive discussions during the first and second readings in the European Parliament and the conciliation procedure.

I should particularly like to thank the Commissioners responsible, Mrs Bjerregaard and Mrs Wallström, and especially the Commission officials involved, for this constructive cooperation.

In Parliament' s view, the result we now have before us is a great success of a kind which would still have been unthinkable two years ago.

This success is reflected in the removal from the statute books of the hitherto fragmented EU legislation in the field of water protection, the coherence of the relevant water directives at EU level, the legally binding nature of the measures taken pursuant to Article 4, the shortening of the deadline for complying with the aims of the directive, the satisfactory way in which the issue of costs has been settled, also in accordance with Ireland' s wishes, the introduction of the combined approach whereby limit values and quality objectives are established with a view to reducing the levels of pollutants, significant improvements over the common position regarding the requirements for groundwater protection and, finally, the inclusion of the goal and the definition of the OSPAR Convention with no stipulations in terms of time.

I should like once again to make explicitly clear in this connection the particular importance we attach to reconciling Community law and international conventions, albeit in such a way that the substance of international conventions does not automatically become legally binding in Community law.

Finally, mention should be made of the guarantee that codecision will apply in connection with future procedures.

Welcome as this result is, we cannot, however, rest on our laurels.

The Water Framework Directive now needs to be put into effect.

I should also, of course, particularly like to thank the Portuguese Presidency and, finally and most especially, the rapporteur, Mrs Lienemann.

Our shared success has only been made possible by her incredible commitment and the huge amount of time and energy she put into her work.

It was a pleasure for me to cooperate with a colleague in this way. My own special thanks go to you, Mrs Lienemann, and our own staff here in Parliament.

Mr President, I too would like to thank Mrs Lienemann, the rapporteur, very much indeed, as we can all see how committed she was to this work.

In addition, Parliament got its own point of view across quite well, especially with regard to the important issue that, at last, we have the prospect of attaining a situation in which hazardous substances can no longer get into groundwater supplies.

In my opinion, it should be as clear as day that when we know a substance is dangerous, in no case should it be able to get into groundwater, as water, apart from anything else, is a very important resource for people in terms of health.

Obviously it is just regrettable that the deadlines for implementation are an unreasonably long way off.

All in all it has to be said that in certain fields of industry in the European Union we have made progress.

In many areas, for example, the community and industry have played their part relatively well.

Agriculture and forestry, however, are still problems, with their diffuse discharges.

More needs to be done about this.

Regarding consumers it is naturally important how consumption is controlled, and here charges and taxation are of prime importance.

For that reason, it is a bit hard for me to understand how people can even begin to think that water could be a commodity paid for out of general taxes, as it is only through charges that consumption can be controlled really sensibly.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, at the Edinburgh Summit nearly ten years ago, Mr Kohl and Mr Major assured one another that there was no need for a European water policy.

If the Spanish wish to pollute their water, they should do just that.

But the tide of deregulation has turned.

In 1996, the Commission proposed the ecological water directive, which did not amount to more than five pages, however.

We now have a substantial legislative document of 60 pages, with 90 pages of appendix.

This is thanks to cross-party cooperation, between the groups within the European Parliament. I would especially like to thank Mrs Lienemann, but also Chris Davies from the liberal group and Mrs Schleicher from the Christian-Democrats.

The Greens feel that 80% of this document has been a success.

What was disappointing was the water price policy.

What is successful is the fact that we have a new principle for chemical substances.

Chemical substances are no longer banned because they are also harmful to human health, but in line with a new principle that harmful substances do not belong in the water.

I think we can be proud of this.

Mr President, the conciliation has been quite difficult.

This has to do with the fact that the subject is itself both extensive and technically very complicated.

It also has to do with the fact that the positions of Parliament and the Council were far apart when the conciliation began.

The fact that the result has turned out as well as it has is largely due to the tireless and committed work done by the rapporteur, Mrs Lienemann, whom we wish to thank.

The directive could, of course, have been still better and beefed up even more, for example as far as the timetables are concerned.

Yet, it is obvious that the European Parliament has gained most and that the Council has had to give most ground in the negociations that have taken place.

The clearest proof of this is that the rules are binding, something which Parliament had demanded.

In certain respects the directive forms a framework whose contents are still unclear.

This is especially true in the case of the phasing-out of dangerous substances.

This is an issue upon which further work will be done in the daughter directives.

Crucial to how the directive will operate is the question of how it will be implemented and monitored.

All in all, the foundations have been laid for a coherent water policy and for long-term improvements in water quality.

We shall therefore be happy to vote in favour of the proposal.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, first of all I would like to say that I am making this speech on behalf of Mrs García Orcoyen, who was unable to attend this sitting.

Tomorrow's approval of this framework directive will represent a great step forward on the road to the cohesion and harmonisation of the legislation of the Member States with regard to the quantity and quality of their water.

In this last stage of the long parliamentary process undergone by this directive, in particular during conciliation, the European Parliament has been able to present a united front in defending its arguments before the Council.

The rapporteur's superb coordination and the will to reach an understanding shown by all the political groups have made this final text possible, and it has been improved in basic aspects such as the legally binding nature of the objectives without omitting to take account of the various problems in the Member States.

I must also congratulate the Council on its flexibility in the face of the criticisms put forward by Parliament, and the Commission for its effective mediation.

Tomorrow, a new and equally important stage in the directive' s development will begin, in which the European Parliament must continue to participate extremely actively in monitoring and controlling the fulfilment of objectives and deadlines and the drawing-up of reports or legislative acts derived from the directive.

One of the weakest points to have become apparent during the drawing-up stage must be strengthened: the incontestable need for more and better means of technical advice for subjects which, like this, require highly specific knowledge, and in which the social and economic cost of a small calculation error can be great.

Finally, I would like to emphasise what makes this directive a real tool for sustainable development: the balance achieved in the consideration of water as an extremely valuable economic resource and as an essential element in the conservation of European ecosystems.

The development of this directive may provide an important meeting point in the much-reviled relationship between economy and ecology.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the Water Framework Directive contains many positive initiatives in favour of comprehensive and integrated water protection.

Yet the objectives are timid, vague and extremely long term.

We cannot wait 30 years for the European Court of Justice to decide whether or not the environmental objectives are in fact legally binding.

The Member States have been called upon to improve the quality of our water quickly in order to achieve the objectives in 15 years' time.

Where groundwater protection is concerned, Parliament has unfortunately bowed to the interests of industrial agriculture and recognised its right to go on polluting the environment to the same degree.

It is now also the responsibility of the Member States to ensure that existing standards are not undermined, the yardstick by which the success of the Water Framework Directive will be measured.

Any more kow-towing to industrial agriculture would lead in the longer term to our most important drinking water resources being destroyed once and for all.

We are pleased, however, that the Greens have achieved a great breakthrough when it comes to emissions of dangerous substances, which now have to be identified on the list of priority substances.

In this area, we must make genuine efforts to meet the OSPAR objectives as well and to avoid what is an incalculably serious risk to health and the environment.

Mr President, the forthcoming Water Framework Directive is based on the justified principle that citizens of the European Community are entitled to use drinking water on a daily basis.

This should be provided for by law.

A simple, uniform and coordinated Community law on the protection of water and groundwater is to be welcomed.

Important directives such as those on protecting the food we eat, on municipal sewage disposal, on plant protection and on nitrates are being revised and redefined on the basis both of ecological criteria and criteria of origin.

The tasks are therefore broadly defined.

As a farmer, I advocate the closer involvement of those who represent the interests of professional groups and serious consideration of their criticisms.

Farming, forestry, fisheries and, in particular, the horticultural industry should also be involved in the decision-making process so that the required combination of voluntary restraint and state regulation is achieved.

The calls for zero limit values can hardly be met by means of legislation alone.

Transposing the directive presents a genuine challenge for the Member States of the European Community.

I agree with the rapporteur: it is only through cooperation that success can be achieved.

Mr President, Commissioner, it was a very turbulent night sitting in which Parliament, the Council and the Commission agreed upon a common water policy for all Member States.

Parliament' s really quite significant victory consists in the fact that this directive is to be binding.

Let us remember, however, that until the very end a number of Member States vehemently resisted any requirement that they should manage their own water resources more carefully and in an environmentally more conscious way in future.

However, it was splendid to see the way in which the Members of the European Parliament transcended all party differences and quite clearly agreed that there should be no common position without a legal requirement.

A further important victory for MEPs involved the protection of groundwater.

Dangerous substances must completely have disappeared from groundwater within 20 years of the Directive' s publication.

It now remains for whatever dangerous substances are meant here to be listed in an annex to the Directive, and it is already clear to me that there will certainly be further heated discussions on this matter.

I believe, however, that the great objective of protecting Europe' s groundwater for future generations is not in dispute.

The process of re-thinking has taken place: a considerable victory for the political process and a considerable victory on behalf of our children.

I am pleased that there has been a satisfactory outcome to the conciliation procedure with regard to the important report dealing with numerous technical issues on water policy, an outcome which we owe to the persistence, competence and motivation of our rapporteur, Mrs Lienemann.

Over the next quarter-century, we will make more progress in this field in the protection, good management and renewal of this resource than in the discovery and exploitation of new deposits.

I would like to make two points to emphasise the importance of integrated water management:

firstly, I would like studies to be carried out on the establishment of a federal "water and environment" management system in the various countries at European Union level,

second, we must ensure that the proposals of the directive are implemented and encourage them, not only at European Union level, but also in the aid that we give to third countries in the form of "water" projects, the impact of which lies in a hydrographic ecosystem affecting the countries of the European Union, but also those that are part of the MEDA agreements, for example, which must be taken account of in the MAP projects and even in others, like the Upper Nile basin or Switzerland.

Mr President, the commitment that has been obtained on the text of the new Water Framework Directive is generally positive, even though it contains certain controversial aspects, worthy of criticism, which can nevertheless be ironed out when the various studies, action plans and draft regulations provided for in the text we have just approved are drafted.

It is a positive development that water management requirements are to be integrated into a single system - hydrological basin management, which is based more on geographical and hydrological areas than on administrative and national borders. This is a particularly important issue for Portugal, whose main rivers are shared with our neighbour, Spain.

Equally positive is the statement that water is not a commodity that should be bought and sold like any other. This means, of course, that special measures must be put in place to protect a commodity that is publicly owned, whilst safeguarding the interests of the population, in particular, domestic water supply and agricultural activity, especially small farms and family-based holdings.

The final text does state that Member States can attend to the social and economic effects on the affected area as well as the geographic and climatic conditions. This will enable Member States to deal with their different situations by means of established exceptions, which may nevertheless prove to be insufficient to cope with agricultural situations in the South, particularly where Portugal is concerned.

We shall nevertheless pay close attention to the way this policy is implemented in practice in the years to come.

Mr President, this is a framework directive with ambitious targets for the protection and improvement of water quality, taking account of the polluter-pays principle.

We will not have the entire picture until the relevant daughter directives are in place over the next few years.

Water pricing policies by the year 2010 will have to provide adequate incentives for users to use water resources efficiently.

The new paragraph 4 of Article 9 will allow for the continuation of the established practice in Ireland of not applying water charges to the domestic water sector.

You can only govern with the consent of the people and by 2010 domestic water charges could well be acceptable to the Irish electorate.

At the moment, it is a hugely politically-charged issue.

I thank my colleagues for their understanding, particularly Mrs Schleicher, who represented our case with understanding through all stages, especially at conciliation.

The principle of subsidiarity in relation to water pricing policy is jealously guarded in Ireland, but public opinion will probably change by 2010.

If we do not apply household or domestic water charges by then we will have to explain our action to the Commission.

There is growing appreciation in Ireland that clean drinking water is a scarce resource and that all services, particularly the cost of distributing clean water to all households, have to be paid for.

At the moment the central exchequer or the taxpayer, is paying for this, yet many do not benefit.

Many have to pay to sink their own pump in Ireland and pay the electricity charges.

Many are on group water schemes which are not part of the public water supply and have to pay dearly each year for the privilege of rather questionable quality water being distributed to their houses.

So we are talking about a question of equity and changing public opinion and we appreciate the matter being left to the Irish Government to decide and to influence public opinion.

Mr President, I believe that today we are witnessing an important act.

We are coming to the end of a long road on which there has been a long battle, long discussions, but in the end, some positive agreements and constructive positions on the part of the three institutions, the Council, Parliament and the Commission, which have made this agreement possible.

As with any agreement, some will think it too little, others too much, but there is a middle point, a balance that is acceptable for the diverging points of view of those who have worked all this time.

Furthermore, they have carried out serious work on a highly complex subject.

On behalf of my colleague, Mrs Wallström, I would like thank Mrs Lienemann for her kind words. As rapporteur for all this work, she has played a leading part and carried out a colossal task, with the persistence and tenacity of her principles which, combined with a dose of realism, have enabled this agreement to be reached.

As she herself points out, and this is no minor issue, a subject such as water demonstrates the diversity of Europe, with its radically differing characteristics between countries.

In some countries, vast expanses have under 400 millimetres per year, that is, semi-arid zones, while in others the average far exceeds 2 500 or 3 000 millimetres.

The focal point of this directive, in which water is considered as a whole, a total flow, with no distinction between surface and groundwater, which is the mistake that was made for a long time, is the right focal point and implies a step forward.

The effort to keep our aquifers in the European Union as clean as possible, or as unpolluted as possible, is a key effort if we want to guarantee balanced development, sustainable development and a habitable Europe for future generations.

On this subject, I have to say that a moment ago one of the Members referred to conversations between two European leaders.

Yes, some may still pollute their aquifers, but some have been polluting them for some time, for example with huge pig farms.

I do not want to go into detail, but people in glass houses should not throw stones.

Mr President, I would like to point out that monitoring and follow-up are essential to this directive.

Monitoring and follow-up that, subsequent to the flexibility and realistic approach that abound in all the articles of the directive, will undoubtedly allow us to guarantee the cleanliness of our water.

This is absolutely essential as, in short, there is no life without clean water.

Mr President, I should like to ask the Commission what is happening with the 1991 Directive on ecological water quality which has so far not officially been withdrawn by the European Commission.

One further request, both to Parliament' s President and to the Council and the Commission: the texts are still deficient in so far as the specialist terminology in the specific languages is not correct.

I would ask for this to be re-examined, for the terminology in each country is quite distinct.

It is a problem which the translators could not solve because the text is so specialised.

It would be a poor show if the legal texts did not contain the correct and necessary terminology.

I would therefore ask for this matter to be looked into again.

In the German version alone, I have found more than twenty mistakes.

I happily leave it to you to examine this matter.

Mr President, with regard to the directive on ecological water quality, to which I believe Mrs Schleicher is referring, this framework directive incorporates all the essential elements of the proposal on the ecological quality of water and I understand that the latter has already been withdrawn.

If this is not the case, it will be withdrawn in the near future.

With regard to the translation problem, what Mrs Schleicher is referring to is a very important factor as the terminology is indeed highly technical in this field and a suitable translation is essential.

I shall simply pass on these observations to the competent departments and the translation departments in particular so that, if appropriate, a more detailed revision of the specific terminology and definitions contained in the directive may be carried out.

The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon.

The next item is the report (A5-0212/2000) by Mr Florenz, on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee, for a Council directive on end-of-life vehicles [C5-258/2000 - 1997/0194 (COD)].

Mr President, to begin with, I should like to take the opportunity of thanking my colleagues for bravely cooperating in the intensive way they did.

It was, of course, not always as simple as that. With me, it never is.

However, I am very grateful to you that we have got through all this.

A number of years ago, the European institutions made the right decision to attend to private motoring.

We began with cars and oil and are now faced with the question of what to do with the nine million cars which end up on the scrap heap every year.

Tonight, we shall also be discussing tyres, and we shall certainly one day also have to discuss how roads need to look in the future, given that they are much too noisy.

In view of the nine million cars withdrawn from circulation every year and the 45 million litres or so of waste oil, I think something needed to be done about this issue.

I believe the Commission has undoubtedly submitted a somewhat overly prescriptive proposal with, in my opinion, some outmoded initiatives in terms of environmental policy.

Fortunately, more work has, however, been done upon the proposal in the course of the three readings, and we now have a proposal which is along the right lines.

Let us bear in mind that, where motoring as a whole is concerned, 80% of damage to the environment is due to driving, 19% to car manufacture and only 1% to the disposal of vehicles.

We must therefore set the correct priorities where this issue too is concerned.

I therefore believe that, by setting exhaust values and quality standards for fuel, we have begun in the right way, and today we closed with the question: how do we deal with the issue of end-of-life vehicles?

We have introduced rigid quotas, without which no progress can be made.

This Parliament ought also, however, to have had the courage to make a really bold decision in favour of a really new type of car for the future, one which will not weigh 1 500 kg but perhaps only 1 000 kg and which, with its lifetime 'mileage' of 300 000 km, may be seen to have genuine advantages in terms of environmental policy.

On the basis of the Commission' s proposal, we have unfortunately allowed ourselves to be persuaded to adopt old quotas which frankly promote cars made of steel rather than modern, versatile cars which are made of other materials and which are much lighter.

Cars of this kind, made out of plastic or fibreglass or whatever, do not, however, have the advantage of being able to be recycled.

How, for example, can you seriously expect to recycle an airbag, which is there as a safety feature and not for recycling purposes?

A bold move towards a special quota for really light cars would therefore have been appropriate in this case.

Unfortunately, we have missed that opportunity, something I particularly regret.

One general point - and also a disputed one in this House - was the question of costs.

The Commission has been quick to say that, in the future, all costs are to be borne by the manufacturer.

At first glance, that is a brilliant idea.

The only thing is that, in the end, this would harm the consumer by eliminating competition.

And that is my overall objection to this Directive.

Certainly, we would now be clearly transferring the costs to the manufacturer, but to one who no longer had any competition and who would in future dictate the cost of recycling cars. And it is precisely this which is anti the consumer.

We need more, not less, input from the market in this area.

This is a wrong decision, which I very much regret because it will have consequences.

We see this already where computers are concerned. The Directive concerned is, in fact, on the table.

Before long, it will be lawnmowers, then mopeds and then furniture which will be subject to such directives. I wonder to whom, one day, we shall return our old roads when they are too noisy, and who is to pay for the transaction.

Cost allocation is therefore not as simple as all that.

I should really have liked things to have worked out differently, but I accept the majority decision.

The bans on metals are quite in order because we need, in the longer term, to come up with a ban, and not only because of the scientific results.

We have made exceptions which will be reviewed by the Commission in three years' time for, together with the scientific advisory board, the Commission has overall responsibility for making the relevant decisions in this area in three years' time.

I believe it will do so.

All in all, I believe that, apart from the issue of cost, this Directive is a great success and marks a step forward.

I would thank the Commission and the Council and, once again, my fellow MEPs.

It has been a pleasure to work with you.

Mr President, I too have reason to thank Mr Karl-Heinz Florenz.

I also found that the Parliamentary delegation very much got its act together during the conciliation and has finished by submitting a very good proposal.

Two aspects are of particular importance for me.

First of all, we have succeeded in clarifying the fact that, from the end of next year, end-of-life vehicles will have to be properly disposed of throughout the European Union.

In other words, it will no longer be possible to dispose of cars illegally or to abandon them somewhere in the woods. Nor will there be the impulse to export them in one way or another to Eastern Europe.

Instead, they will have to be properly disposed of on the spot by authorised companies.

For me, that is one of the great, fundamental successes of this directive.

The second important point for me is no longer the issue of costs and competition.

These are problems we argued a bit about and finally solved quite reasonably by means of a compromise which all sides find workable. Instead, the second important point is the fact that, by means of this Directive, we have established that new cars must demonstrate in their type verification and test that they are easy to recycle.

In this Directive, we are calling upon the Commission to alter the directive on type licensing so that, in the future, new cars have to be built in such a way that they can easily be recycled.

In that way, we are moving away from the end-of-pipe technology whereby we always have to consider what to do with the remains of cars.

Instead, we need to bear in mind, right from the time that vehicles are built, that cars, like other products, have to be re-used and disposed of.

That is precisely the right way of going about matters, and I am therefore very pleased that we have got the directive up and running in this way.

Mr President, the compromise that has been reached is a great success for environmental and consumer protection.

It is the first time that manufacturers' liability for waste has been up for debate at all, and the fact that manufacturers' liability is soon to become a reality is to be welcomed.

The compromise reached on heavy metals is also a giant step towards an environmentally friendly strategy for dealing with the flow of materials.

I believe that this outcome, which is also excellent from a green point of view, will help encourage the motor industry to be more innovative and to begin to develop cars which can be recycled more easily.

However, the compromise is also a slap in the face for our Chancellor and, more precisely, for the German car industry, particularly Volkswagen which has unfortunately tried to stand in the way of this Motor Directive.

I also hope that the rapporteur, Mr Florenz, will draw the relevant lessons from this debate and, when it comes to the Directive on Electronic Waste - which is again concerned with manufacturers' liability - will also, in actual fact, try to act in the interests of the consumer. I hope too that we do not allow ourselves to be put under pressure by individual industrial interests.

Mr President, our group is quite satisfied with the result of the conciliation, even if there is always, of course, room for a little further progress.

Our objective has always been to obtain as soon as possible a comprehensive system for recovering end-of-life vehicles, with stringent demands in terms of recycling and a ban on dangerous substances.

We also wanted manufacturers to be held completely liable, so that it is the manufacturers who take financial responsibility for recovery.

Once this decision has been made, the position in a few years' time will be quite close to what we had wanted to achieve.

What is worth noting, as far as the conciliation process is concerned, is the fact that Parliament has unfortunately slowed down this development towards manufacturer' s liability instead of speeding it up.

It would be quite alarming if Parliament were to exchange roles and, instead of making the running, hand over that role to its opponents.

Mr President, as the rapporteur and Mr Lange have already said, the positive outcome of this legislative procedure is useful, not just in terms of what the directive lays down but also because it marks the start of a process and there is the prospect of a gradual change across the entire manufacturing process in a sector as important as the automotive industry, and a review of the entire process, from vehicle design through to the choice of new materials and components to make proper recycling possible.

Not only is manufacturing reconciled with environmental protection, but we are taking the first steps along the road which has been defined as the environmental conversion of the economy, in what is, I repeat, such an important industry.

Of course, we have only achieved this result after complex negotiations with car manufacturers, who have at last agreed to bear the financial burden of scrapping cars as from 2007.

Lastly, it is important to highlight another point too, which is of a more specific political-institutional nature.

Let us be honest, we are all aware that we started the conciliation procedure from very opposed positions - there was even a certain amount of interinstitutional tension between Parliament and the Council - with many national differences in terms of both experience and interests.

And yet, thanks to the commitment and sense of responsibility of all concerned, we reached a consensus in a difficult, major and highly controversial field, and in doing so we have added another building block in the construction of Europe. At this point in time, in terms of the more general debate currently underway, this is a significant result.

Mr President, Commissioner, with regard to end-of-life vehicles, we have reached a sound compromise.

For the first time, European legislation defines manufacturer' s liability in no uncertain terms.

In 1994, the packaging directive provided for liability to be shared between the government and manufacturers.

This has proved ineffective in practice.

We are now dealing with manufacturer' s liability in the case of end-of-life vehicles.

I welcome this for it will be in the interests of manufacturers to produce their cars in such a way that they can be recycled more easily.

Unfortunately, the text stipulates that the manufacturer will be wholly or mainly responsible.

This means that systems will be set up which differ from country to country, which is unfortunate, as this runs counter to the internal market idea.

In the case of the electronic and electrical waste directive, this must be regulated more effectively.

We need to move towards individual manufacturer' s liability.

My own country, the Netherlands, has a great deal to learn in this respect.

Mr President, it is true that the legislative procedure has been long and difficult, and I have said so.

It should be noted that the Commission's initial proposal was presented in July 1997.

During this prolonged procedure and in spite of the complexity of the legislation, it has been possible to solve a series of problems thanks to the colegislators and, once again, to the three institutions' will to come to an agreement.

I am therefore pleased with the agreement on a joint text, reached on 23 May this year at the Conciliation Committee.

I would particularly like to express my thanks to the rapporteur, Mr Florenz, and to the members of the said committee.

I am sure that the joint text represents a good balance between the need to guarantee a high level of environmental protection and the legitimate concerns of the various participants.

I would, however, like to emphasise three statements that the Commission will make when it adopts the directive.

The aim of these three is to make some clarifications which the Commission considers to be essential.

Firstly, the provision laid down in Article 5(1) does not oblige the Member States to establish separate collection systems with special funding requirements, but allows them to use the existing waste collection systems.

Second, with regard to Article 5(3), it is the responsibility of the Member States to decide which producers, concessionaries and collectors must be registered in accordance with the framework directive on waste or in a new register created specifically.

Third, I would like to clarify that Article 7(1) does not lay down requirements, conditions or additional criteria in relation to the technical inspection of vehicles.

Generally speaking, this text constitutes a significant step towards sustainable production and consumption, a model for future Community initiatives in the field of specific waste management such as, for example, the directive on electrical and electronic waste, to which reference has been made.

Once again, I congratulate all the speakers and in particular the rapporteur, Mr Florenz, on the work carried out.

The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon.

The next item is the report (A5-0187/2000) by Mrs Lucas, on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism, on the communication from the Commission to the Council, the European Parliament, the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions - Air Transport and the Environment [COM(1999) 640 - C5-0086/2000 - 2000/2054 (COS)].

Mr President, I would like to start by congratulating the Commission on a very timely and far-reaching communication which explicitly acknowledges the rapidly growing environmental impact of air transport and clearly recognises that this growth is unsustainable.

Before coming to the proposals contained in my report, it would be helpful to remind ourselves of some of the key issues in this debate.

Essentially, the problem can be expressed very simply: aviation is growing at an unsustainable rate.

It is a serious environmental threat and not only is it a problem, but we are actually subsidising that sector, which is making the situation very much worse.

In terms of aviation growth, air traffic is forecast to almost double in the next 15 years.

When you think what that means in terms of congestion and environmental impact, then clearly that is a nightmare.

To take a case that I know well in the UK, the government's own air traffic forecasts which were published in June this year show total passenger numbers at UK airports rising from 160 million in 1998 to 400 million in just over 20 years' time.

That increase of 240 million is equivalent to four new airports the size of London Heathrow or eight new airports the size of London Gatwick.

Obviously the environmental consequences of such expansion would be totally unacceptable and these projections only serve to show the nonsense of assuming the possibility of continuous exponential growth.

What are the environmental impacts of this growth?

On the noise side, we know that as far as ordinary people on the ground are concerned those changes that have been introduced to make individual aircraft quieter are actually in danger of being cancelled out by the increasing frequency of each noise incident.

On the emission side, air travel is the world's fastest growing sources of greenhouse gases which cause climate change.

That may only count for 3% of total emissions today, but by 2050 it is projected it could account for up to 15% of total global emissions or even more.

You would think that litany of environmental problems, coupled with a projected growth that is clearly unsustainable, might have produced some measures to discourage the exponential growth of this sector, but not a bit of it.

On the contrary, global aviation policies are actually encouraging the unrestrained growth of this sector.

Unlike motor vehicles or trains, airlines pay no tax on their fuel. Indeed it has been calculated that the European aviation sector receives about EUR 30 billion in subsidies every year.

To mention some of the key points of my report very briefly: on noise, current noise standards for new aircraft have actually been in existence since 1977 and there is therefore an urgent need for more stringent standards.

I am recommending that the EU uses the World Health Organisation's own guidelines for Community noise to develop new guidelines for daytime and night-time exposure by 2003.

On emissions, a perfectly feasible target for the developed countries would be to reduce all greenhouse gas emissions from aviation by 5% on 1992 levels by 2012, which is the first budget period according to the Kyoto Protocol.

This would be a first step to reverse the current exemption of international aviation from responsibilities.

On subsidies, the report makes it clear that in principle we support the taxing of aircraft fuel at an international level, but we recognise that there are political difficulties with this because of the need to get international agreements at ICAO.

In the light of those political difficulties, we are proposing instead an environmental charge based on the polluter-pays principle.

In fact, such a charge would be a more subtle instrument since it could actually be calculated to reflect both the amount of fuel used and also, by factoring in the efficiency of the aircraft's engine, the amount of pollutants generated.

Indeed the political difficulties of introducing such a measure would disappear since it is perfectly within the rights of the EU to introduce a levy on all flights starting from airports in the EU.

One final but very important point, you will hear the airlines say that all this is very well but it should be undertaken by ICAO, the international body.

The fact that it is an international body means that it moves at a very slow pace and what the Commission communication proposes - and what I endorse in my report - is the principle that some of the more industrialised regions like the EU should be able to move more swiftly towards more stringent standards than other regions like the developing countries.

This does not spell the end of ICAO.

What it does is to introduce some flexibility into ICAO which is perfectly consistent with other international organisations.

Others do just the same thing.

The reaction of the airlines is to ask why we are picking on them.

In fact, clearly the opposite is the case.

The airlines have been getting away with not paying their way for over 50 years.

Meanwhile, other Members of this House are quick to claim that the measures I propose will have devastating effects on the European aviation sector.

An environmental charge along the lines I have described would not have adverse effects on competition because it is levied on all airlines using EU airports regardless of their origin.

They claim it will have crippling effects on the European economy and that too is nonsense.

The aviation sector is responsible for some jobs but it should not be forgotten that making aviation pay its way in terms of taxation will create thousands of jobs in other sectors.

So I commend this report to you.

Mr President, I should like to begin by saying that all Members of this House care deeply about the environment despite the fact that the rapporteur and members of the Greens would have you believe otherwise.

Environmental concerns must, however, be balanced against the needs of the aviation industry to ensure its success in the future.

I was disappointed with the report from the Commission, not least because it was so negative towards aviation.

Unfortunately this has been built upon by the rapporteur.

I would like to assist honourable Members by pointing out the following information: air transport is responsible for generating 25 million direct jobs world-wide.

In the United Kingdom alone aviation is responsible for supporting nearly 500 000 jobs.

The United Kingdom transports GBP 35 billion worth of exports, maintaining unrivalled access to global markets and contributes around GBP 3 billion per annum to the exchequer.

If multiplied by the number of countries in the European Union one can see and understand just how important this industry is to our economies.

In terms of environmental impact, aviation uses less than 8% of the land required for rail and less than 1% required for road use.

In practical terms, aside from maritime transport, aviation is the only form of international transport now transporting a third of all goods world-wide.

Over the past 15 years CO2 emissions have declined by 70% and unburned hydrocarbons by 85%.

Aviation is responsible for just 2.5% of CO2 emissions.

Short-term measures are available, such as tackling the 44% air traffic flow management delays and 30 bottlenecks which take place over France, Italy, Spain and parts of Germany.

National governments must take action now.

They should also tackle land planning around existing airports and take responsibility for their decisions in the past.

To suggest that either a tax on kerosene, which is internationally exempt from tax for the aviation industry, or VAT on tickets or aircraft purchases is the answer is incorrect.

The industry already pays all its infrastructure charges, some of which go towards environmental improvements.

Finally, if Mrs Lucas' proposals were passed, they would decimate the aviation industry: aviation, tourism, businesses and the aerospace industry.

Their supporters would love to abolish cheap flights.

In short, they would make Europe uncompetitive and give Americans and overseas carriers an unfair advantage.

I would hope in future the proposals from the Commission are thought through more carefully.

Otherwise its members may find that flying to or from Brussels or Strasbourg or on holiday, for that matter, with a European carrier may not be an option.

Mr President, allow me to start by congratulating the rapporteur, Mrs Lucas.

My group has not proposed any further amendments for this plenary discussion.

This means that we agree with the thrust of the report, and I would like to dissociate myself somewhat from the comments made by Mrs Foster, suggesting that the Commission proposals or those included in the report would spell disaster for aviation.

I do not think you should try to block a sound environmental policy by making this type of threat.

The Commission statement on aviation and the environment is a first step towards better European legislation.

This is needed given the growth in aviation and, along with it, the growth in environmental pollution caused by it.

We therefore endorse the key points of the Commission proposals.

The Group of the Party of European Socialists is all for imposing European rules on the aviation industry and making it pay for the environmental pollution which it causes.

As Mrs Lucas has already stated, we do not want aviation to be given preferential treatment.

But today we are merely tracing an outline.

What conditions must European legislation meet?

We will then look forward to the further regulatory and legislative proposals which will also contain the details and specific standards.

So what are the guiding principles of the Group of the Party of European Socialists?

We are at any rate of the opinion that rapid growth in aviation leads to the creation of more and better train alternatives, to give an example in terms of short-distance travel.

I believe that the shift from one mode of transport to another which is more environmentally-friendly is of great importance.

We do not think that capacity growth in aviation is unlimited.

Secondly, we would like European noise standards: in the interests of the public and to discourage competition between certain airports.

Noise at night should, in our opinion, be given more attention and we share Mrs Lucas' view that, in the development of standards and more detailed rules, the standards of the World Health Organisation should come first.

Accordingly, we are expecting ambitious proposals from the European Commission.

The third point naturally relates to emissions, the emission of pollution to be precise, which, in our view, should be tackled as well.

This is also why we support the principle of a tax on kerosene.

However, the viability of these ideas and proposals is questionable.

As stated in the report, we would like international consultation and further research.

Since the outcome of this research is uncertain, we support the fall-back position, as formulated in Paragraph 20 of the report, in the form of a European environmental levy.

In the final analysis, what matters is for us to follow the Kyoto agreements, and aviation should contribute substantially in this respect.

We prefer to have effective agreements on noise and emission worldwide, but should these not materialise, we certainly will not rule out a European policy.

I believe that that is also an important element in the report, and it has been formulated clearly in our view.

We hope that international consultation will bear some fruit.

Should this not be the case, we feel that we should be able to table European rules in a few years' time.

Mr President, I would like to thank the rapporteur for her report.

It is indeed the case that aviation is growing rapidly.

I share Mrs Foster' s view that aviation is a major economic sector, a sector which provides services which are irreplaceable up to a point.

At the same time, however, it is abundantly clear that such a sector also brings with it a number of adverse environmental effects, such as noise and air pollution, and that we need to invite the sector to take a pro-active approach in dealing with this issue as quickly as possible, more so than is the case at present.

Both the Commission statement and Mrs Lucas' report provide guidelines as to how this can and must be done.

I would like to highlight a few points.

It is clear, as Mr Wiersma has already stated, that the different modes of transport - road, train, etc. and also aviation - must be treated the same way as much as possible, which is not the case at the moment.

There are specific reasons for this, but something must be done about the matter.

I believe that it is clear that, in tackling the problems of noise, standards, tax on kerosene, etc, we should certainly at the present time opt for a worldwide approach.

A regional approach is premature at the moment, and I am pleased that the rapporteur has amended a number of her points in the original text to this effect.

In my opinion, the European Union does not need to take any unilateral measures at the moment, if I can put it that way.

There are important negotiations under way, Commissioner, which will have a positive outcome, or at least we can still be hopeful of this.

I believe that this is a factor of importance.

Another important point is that noise must be tackled by means of a package of measures.

Hence my amendment to provide details of these measures.

I have also tabled an amendment to develop a common method of measurement which will enable us to curb competition between different airports, as referred to by Mr Wiersma.

It is, of course, important for competition between airports not to have any adverse effects on the people who live in the vicinity and on the environment.

I believe that this is a factor of importance and that is why we need European regulations in order to prevent competition between the different airports.

Mr President, at the present time the United Kingdom has rates of fuel duty which are spectacularly higher than in other parts of the European Union.

One of the effects of this is particularly detrimental to the peripheral parts of the country.

It has a disproportionately distorting effect on competition, affecting local firms in the periphery competing against large multinationals in the UK.

That is an important caveat to put down about ways in which fuel taxes can distort local economies.

I do not think there is a good environmental argument for trying to drive most of the population of the United Kingdom into the bottom south-east corner.

I did not enter politics to repeat the Highland clearances.

That said, it is also clearly absurd to exempt aviation from the duty to diminish greenhouse gases and ozone depletion and it is also a good thing to look towards an equality of taxation across the European Union, as Mrs Lucas has done, rather than grossly distorting differentials between different parts.

I have considerable reservations about how this will work in practice, but we should welcome the principle that Mrs Lucas has put forward.

Mr President, the fight against noise pollution and gaseous emissions is a just fight, which we support, as it pursues the objectives of citizens' well-being and environmental quality.

Nonetheless, the reduction of these noise or gaseous emissions must be limited to the commendable search for technical solutions that are to everyone's advantage.

It must not serve as a pretext for other objectives in the field of tax or for extending the competence of the Commission.

The latter should instead concentrate on correctly carrying out its already vast range of tasks.

In these circumstances, we cannot accept the instigation of this eco-tax.

This first step towards a European tax will only affect passengers, once again, without achieving any of this report' s objectives.

Our citizens are already squeezed hard by taxes and, at a time when the Member States are trying to reduce taxation, a European tax could put our businesses in a difficult position in relation to their competitors, in particular American businesses or others, with numerous disastrous consequences for employment.

Furthermore, we demand that tax subsidiarity in favour of the Member States be observed.

Europe, rather than artificially swelling its budget by means of this tax, should use this budget more effectively, with respect for the freedom of the individual.

The political dependency of the Member States depends in large part on their freedom in terms of tax.

This is a purely ideological measure, with no direct effect on the environment.

We would prefer a rational measure that respects the interests of the individual and favours economic development while fully respecting the environment.

Mr President, where air traffic too is concerned, the Group of the European People' s Party and European Democrats supports the initiative of the European Commission and of the responsible Vice-President, Mrs Palacio, to reconcile causing as little damage as possible to the environment with citizens' and companies' interest in being able to travel.

The Committee too has made a decision along the same lines, although we ought in all honesty to say that we had completely to re-write Mrs Lucas' report, since it was based upon totally unrealistic premisses.

However, we finally reached a majority agreement.

The summer has again shown how important air travel is for people heading for their holiday destinations.

Particularly where families with children are concerned, air travel offers the quickest means of getting away to the sun, and the one which puts least strain on the nerves.

At the same time, it provides the basis for jobs and businesses in many parts of the European Union.

Business travel and freight forwarding on international air routes are also vital to trade and commerce.

On the other hand, air travel has an obvious detrimental effect upon the environment due to exhaust emissions and noise pollution.

We must make sure that we limit these forms of damage to the environment, at the same time, however, as distinguishing between the damage caused to health around airports and the ways in which people' s ordinary well-being is prejudiced.

I fear that, if we were to adopt the WHO' s regulations, none of us here this evening would be allowed to go on working, since more than ten hours spent in this Chamber is scarcely compatible with these regulations.

So let us be realistic, please.

The Group of the European People' s Party and European Democrats in any case calls for a significant reduction in permitted levels of noise pollution - which, in view of the international character of air travel, ought more sensibly to be regulated within the framework of the ICAO - and for noisier aircraft to be excluded from using European airports following brief transitionary periods.

We hope, and are campaigning for, a situation in which the Member States of the European Commission will provide a clear mandate.

If, however, we were not to obtain success at ICAO level, then we should have to take action ourselves, for Europe is densely populated and we do not have the luxury of the large distances between population centres that are to be found in America or Africa.

We have to protect our citizens from unnecessary noise.

Mr President, we know that traffic emissions are one of the greatest environmental problems we have and they have also proved to be one of the hardest to get rid of.

That is because the volume of traffic is growing even faster than the economy.

In this sense the problems of air traffic are still greater because we have to find global solutions for them.

On the other hand, we have heard that the Kyoto Protocol does not contain provisions concerning air traffic emissions.

Furthermore, air traffic problems are not discussed in the directive on ceilings for emissions which is under consideration.

Being in this situation we really have to channel greater efforts into the work that is done in ICAO and its environmental protection committee, which drafts international environmental norms.

This is a regrettably slow process, but we have to be able to set objectives that are sufficiently ambitious in scope and create negotiating mandates to be able to make progress accordingly.

In my opinion it would not be a bad idea if the developed, industrialised countries, including the European Union, were to set an example in this matter.

It is important to develop engine technology, as a decline in the volume of traffic is not foreseeable.

We will have to have recourse to different acts, environmental taxes, charges and administrative measures, for example regulation of departure and arrival times, taking account of the fact that rail traffic exists alongside air traffic in areas where long distances are not a hindrance, and that must be developed.

Mr President, I would like to emphasise the importance of the aim to use efficient, alternative transport, in place of short flights, which was mentioned in this report.

For example, high speed trains, and, in some cases, short sea crossings offer a more environment-friendly alternative to short flights.

This will be vital to ease congestion at airports and for environmental reasons too.

Replacing short flights with alternative forms of transport will make room for long haul flights, for which there is no alternative.

In Parliament we discussed several reports before the summer recess that aimed at improving the competitiveness of railways and sea transport.

In addition to improving rail and sea transport competitiveness, we also need to take other action.

One possibility is an environmental charge specially designed for air traffic.

It should be introduced in such a way that the charge would be less for the unavoidable long haul journeys than it would for short flights for which there is a more environment-friendly alternative.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, this report is the third in a series which deals with the air transport situation.

Whilst the previous two focused on the freedom and growth potential within aviation, this one highlights the downside, justifiably so, in my opinion.

As I have already indicated when we discussed the Atkins report, the measures which are currently being drafted for aviation only provide short-term answers.

They cannot provide a lasting solution for the problems of congestion and environmental pollution.

This report looks beyond the near future, which is why I would like to congratulate Mrs Lucas.

It is not an unnecessary exercise to indicate the pre-conditions within which aviation should function, both in terms of space and the environment.

This, however, does require sufficient expertise and alternatives.

At present, there is room for considerable improvement with regard to both of these aspects.

This should not deter us, however, from sketching the outlines for the future and to expect this to be done internationally.

This report sets the right tone for this, especially for the benefit of the Commission.

Despite our positive attitude to this report, there are a number of elements which, in my opinion, do not belong in a report such as this one.

I am referring to the amendments tabled by the Group of the Greens and the regionalists.

They may seem like a kind gesture, but these matters are better dealt with by the Member States.

Mr President, this Parliament would not be able to function without aviation, which according to some might not be such a bad thing.

But we need to focus all our efforts on how we can minimise the effects of the rapid growth within this sector on the environment.

I would like to highlight a number of points.

In my opinion, the European Union should support the ICAO process.

Only within the context of this international body is it possible to discuss tighter rules for noise generated by aircraft.

Proposing new standards has a huge impact on the European aviation industry as a whole.

In concrete terms, a standard considerably stricter than the current one would mean that out of the present European fleet of 3,300 aircraft, 1,067 would need to be replaced.

Such a rapid and forced decommissioning would make it practically impossible to replace these aircraft with new ones, due to, among other things, the small production capacity for new aircraft.

The consequences for European aviation are not hard to imagine.

It would need to surrender part of the market to its competitors, and it is very questionable whether this would benefit our safety.

Furthermore, it would lead to a considerable reduction in employment, with all the problems that this entails.

I am very aware that this would be a bonus for some, but do remember that, for airline passengers who need to travel short distances, there is still no real alternative, contrary to what one of my fellow MEPs just stated, to the effect that we would all much prefer to see such passengers travel by train..

Member States and my country in particular, the Netherlands, are extremely slow in introducing high-speed trains which could form a viable alternative for short-distance travel.

Aircraft manufacturers should be put under considerable pressure to build cleaner and quieter aircraft.

That is why the new standards cannot be put on hold forever.

We will try to exert this pressure at international level but we will run out of patience at some stage.

Finally, I would like to say a few words on noise-sensitive airports.

In my opinion, measurements should be taken in a truly objective manner and complaints from those living in the vicinity should not be the only point of reference.

An international standard needs to be established, but some airports, which do not cause any pollution whatsoever to those living in the vicinity, should be exempt so that they are not hindered in their development.

Mr President, Commissioner, I think we are all convinced that we have an obligation and a duty to protect the environment and contribute to sustainable development with an environmental policy that has seen its importance increased subsequent to the Treaty of Amsterdam.

I agree with the Commission on drawing up more stringent standards on noise and also on establishing transitional provisions to satisfy the needs of the regions that are confronted with noise pollution problems.

We also believe that it is essential for us to participate as one in the 33rd assembly of the ICAO in autumn 2001, speaking with one voice because, without a doubt, there is strength in unity and on subjects as important as the tightening of standards against noise it is vital.

It would also be important to ask the Commission to present proposals for the introduction of economic incentives aimed at achieving a reduction of the negative effects on the environment.

Naturally, what we do not agree on is the unilateral establishment of tax on kerosene, as a unilateral decision without the backing of the ICAO would have a minimal impact on the environment, would create legal problems, would damage competition among European airlines and would consequently affect users, who would see their tariffs rise.

It would also be essential that, before taking any measures with regard to the adoption of taxes on the aviation industry, a study should be carried out on the costs and benefits that these measures would imply.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasise the importance of efficient management in the aviation industry in reducing pollutants, placing the emphasis on improving airport management and clearly supporting the creation of a single European sky, by means of which we would also undoubtedly contribute to reducing environmental pollution.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I would like to give Mrs Lucas credit for her report.

She is right when she points out that if the volume of air traffic continues its rapid growth it will be absolutely necessary to take measures to control the problems it causes.

It is part of sustainable development to reduce emissions and bring noise levels down.

The report gained the support of everyone in the committee.

The amendments made to it, however, throw the baby out with the bath water.

The original report was a natural extension of previous EU legislation, but if the amendments are adopted it will mean enormous financial losses for European companies that have taken investment decisions on the basis of EU acts.

For example, the time span for noise reduction is very long.

The time that passes between the decisions taken and implementation can be up to two years.

But now some excellent aircraft which have just been modified in accordance with Chapter 3 would have to be scrapped in four years' time.

The citizens and companies of the Community must be able to have confidence in legislation, as continual shifting of the goalposts undermines long-term plans.

The resultant costs weaken the area' s air transport competitiveness as compared with airlines outside the EU, and, at the same time, in fact, makes it harder to adopt environment-friendly technology in the airlines based within the EU.

What is economically realistic about demands for new technology in the name of environmental protection to replace aircraft which are still serviceable and in good condition?

On the contrary, this sort of action will constitute a burden on the environment, as materials will have to be produced and aircraft built before the economic lifetime of existent equipment is up.

In addition, scrapping serviceable aircraft will mean an additional burden on the environment.

Drafting radically new regulations on aircraft noise has to happen globally and under the auspices of ICAO, and careful, long-term community and town planning consequently has a key role in this.

Finally, I would like to remind everyone that increasing fuel tax in the air transport industry would bring with it an added burden for those who live in sparsely populated countries.

A long journey is a long way to go.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, first of all I would like to congratulate Mrs Lucas on the report that is the basis for our debate today.

As we are all aware, the environmental consequences of air transport have recently attracted a great deal of interest.

At local level, the debates surrounding airport development are increasingly determined by environmental considerations relating to noise abatement and air quality improvement in areas surrounding airports.

Many citizens living in these areas believe that much more could be done to improve their situation and that is what they are demanding.

Furthermore, the long-term impact of gases from air transport on climate change is undoubtedly a cause of concern in the world today, as is the impact of other types of emissions.

The air transport system must therefore be handled globally and coherently, from an environmental point of view, that is, we must also take account of aspects relating to the activity of air transport.

We must try to reconcile interests that are not always easy to reconcile as air transport undoubtedly involves economic interests that are characterised by high investment costs which require a long life span before they are paid off.

For example, an aircraft requires a much longer life span than other types of investment in order to be adequately paid off.

This requires a stable operating environment with no ups and downs or modifications that change the rules of the game and may have disastrous economic consequences for the functioning of aviation companies.

A sector based on extremely expensive technology, with a rapid rate of growth, has an immediate effect on employment in ancillary sectors, such as research, industry and tourism.

In my opinion, trying to safeguard the environment by simply slowing down growth in the aeronautical sector and the air industry is not a valid option.

But there is no doubt that the public, not only people in the surrounding area who suffer most directly from certain types of pollution such as noise or even emissions, but the public in general, who want sustainable development and quality of life, has a right to demand action from us to guarantee this type of growth that should be the European model.

In its communication on air transport and the environment, the Commission maintains that the aviation industry needs to increase its efforts to improve the environmental quality of new aircraft being built.

If the current rate of growth is maintained, the improvements needed to compensate for the anticipated environmental impact of the increase in air traffic will not be made.

I know this message is not well received in many parts of the sector but, without a doubt, in the medium and long term there is no solution but to look for an alternative unless we want air transport to become a victim of its own success.

The Commission, however, is aware that the air transport sector is correct in saying that before carrying out environmental measures, a serious in-depth study must be done on the economic and social repercussions that these measures will have.

I have the impression that today, those most concerned by the environment are accepting, little by little, but more and more, the fact that in order to develop a definite environmental policy, account must be taken of the balance between the cost and effectiveness of the measures proposed.

The report we have before us considers these fundamental issues and takes account of both the need to reinforce environmental protection beyond routine efforts and the profitability analysis factor.

I would like to thank Mrs Lucas for the efforts made to achieve flexibility, as it is clear from her amendments that this is not exactly what she would like as a report, but she is looking for a compromise that makes parliamentary approval possible.

For example, what she says on kerosene seems to me to be a reasonable way of presenting this problem, which undoubtedly cannot be solved at European level, but at world-wide level and by the ICAO.

For it is in aviation, ladies and gentlemen, the industry in which globalisation is more evident than in any other, that these issues must be resolved.

I would like to thank the rapporteur for the support she gives the Commission in the report, and say that we find ourselves at a difficult stage of the debate on new noise standards and on legislation which gradually eliminates the noisiest aircraft, within the framework of the ICAO.

On many occasions, we have indicated our preference for an international solution to these problems, and the Commission has noted with satisfaction the positive development of the United States' stance in relation to the standardisation process that is taking place in the ICAO.

I have to say that the legislation on the so-called "hushkits" , with regard to the noisiest aircraft, adopted in its day by Parliament, the Council and the Commission, was based precisely on the fact that the United States had adopted unilateral measures outside the ICAO.

There is no doubt that it is within the ICAO that this work needs to be done.

We shall coordinate the actions of the various Member States within the CAEP, given that it is the Member States that are the signatories of the ICAO, and I hope that Parliament will support initiatives such as the single sky, to which Mr Ojeda referred, which, naturally, will also have consequences for kerosene saving, if it can be implemented, and the improvement in the allocation and general management of slots.

Mr President, once again I thank everyone for the work carried out in trying to obtain a realistic and flexible text that is acceptable to the various parties.

We await Parliament's vote, to which the Commission will pay great attention.

The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon.

Tyres for motor vehicles and trailers

The next item is the recommendation for second reading (A5-0218/00), on behalf of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to adopting a European Parliament and Council directive amending Council Directive 92/23/EEC relating to tyres for motor vehicles and their trailers and to their fitting [C5-0220/2000 - 1997/0348(COD)] (Rapporteur: Mr De Roo).

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I am here to talk about noise generated by car tyres.

Noise is an environmental and health problem which is underestimated.

Tyres cause a nuisance to one third of the citizens in Europe who complain about it, compared to one quarter of the citizens ten years ago.

The problem of noise is therefore escalating, especially road and aircraft noise.

At first reading, the European Parliament was wrong not to react to the feeble proposals from the European Commission.

For example, the European Commission' s proposal did not contain a review clause.

All environmental proposals made by the European Commission contain a review clause, but not this one.

This is hardly surprising given the fact that this proposal was drafted by the DG for Industry.

In the Council, this environmental matter was wrongly dealt with by the Ministers for Economic Affairs and the Internal Market.

It should have been dealt with in the Council of Ministers for the Environment.

The Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Protection has tabled 4 amendments with 32 votes against 10 votes.

With regard to ordinary passenger cars, we suggest that the limit is reduced by 2 decibels.

The German independent inspection body, TÜV, has tested numerous existing car tyres.

They all meet the ineffective noise limits proposed by the Council.

A reduction of 2 decibels is technically possible without jeopardising safety.

This has also been confirmed by experts of the Swedish institute for roads and traffic.

With regard to vans and lorries, the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Protection also suggests reducing the noise level by 2 decibels.

Vans and lorries produce more noise than ordinary cars.

This is why it is important to make the necessary changes here too, and I hope that a number of the Christian-Democrat MEPs will be able to vote in favour of this.

The tyre industry has been given until October 2005 to meet stricter noise limits.

This seems ample time to me.

More is required, of course, in order to reduce the noise from road traffic.

The noise level from 'fluisterasfalt' [silent asphalt], as it is termed by our Flemish friends, or 'ZOAB, zeer open asfaltbeton' [very open asphalt concrete], as we like to refer to it in the Netherlands, is probably 20 decibels lower than that from cobblestone roads.

Our motorways are no longer paved with cobblestones, but a reduction of 3 to 5 decibels is possible by introducing this type of asphalt everywhere.

We will be returning to the problems of noise when we deal with the directive on noise.

Silent asphalt and a change of tyre could help reduce the noise level by 6 decibels, which may not seem a great deal, but one should remember that decibels are a logarithmic table.

This means that the noise level can be cut by more than half without reducing the volume of traffic.

Cars inherently cause a large number of environmental problems.

More than 10 years ago, the European Parliament introduced the first generation of catalytic converters and, two years ago, the second generation of catalytic converters appeared in the Langen/Hautala report on the motor oil programme.

As a result, air pollution caused by cars and lorries will drop by 70% to 90% in 2005 and 2007.

Similarly, we found a sound solution to the recycling of end-of-life vehicles in the Florenz report.

There are now two major environmental issues left to tackle at European level.

The first one is noise, which I have dealt with extensively, and the second one is the CO2 or the greenhouse problem.

With regard to CO2, the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Protection has suggested that the European Commission submit a legislative proposal to reduce the rolling resistance of tyres by 5%.

This means that 5% less fuel will be used and that the emission of CO2 will also fall by the same amount.

I would welcome a positive reaction from the European Commission.

Mr President, Commissioner, the general lines along which this Directive is discussed are of little concern to me.

I am no lawyer and am not in a position to judge.

What is true is that insufficient account has so far been taken of environmental interests.

Just in the last three days, the car and tyre industries have indicated in this Chamber that their options may well be open when it comes specifically to car tyres.

My group is not at present overly concerned about whether the figure is to be 1, 3 or 4 decibels, but we should like to make it clear that we want positively to force the tyre industry to act and do more of what is required of them in this area.

The motor oil, car and recycling industries have made a lot of things possible where road use by individuals is concerned.

In contrast, the tyre industry has largely refrained from taking action.

It is in this area that we want them to do some catching up.

We shall doubtless at some stage also have to talk about alternative road surfaces in Europe.

I believe that this is a positive way of forcing the tyre industry to act.

I should therefore like straight away to forestall some of my fellow MEPs who now and again stand up jokingly and say that Mr Florenz wants a reduction of two decibels where possible but is accepting a 10 metres longer braking distance in return.

Obviously, we want to maintain standards.

We expect innovation. We expect the tyre industry to employ young engineers of both sexes and finally to go some way towards meeting people' s justified demands to be exposed to less noise in their homes.

That is a task we have set ourselves, and I hope that the Commission will be prepared to cooperate.

It is possible, as we shall see in one or two years' time, that the industry will be able to achieve these objectives of ours by the year 2005.

If that were not possible, I am the very first to concede that we need to broaden our field of operations somewhat.

But the industry must be forced to act, and that is what we shall be campaigning for at the present time.

Mr President, Commissioner, it is a well-known fact that you are not entirely averse to cars yourselves and also enjoy driving.

It would therefore be a jolly good idea if, merely by being fitted with new tyres, our own cars were to cause 40% less noise and, at the same time, use 5% less fuel and also emit less CO2.

This is the road we should be going down.

There are already tyres whose specifications are well below the values proposed in the common position when it comes both to tyre noise and to the rolling resistance which is responsible for petrol consumption and CO2 emissions.

There are even tyres to which the Federal Republic of Germany awards a Blue Angel as a sign of environmental friendliness because they are a model of quiet operation and give rise to low petrol consumption.

Now, these tyres are not particularly unsafe.

Michelin and Dunlop tyres even make for shorter braking distances while remaining quiet and preserving fuel economy.

I am therefore wondering why this Parliament cannot summon up the courage to say that whatever is now already state of the art technology is what we demand by 2005 for all tyres, particularly those fitted to private cars.

I should therefore like strongly to request that we adopt Amendment No 1, through which we call for limit values not only for tyre noise but also for rolling resistance, and that we adopt, in particular, Amendment No 2 in connection with quieter tyres.

I would ask you to consider that this does not yet mean the end of the negotiations.

We are entering into the negotiations in the Conciliation Committee with the Council, and we shall then see what emerges.

However, we must also have room for manoeuvre.

Mr President, before I start on the subject of tyre noise, may I make a more general point to the Commission.

They are bringing forward far too much legislation and, with legislation, quality is usually in inverse proportion to quantity.

We talk of doing less and doing it better. In fact we do more, and we do it worse.

Now turning to tyres. I little thought when I came to this House that I would end up defending the Commission's position - and yet the Commission has done its homework.

It has consulted with the industry. It has come up with a proposal that sets challenging, but achievable, targets which protect the environment whilst also recognising the interests of road users and tyre makers.

Some of our colleagues are seeking to sabotage this careful work by demanding arbitrary and ill-considered decibel reductions.

In some cases their figures are achievable, in others not.

But they have forgotten that changes in the production specifications of tyres affect not only noise, but also grip, safety, fuel economy, cost and durability.

They may end up with quieter tyres that are expensive, that wear out quickly and that allow cars to slide off the road and crash into trees!

More road users will die if Mr de Roo's amendments are passed.

The electors I represent will not thank us.

We are being far too prescriptive.

It is our job to set a broad legislative framework in the public interest.

Instead, we seek to micro-manage a highly technical and complex industrial development programme, a task for which we have neither the time nor the skills.

I call on colleagues to reject the amendments and support the Commission proposal.

Mr President, I welcome this proposal.

Certainly the amendments to it by my colleagues Mr de Roo and Mr Lange are moving in the right direction.

Since the first publication of this directive back in 1997 the manufacturers have moved to meet the Commission standards.

I understand the desire of my colleague, Mr de Roo, to take the standards further.

However, I have to sound a note of caution.

Firstly, tyre standards are not the only problem.

The nature of the road surface is just as important and in particular circumstances like noise hotspots in urban areas perhaps more important than trying to change the tyre standards.

In many cases a better solution is to change the road surface and not the tyre standards.

Secondly - and in my opinion of paramount importance - is the need to balance the problem of tyre noise and tyre safety.

Whilst we are tonight seeking to adopt new tyre standards to reduce tyre noise we are not making any progress at all on tyre standards for the grip or adhesion of tyres on the road.

Despite good and serious proposals being put on the table some considerable time ago by the UK, they have not yet been agreed or seriously considered.

Our failure to agree tyre safety standards creates an unacceptable level of uncertainty with regard to this vital question.

For that reason I am particularly concerned about the potential effects of Amendments Nos 3 and 4 and their impact upon tyre safety, especially for vehicles such as buses and trucks.

In the circumstances I feel bound to say that I personally cannot give my support to Mr de Roo's Amendments Nos 3 and 4.

I suggest to him that they are premature and I would ask the Commission to reject them.

Mr President, Commissioner, my thanks go to Mr de Roo for the work he has done.

The reduction of any kind of noise is important both for people' s health and their comfort.

For that reason, I feel very positive about the Council' s common position with regard to tyre noise.

I am by no means acting as spokesman here for the tyre industry, but, having watched that industry very closely, I nevertheless wish to express my concern about the effect the amendments will have.

The tyre industry is a very fiercely competitive industry, and one that is competitive on a global scale. It is responsible for some very thorough development work and, owing to the nature of tyre technology, it is progressing slowly but surely.

The situation will become untenable, however, if there is an attempt to bring in changes too fast, as would seem to be the case on this occasion.

If things move too quickly it will mean immense technical problems for the industry, with unnecessary extra costs, which will be reflected in the prices of the products.

The consumer is always the one that has to pay.

An adequate transition period, however, will guarantee that the new requirements are taken account of at the development stage.

Any other course of action would be a waste of resources, because it would take on average three to four years to develop a new tyre model.

The issue becomes especially problematic when we consider that a tyre is a very delicate product in terms of balancing its individual properties.

It is not really just black and round, as the layman thinks.

When one property of the tyre is improved, it affects the others adversely, so tyre design is really a question of optimising compromises.

For example, a broad tyre holds well on asphalt, but tends to start skimming over water easily.

On the other hand, a narrow tyre works well on snow.

If a tyre' s noise properties were to be essentially improved it would above all impair its ability to hold the road in wet conditions.

I want my fellowmen to drive on safe tyres, above all.

I wish the tyre industry and the EU legislators would get together and draw up a realistic timetable for the excellent objectives outlined in this report.

Mr President, the aim of this proposal for a directive is to limit tyre/road noise without sacrificing grip and therefore road-holding and braking safety.

In preparing the proposal, the Commission consulted several bodies independent from the manufacturers, who worked with experts from the Member States for a long time in order to find the appropriate level of strictness on decibels for the various categories of tyres for cars, vans and lorries.

As a result of this extensive prior consultation of experts, the Member States have unanimously approved the level of strictness chosen in the proposal as a common position.

The European Parliament itself showed its satisfaction with the level of strictness of the proposal and did not table any amendments.

First of all, it should be noted that the quality of the road surface is, to a great extent, up to 6 decibels, responsible for the noise generated by tyre contact.

It should also be made clear that the Commission is continuing with the measures launched two years ago to combat the various sources of noise, covering every sector of activity of the European Union.

Now, at the second reading, 4 amendments have been tabled.

Amendment Nos 2, 3 and 4 propose the reduction of noise thresholds by 2 decibels.

If this reduction of 2 decibels were implemented today, more than 70% of tyres currently on the market would not pass the test.

Manufacturers would therefore be obliged to urgently modify the structure of the tyre and the hardness of the rubber by reducing the grip.

Until grip requirements are applied, these three amendments are therefore unacceptable.

This correlation between noise and rolling, tyre grip and fuel consumption is rightly at the centre of the concern expressed in Amendment No 1.

This concern is currently the subject of the search for a consensus in a working party for the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe, a working party monitored by the staff of the European Commission.

This matter is also the subject of discussion in the Transatlantic Business Dialogue to promote the emergence of a Global Type Standard GTS 2000.

The European Commission is following this work with the intention of transposing the results into Directive 92/23/EEC in order to determine the correct balance between safety, noise and resistance.

Unfortunately, however, the proposed timetable is too strict.

The wide range of products covered and the problem in all its complexity must be considered.

It is for these reasons that Article 3, as worded in the common position, stipulates that the requirements on grip and on rolling resistance shall be integrated with the noise requirements in the extended timetable of 24 and 36 months respectively, following the entry into force of this directive.

Amendment No 1, which proposes to legislate again on two occasions within a period of one year after the entry into force of this directive, is not acceptable.

Due to the complexity of the methods of measuring grip on dry and wet surfaces and rolling resistance and due to the wide range of products, the results of the experts' work will not be available before 2002.

The Commission will then be able to amend this directive in order to include grip on dry and wet surfaces and rolling resistance for all categories of tyre.

The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon.

The next item is the report (A5-0168/2000) by Mr Bakopoulos, on behalf of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive amending for the nineteenth time Council Directive 76/769/EEC relating to restrictions on the marketing and use of certain dangerous substances and preparations (azocolourants)[COM(1999) 620 - C5-0312/1999 - 1999/0269(COD)].

Mr President, the proposal for a directive which we are debating today is designed to restrict the marketing and use of azocolourants used in fabric dyes and leather goods.

The reason for the restriction is that there is good cause to believe that these substances are carcinogenic.

The annex to the directive contains a list of fabric and leather products in which the use of these suspect substances is banned.

Several countries have already introduced similar bans in their legislation and most companies established in the European Union fall into precisely this category.

However, we need a directive in order to harmonise the internal market and prevent such unilateral regulations.

Finally, as is only to be expected, the directive also contains an analytical method for detecting banned azocolourants.

The Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy accepts the principle on which this directive is based.

The amendments, which were adopted unanimously, therefore represent an improvement.

I should like to refer to just two of them.

The Committee on the Environment takes the view that the list of products in which the use of azocolourants is banned, as contained in the annex to the directive, should not be open.

It should be a complete, closed, precise list of named products.

This will avoid arbitrary interpretation of the directive and, as a result, a wide variety of applications, which would run counter to the principle of the single market, which this directive has been introduced to protect.

That is the purpose of Amendment No 3.

The second amendment to which I should like to refer is Amendment No 2, which introduces recital 7a, exempting hand-made oriental carpets from the directive.

The reason for the exemption is that, because these carpets are hand-made, spot checks are, by definition, impossible, while separate testing of each carpet would seriously damage the product.

Especially in cases - and they are not infrequent - of hand-made artefacts and/or works of art.

Importers are, however, advised to develop a quality mark.

Mrs Roth-Behrendt and Mrs Müller tabled Amendment No 6, on time, rewording the previous recital 7a and proposing that the exemption from the scope of the directive for oriental carpets should expire on 1 January 2006.

I think this proposal is sensible and propose that it be accepted.

Finally, Mr Ferrer tabled Amendment No 7, again on time, proposing that the list of 21 azocolourants in the annex should include another substance, in addition to the two inserted in Amendment No 4.

However, the substance which Mr Ferrer proposes is already included in the annex.

Obviously, this is an oversight and I do not therefore propose that it be accepted.

Mr President, Commissioner, this is a small and modest report, an amendment to a directive that I, however, believe is an important and significant example of the great success of the awareness and information policies and of the fact that the regulation often comes after society has sorted itself out.

The fact that practically all manufacturers and producers in all the Member States have removed the products we are now trying to remove indicates that there are now many mature areas in which ideally we would not have to establish legislation, and would not find ourselves in situations like this.

I would therefore like to emphasise, so that it may be taken down in the Minutes, that we must work to this formula where possible in a mature society and a mature industry.

I think the exclusion of oriental carpets is marvellous, as I believe it is good that flexibility in favour of art and beauty is entering into the spirit of a legislative machine that often forgets small details.

Furthermore, as far as I know, people do not normally tend to eat carpets, and therefore this level of risk could be avoided.

I repeat, I believe it is positive for us to work towards progress, for society to be one step ahead of us and that all we have to do is ratify what has already been recognised.

Mr President, in response to the rapporteur' s intervention, I should like to clear up one small point.

The amendments to this report were tabled by myself.

I just want to straighten that out because Mrs Roth-Behrendt' s name was mentioned.

Azocolourants are dyes which release cancer-causing aromatic amines if they come into contact with human skin or with the mouth cavity.

That was also the reason why a number of Member States issued interim regulations to protect consumers, as well as the reason for the Commission' s initiative, which we are discussing this evening, whereby azocolourants are now to be prohibited throughout the EU and a ban placed on imports of these substances from third countries.

The draft we have from the Commission nonetheless has some gaps in it which compromise safety and which, in my opinion, need to be closed.

That is the purpose of my amendments, to which a large majority of the committee agreed.

We are mainly concerned with adding two further amines to the banned list because they have since been categorised as carcinogenic.

Moreover, the general description of the area of application that has been given is too vague.

We want an exhaustive, clearly defined list for the purpose of creating clarity and legal certainty.

By means of the voluntary stamp of quality and the interim deadline of 1 January 2006, we have also succeeded in taking account of the special problems presented by the oriental carpets industry and, in spite of these problems, in also including hand-made oriental carpets in the directive in the medium term.

We have also provided for an option whereby, until such time as new testing methods have been validated, two methods can be applied which take account of the differing demands which materials make upon the testing method.

With the adoption of these amendments, which have been decided upon by a large majority of the committee, any vagueness and lack of clarity in the directive would, all in all, be removed.

In this way, the directive would do justice to the demands which will have to be made upon it in view of the risk of actual damage to public health.

Mr President, I would like to thank Members for their interest in this subject and especially Mr Bakopoulos, the rapporteur, for his constructive work.

Certain azocolourants used in textile and leather pose the risk of cancer for consumers and workers, as has been said.

Following an opinion of the Scientific Committee on Toxicity, Ecotoxicity and the Environment confirming such risks, the Commission proposed in December of last year a directive restricting marketing and use of certain azocolourants which could pose a risk of cancer if they come into close contact with the skin.

The Commission proposal for a directive would introduce a ban on the use of certain azocolourants in textile and leather articles that come into close contact with the skin.

The colourants concerned are xylidines which may release any of the 21 cancer-causing amines listed in the proposed directive.

Furthermore, textile or leather articles dyed with these same xylidines may not be placed on the market.

The test methods to be used to show compliance with the provisions are specified in the proposed directive.

The proposal provides not only for the protection of consumers' and workers' health.

It also addresses an internal market issue.

At the present time, the internal market is fragmented, as some Member States are already applying national bans.

The proposed directive would harmonise the rules of Member States.

I would stress that the proposal is based on the results of independent studies on the risks of azocolourants and of the costs, benefits and trade effects of the proposed restrictions.

It also takes account of the opinion of the competent Scientific Committee on Risks.

I believe it is a proportionate measure.

The Commission is unable to accept those Parliament amendments which would extend this ban by replacing the proposed list of examples of product categories covered by an exhaustive list by covering articles other than those made of textiles and leather and by including other amides.

Amendments Nos. 3, 4 and 7 of the Committee on the Environment are the ones I refer to.

The Commission feels this could not be justified on the basis of the current knowledge about the risks.

Nor is the Commission able to accept amendments that would introduce a second testing method to show compliance with the provisions.

This applies to Amendment No 5 of the Committee on the Environment.

These would make it more difficult for suppliers, especially in the Third World, to show compliance as the method proposed by the Commission is the method most widely accepted and used.

However, the Commission can accept that when available a more reliable standardised testing method could be introduced.

The Commission can accept in principle an exemption for handmade oriental carpets from the example list of product categories covered by the proposed directive as the risk from such carpets is likely to be low.

However, the Commission cannot accept that the exemption is only temporary.

To summarise our point of view, we can accept Amendment No 1 of the Committee on the Environment.

We must reject six amendments, namely Nos. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7 of the Committee on the Environment.

However, the Commission can in principle support parts of Amendment No 3.

We wish to carry on the dialogue with Parliament.

I am convinced that we can reach a constructive solution.

The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon.

The next item is the report (A5-0220/2000) by Mrs Glase, on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs, on the Commission communication on undeclared work [COM(1998) 219 - C4-0566/1998 - 1998/2082(COD)].

Mr President, the report before us is a position adopted by Parliament in response to a communication from the Commission on the problems associated with undeclared or illicit work.

This problem is being dealt with at European level because it relates not just to one particular country but to all Member States.

What is the heart of the problem? Major economic and socio-political damage is being caused in the Member States through work not being declared.

Health insurances, pensions systems and the Treasury together lose billions every year.

Workers are in no way insured or otherwise safeguarded.

Thoughts of a modern slave trade with fatal consequences for those involved spring clearly and inevitably to mind.

Those who are rewarded in some way for undeclared work have no right to claim compensation at all and no other consumer rights.

The people concerned believe that they are at an advantage but are in fact harming only themselves and society.

The fact is that, by definition and by its very nature, undeclared work is difficult to get to grips with in any country.

On the basis of estimates and long-term investigations, it may be assumed that a total of 28 million people engage in undeclared work.

The volume of undeclared work now corresponds to 15% of gross domestic product in the EU.

The sector as a whole is growing three times as fast as the official economy.

In the communication before this House, the Commission has problems with the analysis, as well as with the steps that need to be taken to stem the tide of undeclared work.

Parliament has been working flat out on these problems for a long time and produced a list of causes which produce combined and many-sided effects.

Almost all investigations list unduly high taxes and social security contributions as a cause.

However, the Committee lists further causes such as poverty, frivolous bidding procedures, giveaway prices for subcontractors, inflexible employment legislation and poor administrative practice, as well as a clear decline in the perception of undeclared work as something illegal and illicit.

In drawing its conclusions, the Committee has, however, come up with a variety of positions derived from the very different evaluations of the various causes.

I nonetheless believe that we are united as to our goal. It is only the path about which we disagree.

The conclusions adopted by the Committee at its last sitting call for as precise as possible an assessment to be made of the sectors affected and of the most significant groups of people involved, as well as for the social partners to be involved in active measures to combat undeclared work and for the issue to be tackled in national employment programmes. They also call for surveillance and for sanctions to be imposed when undeclared work is detected.

However, a majority of the Committee considers a reduction in tax and social security contributions to be crucial as a preventive measure, as well as a reduction in value added tax in the case of labour-intensive services, as already provided for by the Council' s decision of 28 February of this year and as also already practised in new countries.

It is also important to find solutions in hitherto unsatisfactory areas, for example in connection with the directive on the posting of workers and with the paid domestic work largely performed by women.

In the five minutes granted to me, I can present only a number of important points in the report.

The problem is complex and needs to be tackled at a variety of levels.

The Committee therefore calls upon the Commission and the individual Member States, each according to its powers but above all with firm determination, to take up Parliament' s proposals and to become active in this matter.

I hope that we can demonstrate to you our substantial agreement with the report, together with Parliament' s active resolve.

I would thank all my fellow MEPs for their splendid cooperation but, above all, the shadow rapporteur, Karin Jöns, for her constant readiness to engage in discussion.

Finally, I would draw your attention to a printing error.

In Article 25 of the conclusions, the Committee has clearly formulated the right to a class action.

This needs to be revised in the latest text we have before us.

The words 'appeals to the courts' must therefore be deleted and replaced with the words 'a class action' .

The words then correctly correspond to the will of the Committee, as agreed.

Mr President, this is a most useful report on a very important issue.

There are some parts I do not like, such as for instance paragraph 13 which promotes tax coordination.

I am proposing to table an amendment on that because, as the rapporteur knows, this is a subject particularly dear to the heart of UK Conservatives.

But the overall thrust of the report is very good.

There is another report out today which was an annual report from the Commission, referred to in today's Financial Times under the wonderful heading "Brussels demands labour reform".

To quote briefly from the article, "In its assessment of countries, the Commission will tell France that, like Germany, it must reduce 'fiscal pressure' on labour and reduce the 'administrative burden on companies'."

Certainly anything that promotes labour flexibility, liberates enterprise and reduces burdens on business must be good for the economies of those countries and for employment.

But it also addresses this problem of undeclared work.

The higher the tax, the more the red tape, the greater the incentive not to declare work.

I should like to make one further suggestion.

Countries with the highest undeclared work may well be recording the highest official unemployment figures, thereby attracting the highest offsetting regional funds.

This is perverse and it is in all our interests to address the problem.

Reducing tax and red tape would be a splendid start.

I urge Member States to follow the Commission advice and also to note the Glase report.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, there is a clear need for action on the issue of undeclared work in all the Member States, for there have not so far been many successes in combating it.

All the more reason, then, for me to welcome the Commission' s communication on undeclared work because it gets the discussion going at European level.

In this way, I now come to a core demand of this really excellent report by Mrs Glase.

We must unreservedly include the fight against undeclared work in European employment strategy.

With problems of this complexity, we need to exchange views, learn from each other and, in accordance with the tried and tested motto for our employment strategy, always seek best practice.

We must take a close look at the issue of undeclared work in order to be able to combat its various causes efficiently.

I would warn against over-simplification, three forms of which I would also at this point immediately oppose on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists.

The first point concerns the repeatedly made assertion according to which undeclared work is in the first place traceable to unduly high taxes and social security contributions.

I would say to my fellow MEPs in the conservative camp that things are really not that simple.

Let us take Austria and Italy, for example.

In Austria, taxes are significantly higher than in Italy.

In spite of that, there is very much more undeclared work in Italy.

High taxes and social charges are therefore only one reason among many.

There, taxes and social charges are somewhat higher still.

On the other hand, the amount of undeclared work is comparatively small.

This no doubt also means that the quantity of undeclared work also has something to do with social acceptability, that is to say with a society' s social coherence.

Undeclared work must no longer remain a mere peccadillo.

Secondly, I should like to reject the argument that making the labour market more flexible would reduce the amount of undeclared work.

This would-be panacea does not in fact work.

The Thatcher era in Britain taught us that.

The amount of undeclared work rose then, despite the fact that the labour market was made more flexible and social charges were reduced.

Making the labour market more flexible is something which no doubt only works if correspondingly high social standards can be maintained.

Thirdly, undeclared work is not primarily the result of illegal immigration from third countries.

On the contrary, the majority of those who engage in undeclared work are our own citizens.

As Mrs Glase' s report shows, we need a sensible policy mix at national and European levels.

As a part of this, public authorities throughout the EU must also be jointly liable for ensuring that no contracts at all are awarded to companies whose quotations can quite clearly be traced back to the existence of undeclared work. In the same way, companies need to be jointly and severally liable towards their sub-contractors.

However, we also want a right of class action which could help the trade unions, in particular, to take proceedings against those suspected of not declaring their employees or only partially declaring them.

Mr President, I would like to take the opportunity to thank Mrs Glase for her report, which is extremely efficient.

It is a very complex report which I described in committee as cautious in parts: cautious for reasons of necessity, if we consider that employment policy concerns the Member States, and therefore does not afford the European Parliament, or, by extension, Europe, genuine, practical competence in this matter.

So we are faced with a real, substantial difficulty to overcome.

As Mrs Jöns has just said, what we now need to do is develop a new strategy which looks at the entire question of work and employment from a global viewpoint, and calls upon the Member States first of all to make their situation public with regard to employment and undeclared work.

So far, we do not have detailed documentation for all the States; that is, we do not know the extent of the problem in all the Member States.

We do not know the extent of the problem in the States which are hoping to join the European Union either.

It is a complex issue: the percentage is increasing every year in line with the gross domestic product; we have a remarkably high average of 15% across the countries of the European Union. This figure should make us think.

In any case, for all of us, illegal and undeclared work constitutes, by definition, an abuse of those who need to work, not least in terms of the tax burden which should ensure solidarity.

This is, therefore, a crime against society, which we as legislators must address, within the limits of our direct competence in this field.

However, there are specific recommendations in the report, for example specific procedures which could be implemented in order to fight the scourge of illegal or undeclared work.

I tabled some amendments, which have already been accepted by the rapporteur, and I will therefore not dwell on them.

I would just like to use the rest of the time available to mention an amendment which is particularly important to me and which I believe people found difficult to assess objectively: the amendment on illegal child labour, which I will summarise now.

It is claimed that child labour does not exist in Europe, but that it might exist - as has been stated - in Italy and southern countries.

Child labour exists everywhere: among immigrants or third-country nationals, among all those young people who drop out of education before they reach the age of majority, who are exploited, underpaid and untrained, thereby constituting a serious problem of exploitation and undeclared work because they do not have a qualification which can be used to ensure that they are adequately paid.

Lastly, the issue of illegal work also concerns children under 15 years old!

So let us not pretend that this problem does not exist in Europe, because it does exist, and Parliament should speak out resolutely on this matter too, in order to confirm the social, democratic and political maturity of this House.

Mr President, there are different types of undeclared work.

It can be difficult drawing the line between undeclared and properly declared work.

Sometimes, the blame has to be placed upon individuals who do undeclared work in order to dodge paying tax.

The serious cases of undeclared work are those that are organised as such.

More often than not, many workers are involved, and the reason is that there are employers who organise, lead and distribute work that will go undeclared in order to keep wage costs down and reduce taxes for themselves.

That is the heart of the matter.

In many quarters, organised undeclared work is well-known, both among the local population and the authorities.

In those cases where no action is taken against such work, this may be because unemployment is high and poor people have no alternative to being exploited by employers who do not declare their employees.

There is also a tax argument which plays a big part in Mrs Glase' s thinking.

This subject has already been taken up in the debate.

Mrs Jöns observed quite correctly that in those regions and countries where the level of tax is fairly - or even very - high, where the labour market is well organised and where workers have strong unions, there is almost no undeclared work at all, at least not in any organised form.

If Mrs Glase and her group want to reduce tax in order to make undeclared work less profitable, this is as good as saying that they want to legalise the economic calculations behind undeclared work and make them the general rule.

It is like increasing the speed limit on the roads to reduce the number of drivers who break the law by driving too fast, or like legalising the drugs trade to reduce the amount of illegal drug dealing.

I was quite shocked to read the rapporteur' s original report in which she proposed that all employees in European workplaces should be forced to carry electronic cards so as constantly to be monitored by the authorities.

I believe it is the employers who organise production and take on workers.

If anyone is to be compelled to carry electronic cards, it is therefore these employers, who are responsible for the work that is done.

My group and I believe that fighting unemployment and poverty is the best, and in fact the only, way of properly combating organised undeclared work.

Improved wages are a much better remedy than lower taxes and other concessions to irresponsible employers.

Mr President, I think we should begin by congratulating ourselves not only on the quality of Mrs Glase's work, but also on the fact that this subject has come before Parliament.

We are living in a Europe that is increasingly closer to its citizens and therefore we cannot omit to concern ourselves with employment, as employment, together with health, is one of the main concerns of the citizens and, I dare say, especially of those who are unemployed because they have lost their job or perhaps never had one.

We should ask the question whether those who are working in the hidden economy, working on the black market or, to use the most common term, carrying out undeclared work, really have an adequate job?

I do not think this is the right time to detail the harm done by undeclared work to the public funds and those carrying it out, due to their own position of insecurity, and to other employers, competitors or otherwise, and society in general.

The economic causes of undeclared work, increased income for workers, the opportunity to save on tax and social contributions or the reduction in costs for the company, are not unrelated to its existence and a significantly higher rate of growth than that of the legal or official economy.

To refer briefly to the sectors or groups in which undeclared work has the most scope for expansion, we need to include multi-job situations where the income obtained from this illegal work is supplementary; economically inactive people who have greater flexibility in terms of time and the case of the unemployed who want an additional income, often turning down offers of legal work.

We must also consider the situation of illegal immigrants who cannot carry out other forms of work.

In addition to these easily visible situations, it is assumed that there are also many cases of production decentralisation, outsourcing or subcontracting which, in a less direct, less visible way, can lead to undeclared work.

A situation which must be prevented and which I would like to consider is that of the new type of work via the Internet, teleworking, part-time work, which can be an easy breeding-ground for undeclared work.

Mr President, we must anticipate this, as Europe must opt for secure, stable, quality work, and undeclared work is neither stable nor secure and nor, of course, does it demonstrate solidarity.

Mr President, we must welcome the Commission' s decision to address the problem of undeclared work and I too should like to congratulate the rapporteur on managing to clarify certain aspects of such a complex issue.

It is precisely because this is such a crucial issue that I should like to make two comments.

It is true that this is not just some sub-issue; it is a central issue which impacts on the efficiency of individual policies in the taxation, insurance and employment sectors.

With the rapid spread of undeclared work in industrialised countries, this phenomenon has ceased to be a typical feature of third world countries, for which the International Labour Organisation several decades ago coined the term "informal sector" , which is not the same as "black" or illicit work.

That is a mistake which I would ask the Commission to take into account.

What we are witnessing, in fact, is the emergence of two productive systems and two social models.

One in which producers operate by analysing the responsibilities and costs imposed by the system and another in which they operate to the detriment of the former and society as a whole.

What we must understand is that the future success of European initiatives in the employment, insurance and tax sectors depends on the way in which this issue is resolved; in other words, this issue is of equal importance to employers, workers and the rest of society.

Secondly, I think that the general reference to undeclared work or to certain general categories is the weak link in the approach to the problem: we all know that undeclared work cannot be dealt with as a single phenomenon and needs a policy which is differentiated by sector and sub-sector, depending on the people supplying it and the nature of the individual problem.

The various categories of people which supply it, such as immigrants, minorities, children, women, moonlighters etc. cannot all be dealt with in the same way.

There is a thriving undeclared sector and there are instances which only partially constitute undeclared work.

Then there is the matter of bogus self-employment and certain new forms of employment.

All these problems require innovative solutions; bans are not enough.

Mr President, the good news is that Europe has not run out of work.

The bad news is that, more and more often, work goes undeclared.

Failing to declare work is no mere peccadillo.

The wide-boy in the local pub who brags about ripping off the State should no longer be indulged.

In Germany, for example, work is being lost due to illegal employment and, for every ten thousand jobs, DM 240 million is lost in taxes and social security contributions.

In her splendid and balanced report, Anne Glase estimates the volume of undeclared work in the EU at between 10 and 20 per cent of GNP.

People who engage in undeclared work are to be found not only among the unemployed and among those who have entered the country illegally and have to suffer at the hands of those who profiteer from unemployment.

They are also to be found among part-time workers who, in addition, are working at night and in the evenings on their computers, as well as among the self-employed who do additional work they do not declare.

Those affected by this are small and medium-sized businesses which, unlike competitors who operate illegally, obey the law.

Jobs cannot be safeguarded in this way. Nor can new ones be created.

Firstly, abuse of the rules governing work must be punished, with fines for those who engage in undeclared work and for those who employ others to do such work.

Those who hire workers who do not have work permits should be excluded from being awarded public contracts.

Moreover, they should expect to receive custodial sentences.

Secondly, thorough checks, including cross-border checks, by the relevant authorities are necessary.

Town clerks' offices must cooperate with factory inspectorates, and tax offices with immigration authorities, preferably in task forces.

Thirdly, incentives to abuse the system must be reduced.

Taxes and social charges payable by companies must be significantly reduced, as must VAT on labour-intensive services.

Fourthly, it is particularly important that there should be more awareness-raising campaigns in order to convince all relevant target groups that undeclared work needs to be combated.

It is extremely damaging both socially and economically.

I should like to thank Mrs Glase for her excellent report.

The Commission has opened the debate with its communication on undeclared work in the spring of 1998.

We are pleased to say that it has stimulated debate both with the European institutions and within Member States.

The time has come to bring together the fruits of this debate.

Therefore I especially welcome Parliament's initiative in taking up this issue now.

The Commission's communication focused on the policy strategy to tackle this important problem.

It has highlighted the need for an integrated approach to combating undeclared work, involving both preventive measures and sanctions.

These deal with the two dimensions of undeclared work: it can be viewed as an issue of individuals taking advantage of the system and undermining solidarity in the process or as the outcome of greater flexibility in the labour market and slow adaptation of existing legislation.

I am pleased to see that Parliament has agreed with the Commission's analysis.

Parliament also seems to share the view that the main action has to be taken at the level of Member States.

Indeed it is the mix of the situation in the labour market, the tax and social security mix, as well as the social acceptance, that determine the level of undeclared work.

For that reason, the action that can be taken at Community level can only be minimal and has to be clearly targeted in those fields where the Community can have an impact.

The Commission is also convinced that undeclared work should be dealt with within the framework of the Luxembourg process.

We believe that undeclared work should be actively taken into account in the national action plans for employment.

We are working with the Member States to ensure that this is so.

We welcome Parliament's support in this.

However, the Commission can have an impact in developing a standard methodology to describe and record the extent of undeclared work and to assess its impact on the economy and on social solidarity.

This we have done with the Communication in 1998 and we will continue to do so.

Indeed the Commission is now carrying out a study on different measures used to combat undeclared work in selected Member States in order to identify good policy mixes.

Results of this study will be presented in a conference at the end of the year.

However, to have annual monitoring and reporting on this problem would be heavy procedurally while not adding much new.

We must not forget that undeclared work is a deeply rooted phenomenon.

To keep this item on the agenda and to ensure that progress is reported we would suggest a triennial reporting exercise.

The Commission agrees with the analysis of Parliament that women, while not the majority of undeclared workers, often operate in situations of greater insecurity and exploitation.

Within its possibilities the Commission will continue to monitor the situation and report on it within the framework of existing reports on the principle of equal treatment.

That is very important to the need to maintain momentum in introducing and reinforcing equal opportunities for women and men.

The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon.

(The sitting was closed at 11.45 p.m.)

Mr President, on a point of order. Questions to the Council are no longer being answered in the time stipulated.

Despite being warned on two occasions, the Council has not answered European Parliament questions.

Would you please ensure that the Council fulfils its obligations in this area as well?

Your request and your comment will be dealt with appropriately.

Mr President, on a point of order.

Regarding the questions that will shortly be put to the Commission and the Council, you will be aware that the French Government, confronted by the fuel crisis that has gripped France along with the rest of Europe, took a number of measures yesterday which will drastically alter the conditions of competition and the basis of the fight against the greenhouse effect, and which will, therefore, have an immediate and serious impact on Europe.

Mrs Loyola de Palacio had an extremely interesting article published in the French press this morning on this European crisis. Would it be possible for her and/or the Commissioner for Competition to speak during this part-sitting in order to tell us how the Commission intends to react to the fuel crisis, and how the Commission and the Council intend to prevent an outbreak of fiscal dumping in Europe and prepare Europe to deal with this crisis?

Of course, Mr Lipietz, the point that you have raised is very topical and very urgent, but the agenda has already been fixed, and therefore, I think it will be quite difficult to satisfy your request, although the President will do everything possible to deal with it.

Mr President, the honourable Member's request concerns a matter of importance.

The President has very clearly ruled out the possibility of a debate this morning.

I shall tell Mrs de Palacio and Mr Monti that Parliament would like to hear them and, together with the Presidency, we shall decide on a suitable time.

Thank you very much, Commissioner, for making yourself available.

The next item is the joint debate on:

the Council statement on doping in sport and sport in society;

the Commission statement on football player transfers;

the report (A5-0203/2000) by Mrs Zabell, on behalf of the Committee on Culture, Youth, Education, the Media and Sport, on the communication from the Commission to the Council, the European Parliament, the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions: Community support plan to combat doping in sport [COM(1999) 643 - C5-0087/2000 - 2000/2056(COS)]];

the report (A5-0208/2000) by Mr Mennea, on behalf of the Committee on Culture, Youth, Education, the Media and Sport, on the report from the Commission to the European Council: With a view to safeguarding current sports structures and maintaining the social function of sport within the Community framework - The Helsinki report on sport [COM(1999) 644 - C5-0088/2000 - 2000/2055(COS)].

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I should like to begin by thanking you for devoting this morning to sport.

In eight days' time, the Olympic Games will be opening in Sydney. Athletes will be gathered there from all over the planet.

The results of the various competitions are not yet known; they are not predestined; in sport, anything can happen.

The champions who are preparing to enter this field of dreams have their own schedules.

Many are familiar with the world of professional sport, but, as you well know, all of them have at least two things in common.

Firstly, their selection is the climax of several years of effort and of meticulous training, with volunteers, coaches and public and private resources all mobilised on their behalf.

Secondly, and most importantly, they all began their sporting careers in an amateur club or at a school.

In order to promote sport, we must also - at the same time and as part of the same effort - promote local amateur clubs alongside top-level amateur and professional sport.

Sport at the highest level is the stuff of dreams; it contributes to the development of mass sports and, through them, to social education.

Elite sport, be it amateur or professional, receives global media coverage today.

More and more men and women, whatever their age and their circumstances, are taking part in a sport.

Sport has permeated the whole of society.

So, nobody here will be surprised to see how this human activity can sometimes be perverted by acts of violence or racism, or engender greed.

Far be it for me to demonise the economic aspect of sport.

Sport needs resources, and the public purse cannot provide all the necessary funding.

It is not a matter of distinguishing between a pure form of sport which is untainted by money and a sponsored form of sport which is corrupt.

No, the real question is a different one and may be expressed as follows: will the sporting community have the means to preserve the ethics of sport by harnessing the funds that flow into sport and ensuring that money does not rule sport?

Let us not beat about the bush.

This problem is not one that will arise in twenty years' time; it is already a problem today.

Sporting events have become so attractive that financial interests seek to use them as a source of profits, even if it means sacrificing the ethics of sport and treating sportspeople as marketable commodities. Who has not witnessed the sale and purchase of sportsmen, some of whom are still very young?

Who has not been shocked by the amounts that are paid for broadcasting rights or by the size of certain transfer fees?

Who has not been alarmed at the sight of increasingly overcrowded sporting calendars? Who has not been concerned at the plans of certain private groups to create their own sports competitions, outside the jurisdiction of the national and international federations and on the basis of a single criterion, namely the size of the participating clubs' budgets, as we have recently seen in association football and, subsequently, in basketball too?

What kind of sport do we want for the twenty-first century?

The reply to this all-embracing, fundamental question depends on our response to the present situation. There are two options: having identified these excesses, we could consider that sport no longer depends on anything but the market or sportspeople on anything but their added value.

In that case, we must apply the rules of competition and compound the present follies with a dose of deregulation, accepting, in the name of freedom of movement, the sale and purchase of youngsters aged between 18 and 20. The other option is to decide, on the basis of the European sporting tradition that has been developed in modern times, with its humanist values and voluntary structures, and in the light of the present situation, with all its economic and social implications, that we should re-equip the sporting community with the legal and political instruments it requires to protect the entire range of sporting activities within the framework of their respective federations.

This second option, which is supported by the French Presidency, does not mean adhering to the status quo, but actually requires innovative proposals from the sporting community itself - and I am gratified to see that these have been forthcoming on the question of transfers - and from governments with a view to combating the excesses that are affecting the sporting world and to developing practices designed to protect the associations and, hence, the cohesion of each sport.

Ladies and gentlemen, the European Parliament has already devoted a huge volume of work to this option, and we are starting to move forward within the Council too.

In June 1997, the sports ministers met at the Stade de France in Paris, and this was followed by meetings in Germany, Finland and Portugal.

There have been the annex to the Treaty of Amsterdam, the conclusions of the Vienna Council and, last December, the Helsinki report on the subject of sport.

Then, at Feira in Portugal, on the occasion of the Council meeting in June 2000, a clear call was made for the specific characteristics of sport to be taken into account in the application of Community policies.

It is the wish of the French Presidency that we should succeed in defining precisely what these specific characteristics are and what their recognition implies.

To be absolutely precise, it is a matter of recognising that sport is rooted in the everyday practice of millions of men, women and children, in the commitment of hundreds of thousands of volunteers; that it is an irreplaceable instrument of informal education, of social inclusion, of access to citizenship; that sport is, above all, a means by which the individual can grow and flourish and can encounter other people in a spirit of mutual respect.

We need cohesion throughout the Union.

I am delighted that this is emphasised in the report prepared by Mr Mennea and adopted by the Commission.

This approach is the basis on which my counterparts in the other fourteen Member States and I have been working, in close collaboration with Commissioner Viviane Reding.

After two meetings of the working parties established by the Portuguese Presidency, a meeting of the Troika, and a great many bilateral contacts with my counterparts from the other Member States, here are some of the objectives that seem to have attracted the broadest consensus within the Council.

The first question concerns the protection of under-age sportspeople.

We must be able to put an end to commercial transactions involving minors.

Specific measures should be taken to protect the health of young athletes, especially to prevent any recourse to performance-enhancing drugs, and to ensure that they complete their education and vocational training.

To that end, the subject has been placed on the agenda of the Council of Youth Ministers for its meeting on 9 November.

I am very hopeful that, having regard to the 1994 Directive on the protection of young people at work, we shall be able to offer the prospect of precise recommendations on this point.

Secondly, I also wish to see measures taken to maintain the development policies of sports clubs.

Sports federations and governments should be able, if they so wish, to take appropriate measures to protect the clubs that develop young talent.

It must be possible to insert provisions such as a clause requiring young players to sign their first professional contract with the club where they have received youth training, perhaps with compensation proportionate to the cost of their training to indemnify the latter club if such a player is transferred.

At the same time, the international sports authorities have a responsibility to take action to control club management in order to avoid excesses, especially in relation to transfers.

Thirdly, in the wider context, it seems to me that there is an urgent need to recognise the unique central role played by the federations.

I believe it is necessary to acknowledge the key role of the sports federations in organising sports competitions, in formulating the rules of their respective sports and in awarding titles.

This does not mean that I advocate vesting these rights in the federations without demanding anything from them in return.

That is why I envisage that the recognition of these exclusive rights should be accompanied by the imposition on sports federations of precise duties and responsibilities relating to their obligation to serve the public interest and to redistribute their commercial revenue equitably.

Identifying the specific features of sport is an enormously complex undertaking.

Significant progress in this direction is a matter of urgency.

I believe we are caught up in a race against the clock.

France has decided to make this a priority of its presidency.

I have great faith in the contribution that will come from your Parliament.

I have taken note, by the way, of your call for the inclusion of an article in the Treaty and see it as a manifestation of your will to ensure that due consideration is given to these concerns.

Let me turn now to the fight against doping, which is an absolute priority issue.

I am also aware that the European Parliament shares this concern, as your reports and resolutions show.

You know that it is a long and arduous struggle, one which has to be waged relentlessly for the sake of public health and the sporting ethic.

Recent events show that we still have a long way to go.

Be that as it may, I refuse to join the defeatists who want us to throw in the towel on the grounds that drugs are endemic in sport today.

We need to enlist the support of the sporting community, but there is an equal need to enlist the support of governments and the European Union.

The World Anti-Doping Agency that has now been created owes its existence to the will of the European Union.

The International Olympic Committee has established the objectives of its fight against the use of drugs at the Olympic Games in Sydney.

Nevertheless, as you know, a debate is raging across the Member States of the European Union on the expediency of direct EU membership of the organs of the World Anti-Doping Agency and, hence, on whether the EU should help to fund the agency.

I wish to lay particular emphasis on this point, because it has emerged from our exchanges with the European Commission that the latter will not commit itself to the participation of the European Union as such unless it receives a strong and unanimous political signal in favour of participation.

I, for my part, believe that we have the legal basis for participation.

Doping is unquestionably a matter of public health.

One need only consider the increase in the consumption of performance-enhancing drugs by young amateur sportspeople.

It also has to do with the fight against trafficking and, thus, with police and customs cooperation.

Lastly, the struggle against doping also relates to the development of research.

As is proposed in the report prepared by Mrs Zabell and adopted by the parliamentary committee, the aim would be for the European Union to be able to speak positively, with one voice, in order to guarantee the effectiveness of the Agency.

While we await the resolution of the legal questions regarding the involvement of the European Union in the Agency, my Troika colleagues and I have established a liaison committee, which will be very useful.

There will also be a need to ensure that the Agency grows in stature so that it has the power to act in every country.

Public opinion, sportswomen, sportsmen and everyone who is interested in these Games expect these decisions to be taken.

The credibility of the anti-doping effort depends on it.

Ladies and gentlemen, European sport is at the crossroads.

I hope it will continue to be a field of dreams, just as I hope that it will keep giving young people the educational and integrative framework they need - in short, that it will remain a school of life for our children.

But the greed that it arouses and the threat that emanates from such greed must be taken seriously.

I am convinced that the clear positions you are preparing to adopt through these two reports will be a great asset in this debate.

I wish to thank you for that and to tell you how fervently I hope that we shall be able to continue this work together.

Mr President, Parliament has asked me to make a statement on the transfer system and on the whole panic which has gripped the world of sport and which the press has been echoing.

I have naturally taken note of Mrs Buffet's statements.

Let me also convey to her my sincere thanks for the work that the French Presidency has been doing in the interests of sport and for the solidarity it has demonstrated with the Commission and with Parliament.

It is my fervent hope that these efforts by the French Presidency will be rewarded with a very favourable outcome for sport at the European level.

Mr President, I shall respond to the report on doping in sport and sport in society at the end of the debate, if I may.

For the moment I shall confine myself to a statement on the transfer issue.

The approach that the Commission has adopted with regard to sport is defined in its Helsinki report.

We want sport to have a social function.

This report invites the sporting community, the Member States and the European Union to pool their efforts in order to ensure that sport, in its new economic environment, will continue to act as an instrument of education and integration on the basis of its values of fair play, equal opportunities and the pursuit of merit.

It goes without saying that the provisions of Community law, especially those based on the principles of non-discrimination and free movement of persons, as well as the rules of competition, are applicable to sport.

It is equally self-evident that, as the declaration annexed to the Treaty of Amsterdam emphasises, the European Community recognises the social impact of sport and the importance of dialogue with the sporting community.

This is the context, ladies and gentlemen, in which the Commission, under the direct responsibility of my colleague Mario Monti, has been examining several aspects of competition as they relate to sport.

The Commission recognises that the sporting community is free to determine the rules that will ensure the proper administration of their respective sports.

The Commission recognises the specific nature of sport in the sense that some degree of equality is needed in competition between players and clubs so as to guarantee the uncertainty of results, which is the very essence of sport, as the Minister has just emphasised.

The Commission is investigating only those aspects of sport with a Community dimension and an economic dimension.

Regarding the matter of current FIFA rules governing transfers, I must remind you that, back in 1998, following a number of complaints, the Commission questioned the compatibility of the FIFA transfer rules with the rules of competition and sent FIFA a list of grievances.

The Commission believes that the FIFA rules on transfers unfairly obstruct freedom of movement.

This is especially true of the rules which lay down conditions of transfer on expiry of a player's contract, even though the contract has been duly terminated in accordance with national employment legislation and with its own terms and the contractually agreed financial indemnity has been determined and paid.

Contrary to what some press articles have been suggesting, the Commission has no intention of simply abolishing the transfer system or of creating a situation in which players would be able to terminate their contracts on a sudden impulse.

The Commission, as the Guardian of the Treaties, wishes FIFA to apply a transfer system which complies with the principles of Community law as well as respecting the unique nature of sport.

The present system, however, satisfies neither of these criteria.

It obstructs competition between clubs as well as players' freedom of movement, it has done nothing to prevent the over-commercialisation of sport or the widening of the gulf between the rich clubs and those with limited financial resources, nor has it prevented players - especially the youngest players - from becoming targets of financial speculation.

For many years, ladies and gentlemen, the Commission has been waiting 'patiently' for FIFA to present a formula that could replace the present system, to offer a basis on which we could work together in search of a universally satisfactory and equitable solution.

Mario Monti and I have established contacts with the footballing world.

We have made the point that, under national codes of employment legislation, some form of compensation is warranted when a player breaks his contract with one club in order to join another.

We have emphasised that, in order to avoid distorting championship competitions, we are naturally disposed to accept rules limiting transfers to particular fixed periods and, above all, we have stressed that efforts made to develop young talent must be encouraged, which means that we can accept a compensation mechanism designed to reflect the expense incurred by a club in the development of young players, provided that such a mechanism does not put young players in a position of undue dependence on their clubs.

For a number of years, and until a few days ago, we had received no reply.

The Commission certainly cannot wait indefinitely, which is why Mario Monti and I have been declaring very plainly over the past few months that FIFA must propose other solutions or run the risk of having its rules banned in the EU - something that no one would wish to happen.

Mario Monti and I are pleased to learn that our plea seems to have been heeded this time.

Last week FIFA admitted that its transfer rules do not conform to Community legislation, and it announced its intention of establishing a new system.

Since the details of that system have yet to be finalised, I cannot comment on them at the present time.

We have, however, received an initial outline of the proposals.

This afternoon I shall be meeting with FIFA officials and a delegation from the national leagues.

They too will be making proposals.

Mario Monti's departments are ready to examine these, within the shortest possible time, with the aid of my departments and those of Anna Diamantopoulou.

Our doors are always open to any debate or any negotiations that will help us to arrive at a consensus.

Allow me to conclude by underlining the commitment of the Commission to the European model of sport and its values.

The European Parliament has affirmed on many occasions - for which I am deeply grateful to it - that it shares this commitment.

I believe you will reaffirm this by adopting the parliamentary report devoted to the Helsinki report.

The French Presidency, as I said at the start of my speech, has testified to this same attachment to sport and its values on behalf of the Council.

So, if I am not mistaken, we are all on the same wavelength.

The Commission is acting in the interests of sport to preserve the beautiful game, and I am convinced that, if we all pull our weight, a satisfactory solution will soon be in sight for the good of sport, for the good of football and for the good of Europe.

Mr President, doping is not a new problem. It did not even start this century, but comes from the last century.

In fact, the first death from doping took place in 1896, when a cyclist took drugs.

The first measures against doping, however, began to be taken after the first Helsinki Olympic games in 1952, but it was in the Tour de France of 1998 that the problem became too big and the serious fight against it began.

In fact, we have already heard this morning that it is a priority for the French Presidency, the Council and also for the Commission.

We have to assess why this problem exists and why doping has increased so much in recent years.

On the one hand, it is worth mentioning the over-commercialisation that is affecting sport, as well as the saturation of sporting calendars and greater demands on sportsmen and women, both physical and mental.

Before, the motto of sport was that of Pierre de Coubertin, 'the important thing is taking part' .

Now, however, it seems that whoever comes first wins, whoever comes second loses, and the rest just take part.

On the other hand, we should not forget that, these days, an increasing number of tests are being done, many of them outside competitions, and this also means that, logically, more cases of doping are being discovered.

However, it is very important to distinguish between the two types of doping: on the one hand, there is intentional or planned doping, that is, a team plans which substances the sportsman or woman needs to take, and when, in order to improve his or her physical performance.

Logically, this is more common in sports with greater financial resources.

On the other hand, there is accidental doping, which often does not even improve the sportsman or woman' s physical performance.

This tends to be more common in sports which have few resources, so that often public opinion does not even realise what has happened.

Obviously, we have to fight both types of doping, although each one should be approached in a very different manner.

Combating intentional or planned doping is much more difficult.

Police cooperation plays a very important role, because we should not forget that the trafficking of doping substances is worth EUR 1 billion per year.

It is also important to listen to sportsmen and women when drawing up sporting calendars or planning a competition or trial. Sometimes, we ask them to do more than is physically possible without turning to external help.

Overall, we need to fight doping globally.

It is not an isolated problem for one Member State and therefore the presence of the European Union in the World Anti-Doping Agency is absolutely essential.

Combating accidental doping is much easier.

It is mainly due to the lack of information among sportsmen and women, and the report therefore proposes that there should be an indicator on the boxes of pharmaceutical products, consisting of five Olympic rings and a traffic light.

Thus, when buying a drug, sportsmen and women will be able to clearly see the red traffic light indicating the risk of testing positive, or the green light which indicates that there is no risk, or the amber light indicating that there may be a risk and that they should contact their doctor or a specialist for advice.

This is very important, because we now have fifteen Member States with fifteen lists of prohibited substances, and in each country there can be a different brand name for the same drug.

For this purpose, we ask for the intervention of the European Medicines Evaluation Agency.

However, even though the types of doping are different, sportsmen and women receive the same treatment and from the moment that they have a positive result they are considered to be guilty, with no right to prove their innocence and without an assessment of whether the doping was intentional or not, as occurs with other things in life.

We also call on the European Commission to request that the Fifth Framework Programme carry out research into doping substances and their impact on the health of sportsmen and women, detection methods and the natural limits of hormones that can be produced by the human body.

With regard to laboratories, it is very important that they comply with ISO standards on uniform methods for collecting and analysing samples, and also that there should be protection and confidentiality, both in collection and in dealing with the case, in order to preserve sportsmen and women' s right to honour and privacy.

When a person other than the sportsman or woman has taken part, such as a club, an association, a federation, a doctor, a coach, etc., that person should also be subject to a penalty, exactly equal to that given to the sportsman or woman, because we should not forget that the person with the shortest working life will always be the sportsman or woman.

Mr President, the European Union must act to ensure that sport is given its rightful place and due attention and that it is regulated by clear, precise rules.

The system of sport which the European Union must aspire to must make the right to sport for all citizens a practical reality and aim to preserve the social function and traditional values of sport, while taking into account its economic and legal development.

This is why the declaration on sport in the Treaty of Amsterdam annex is no longer sufficient to ensure that the predetermined objectives are met.

Sport needs a new definition: indeed, it should be considered as an activity that is an integral part of the education and training of young people, free time and the integration of socially excluded and disabled people.

In short, sport must be an essential factor in promoting the education and integration of all social classes.

Moreover, it must be able to adapt to the new business context, within which it must evolve without losing its autonomy.

Some changes are needed so that the European Union can help with the developments in the world of sport.

The central committee has stated several times that it can no longer guarantee the pyramid structure on the basis of which sporting organisations and the social function of sport are currently organised.

A legal basis is therefore essential since, without one, there is a danger that the objectives that have been reached so far will come to nothing.

Europe must be more forceful in the fight against doping, a phenomenon which, unfortunately, is growing very rapidly and is no longer confined to the world of sport: the spread of this scourge has led to an increase in highly lucrative illegal activities, in which many criminal organisations have been involved, and we need to recognise that entrusting the fight against doping solely to sporting organisations has been a complete failure.

Europe should therefore look into the possibility of promulgating Community criminal legislation which would be valid in all the Member States, and should consider setting up an independent, transparent, European anti-doping agency.

Moreover, all sports-related economic activities must be subject to the rules of the EC Treaty.

The monopolistic activity of sporting organisations has caused numerous problems and must therefore be subject to strict checks and possibly reduced.

We need to encourage sporting associations, provided that aims are established to support amateur sport and to show solidarity with less-advantaged people, particularly the disabled.

We need to try to improve the role played by sport and the role of the teaching of physical education in the curricula of schools.

Furthermore, the work and status of sportspersons should be properly appreciated and safeguarded by the Member States.

I feel that it is the European Union' s duty to help reintegrate into the labour market athletes who have made no provision for their futures once their sporting activity comes to an end.

Europe must also call for sportspersons' professional qualifications to be recognised at European level and for their vocational training to be promoted.

There must be a firm, determined fight against the trade in young sportspersons, calling for the entry of young people into professional sport and their membership to take place as late as possible.

Moreover, we need to ensure that the statutes of national and international sporting federations lay down mission statements and contain clear, precise rules.

We need to combat the violence which takes place at sporting events and ensure that our citizens are protected.

Furthermore, we need to eliminate the permanent sporting contract currently used in many sporting federations, as this violates the most basic principles of the Member States' constitutions.

In conclusion, until a legal basis is established for 'sport' , Europe will not be able to do much in this area and will therefore have to consider the possibility of taking on a certain amount of autonomy in the sector, not in order to take it away from other bodies, but so that it can make an essential contribution to safeguarding the values and functions of sport.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market was first and foremost concerned that the treaty provisions put into concrete terms by the Bosman judgment should also be observed in future European Union policy.

We are therefore grateful to the committee responsible that it has incorporated the requests to this effect into its report.

We also unreservedly support the Commission's position on this issue.

This is necessary because of competition law and freedom of movement for workers. Mrs Reding has already made this point very well.

I therefore regret all the more that it has become evident over the last few days that many people in positions of authority in football and other sporting associations are unable to learn lessons and enter into a dialogue.

Judging by the statements made over the last few days, you cannot help feeling that the assumption that a lot of footballers' talents lie more in their legs than between their ears is quite justified.

So, when we now hear calls for Heads of Government to get involved and turn European law on its head, as it were, then I feel bound to say that this demonstrates that people clearly have no idea what the legal position is.

This has got nothing to do with Heads of State and Government at all.

It is the European Commission that is responsible for ensuring that the Treaties are respected. And the Commission is exercising precisely that remit.

I would like to say, once again, that I unreservedly support the position being taken by the Commission on this issue.

Mr President, ten days before the start of the Olympic Games, the spectre of doping is hovering over Sidney.

The International Olympic Committee cannot be serious with its talk of 'clean' Olympic Games when we all know that 1,000 syringes of erythropoietin were stolen from a Sidney hospital a month ago and when one legend of the Olympic spirit after another now openly maintains that there are anti-doping tests for every banned substance only the International Olympic Committee prefers to bow to pressure from big business than to apply them.

Minister Buffet, who has addressed us so eloquently here today, stated in Le Monde on 4 August that the basic ingredient missing in the fight against doping was strong political will.

But it would appear to be difficult to exercise this will when there is the pressure of commercialisation and the pressure, encapsulated in the thoughtless and superficial motto of the Olympic Games, to be 'faster, higher, stronger' .

It is even more difficult to exercise this political will when the supply of banned substances is much more in demand, with a turnover, as we have heard, of a billion euros, although this turnover is much higher - much, much higher - if we include the mild doping which is spreading through gyms, beauty centres and God knows where else.

We need to bring our political clout to bear as quickly as possible, we need to harmonise lists of dangerous substances, methods of testing for the new substances which industry is constantly producing, we need to apply sanctions, we need to find out who is responsible and apply sanctions.

Of course, the European Union needs to take a more active role in the World Anti-Doping Agency, precisely as the President of the Council described, and I agree with him.

I should like to finish by saying that this World Anti-Doping Agency is quite simply an observer in Sidney today.

And, as long as we are just observers, nothing will be done in the fight against doping.

Mr President, sport is a popular activity.

We have just had Euro 2000, the Olympic Games are about to start, and, what is more, there are an increasing number of people who enjoy sports as a leisure activity.

It is healthy and brings people together from all walks of life, irrespective of age or race.

This is, of course, extremely important in a society which increasingly focuses on the individual.

At the same time, as has already been pointed out, there is also a downside to sport, namely violence around the pitches, the use of doping, an increase in the use of performance-enhancing substances - also increasingly so in amateur sport - and the huge pressure on sportsmen and women due to the major economic interests involved.

This is why we welcome with open arms the fact that the European Commission has taken it upon itself to highlight the social aspect of sport and to examine how the economic dimension of sport can be reconciled with the educational and other roles that sport fulfils.

The PPE-DE is entirely behind this objective and has tabled amendments to give this initiative a boost.

It has, more specifically, submitted proposals to step up the support given to sports organisations, in order to invest in people, in team spirit and to improve the legal framework underpinning sport, as all we have at the moment is the declaration to the Treaty of Amsterdam.

With regard to a few specific problems which sport is having to contend with, I would like to say the following on the issue of transfers.

The Bosman ruling has mainly hit the smaller clubs, as the Commissioner has already pointed out, especially in the smaller countries, such as the Netherlands where I am from.

These clubs invariably need to make major investments in training and education without sufficient backing or compensation.

We therefore hope that the Commission, in tandem with the sports organisations, will produce proposals which will make amends in the short term.

The sports federations, such as UEFA and FIFA, have also submitted proposals to this effect.

Doping is a huge, international problem, as already pointed out by the rapporteur, who has drafted an excellent report, and it is therefore vital for there to be international cooperation in this respect.

We will need to agree internationally on what we take doping to mean and will need to refer to the World Anti-Doping Agency.

It would be useful if pharmaceutical products could be labelled with a 'doping-safe' logo and a warning, and we would also welcome a more pro-active preventive policy.

Mr President, Madam President-in-Office, Commissioner, the Group of the Party of European Socialists asked the Commission to make a statement on the topical subject of football transfers and for it to be added to this joint debate.

I welcome the statement made by the Commissioner, which has our support.

I recommend that, in future, she should come to Parliament before so many leaks occur from the Commission administration, which forced the Commissioner to face the press with great courage and determination, not afraid to tell them the truth.

It would be better if they came to Parliament first and had our support.

The subject of transfers is perhaps an example that sums up the current situation of sport.

There are two reports, the Zabell report and the Mennea report, drawn up by Olympic champions.

On the eve of the Sydney Olympics, I would like to recall that the first, and perhaps the best, contribution to peace made by Europe, that is, by ancient Greece, was precisely the Olympic Games.

They talk of sport as a citizen' s right, with a social and cultural function.

There is a component of transfer fees that is justified in terms of the contribution that is made to training and preparing sportsmen.

This makes sense and needs to be regulated, and we need to support young people and small clubs so that they can promote themselves.

Another dimension is the big business involved, which in many countries is becoming the second largest sector in the economy.

We are dealing with uncontrolled, unsustainable long-term speculation.

A major club in my native city made the biggest transfer in football history - EUR 70 million.

The person involved has said that it is absurd, and the chairman of the club has said that it is in a very grave economic situation.

If we were applying the rules of economics, we would have to act differently.

Therefore, I think that the Commission should act.

It has managed to make FIFA begin to see sense.

My group and I would like to show our support for the Commission and we maintain that action has to continue that will really express and guarantee this right of Europeans.

Finally, I would like to point out that there has been talk of the collapse of the world of football.

In the United States in the 1940s, under anti-trust legislation, the same measures were applied in Hollywood as those that the Commission is proposing.

But Hollywood did not go under.

Quite the opposite. We now have a considerable economic problem in coping with the clout of the American film industry.

I welcome the fact that the Zabell report tries to address the problem of intentional doping and proceeds from the presumption of innocence based on the charter of human rights.

Unfortunately, UK athletes - Linford Christie, Dougie Walker and Gary Cadogan - were not presumed to be innocent by the International Athletics Association.

Despite evidence, based on research by Aberdeen University, that nandrolene could be produced by a combination of dietary supplements and vigorous training, Mark Richardson is still waiting, eight days before the Olympics, in the Olympic village not knowing whether he is going to compete or not.

Linford Christie has campaigned throughout his career against doping in sport.

He would not do anything now to jeopardise that.

These cases demonstrate the need for the World Anti-Doping Agency to harmonise disciplinary procedure that would safeguard the rights of athletes but, at the same time, swiftly punish those who knowingly take drugs and are guilty of taking drugs.

Mr President, I would first like to support what Mr Mennea has said, and then to ask this question: do we see the social significance of sport as the old 'bread and circuses' or 'bread and sport' , or do we see it as a means of improving health and building moral fibre?

It has never been clear what social significance we should attribute to it.

By and large, I have to say that the top-level sport we are generally talking about here is not necessarily a healthy pursuit, any more than the extreme sports that I go in for, or used to do.

Only the gods on Mount Olympus can say whether top-level sport is healthy or not - we certainly cannot.

Let me turn to the facts now.

Because of globalisation, our consumer society has become ever more hungry for stars, sensations and records.

So, officials and businessmen have turned 'bread and sport' into a branch of show business that is now one of the biggest in the world, and the process of commercialisation, is of course, continuing.

And the systematic doping that this commercialisation encourages is simply intensifying this process.Those are the facts of the matter.

There is no way we can change those facts unless we create greater transparency, and unless we set up an independent anti-doping agency which is accessible to everyone and which everyone understands.

Mr President, doping is symptomatic of the inverted values of our societies, in which the end has come to justify the means.

It is primarily a form of cheating, with individuals cheating themselves as well as cheating others.

That is why there is a need to establish a vast education programme to reinstate the true values of sport and to make it,once again, a school of life and an example for our youngest generations.

At every level, including the very highest, sport should be an opportunity to teach the virtues of endeavour, courage, team spirit and respect for others.

The Commission was right to remind us that one of the first causes of the increased prevalence of doping lies in the commercial implications of modern sport.

That is why our reflections should focus more sharply on the possibility of imposing stiffer penalties on the various economic operators who encourage doping or profit from it.

Finally, the reason why sport has assumed an important and indeed a central place in our contemporary societies is perhaps because it has become the only means open to a nation to demonstrate its greatness.

Perhaps the nations ought to rediscover other ways of projecting their greatness and their pride on the world stage, and I cannot help thinking at this moment of national currencies, which are an essential attribute of a country's sovereignty and grandeur.

Today, as the euro, the currency of the Euro-optimists, plummets, it is an urgent necessity that all nations should be able to keep their own currency, just as they keep their national sports teams, of which they are so proud, with no need of artificial stimulants.

This is an important debate, and I want to endorse the ideas coming out of the two reports, particularly those of Mrs Zabell on doping and also Mrs Lynne's remarks about the presumption of innocence, because that is important.

We all recognise nowadays that sport is big business.

This is particularly clear in football with its enormous transfer fees, often ridiculously high salary levels, and stock market deals, but it is not just football.

Other sports have a lot of money sloshing around.

Formula 1 is a good example.

In, the UK they even had a million pounds to spare for the Labour Party.

Sport has a lot of money and it cannot expect to be exempt from free market rules.

I do, however, disagree with the reports when they call for a Treaty clause on sport.

Jacques Santer was absolutely right when he said Europe must do less but do it better.

So let us try to operate within our means.

Let us try to operate within the powers that we already have.

What is needed regarding transfer fees is a healthy dose of pragmatism and common sense.

I endorse the Commissioner's remarks this morning.

I have absolute confidence in her abilities and attitude and wish her well in her forthcoming discussions.

I would, however, say that there is no rush.

FIFA has certainly been very slow to act and should be criticised for that, but the Commissioner must also be prepared to listen to the small clubs, the players' organisations, and spectators.

Let us work for a good solution that we can defend rather than working for a solution this afternoon, or this week, or this month.

It is something that needs to be sorted out so that the people of Europe will understand.

Let us not add football spectators to those people who do not understand what Europe is about.

Come up with a good solution and you will have the backing of this House and the backing of football supporters across Europe.

Mr President, I also thank Mr Mennea and Mrs Zabell for highlighting the crucial role that sport is now playing in all of our lives, I have to start by saying that sport's importance as an industry is well known, but for sport to become just another industry would be a mistake and a great loss to our society.

We are all living longer, and sport is occupying a greater part of our time.

It is there not just to revitalise our bodies but also our minds and our souls, and we have to recognise the importance of that fact in European legislation.

I therefore support the call for a legal basis that will put our powers on a par with those of the very important international sports organisations.

Europeans share a love of watching and participating in football, from Newcastle through Dortmund to Barcelona, but it is important that local people should be inspired to join their clubs.

I would therefore say that the most enduring teams should be built up from scratch and not simply bought up.

The system needs well-run machinery consisting of clubs of all shapes and sizes and degrees of professionalism and we need to take the opportunity to reform it.

I support, therefore, Commission statements and the Commissioner's action on this matter.

It has shown that it can build understanding and fight racism.

Let us do more work in sport to bring our communities together.

It has shown that it has the power to encourage disabled athletes to succeed.

Let us show that we share their pride and build joint events for them and able-bodied people.

Violence on the field has been the bad side of sport.

Let us work to ensure that sport is violence-free.

Doping, finally, is a symptom of the over-commercialisation of sport.

As our teams head off to Sydney they are under more pressure than ever.

We have to set up facilities that fight doping on an international basis because, as we have seen, one false accusation can ruin a career or cast a shadow over an exemplary career, such as that of Linford Christie.

Therefore, we support these reports and hope that they will provide the foundation for us to move forward into the next phase of European sport, a community spirit to build the industry and the potential of sport in Europe.

Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I would like to congratulate the rapporteur, Mr Mennea, for this extremely valuable report.

Sport fulfils a major social role in our society; that much is clear.

Professional sport fulfils this role too and has great social significance.

I have tabled an amendment to Mr Mennea' s report, naturally with his consent, proposing a possible alternative to the transfer system.

I happen to believe that the performance on the pitch which we are discussing, in other words the job performance, is no longer proportionate to current remuneration levels.

For this reason, I believe it is merely a commercial activity which should be distributed evenly.

I would like to know whether you have a response to this.

Secondly, on behalf of a large number of fellow MEPs, I have requested the final decision with regard to reforming the transfer system to be postponed.

You commented on it yourself a moment ago. The reason being that UEFA, together with a large number of national football federations, is organising a meeting during the next part-session in October and I would ask you to attend, together with Mr Monti.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, no sportsman or woman takes drugs unless he or she has a financial interest in doing so.

There is no doubt that doping is changing sport and that sport will be changed due to doping, which means it will become absolutely ludicrous if we do nothing to prevent it.

The combination of enormous and disproportionate financial, media and sponsoring interests surrounding sportsmen and women puts so much pressure on them, and the intensity of sport is so great, that in order to maintain their level of competitiveness and the pace imposed on them by sporting calendars, sportsmen and women tend to use prohibited substances.

Without limiting the length of competitions and without having obligatory rest time, it will be very difficult to eradicate doping.

However, we should not forget that sportsmen and women are also human beings who can fall ill or injure themselves, and will therefore need drugs and additional help to combat the stress under which they place their bodies, which is why false positive tests are the order of the day and will brand the sportsman or woman concerned forever.

What we need to do is to harmonise criteria, have a single list of prohibited substances, homogenise tests, have warnings on drugs and do more research.

Ladies and gentlemen, we need to reinvent sport, because as it is at the moment there is a battle for glory, but also for money and sponsorship.

In order for it not to disappear, we need to go back to the traditional values of sport, in which people compete for one reward only - a medal.

NGL). (EL) Mr President, we live in an era in which Europe is moving towards federalisation.

We might say that sport has got there first, that sport built structures before we were able to do so at political, economic or other levels.

Because sport had its roots in ancient Greek Olympia, sport had prophets such as de Coubertin, and sport allowed peoples to meet in peace.

Europe was at war but, at the same time, it had common sporting structures and common sporting rules.

Today the tables have turned: we are preparing to review the Treaty, we are increasing the number of common rules and common principles and our works and structures, while sport is falling apart.

Because big business calls the shots, because major financiers are involved, because the mass media are backed by strong centres of power and because, in my view, intervention by the European Union is inadequate and misguided.

By intervening in sporting issues solely from the point of view of competition, the European Union has, in essence, strengthened this trend and this attitude.

I think we are at a turning point.

Thank goodness we have President Buffet and the French Presidency which, I think, has taken up and taken a leading role in the matter of unifying and developing and strengthening our sporting structures.

I think that Mrs Reding also has a positive part to play on behalf of the Commission in changing the way in which the Commission intervenes.

In this sense, I think that we can avert what is happening in the basketball federation today and what we can see will happen in all the other sports tomorrow, and maintain the unity of sport and its contact with society.

Mr President, first of all, I would like to congratulate the rapporteurs on their work, which I fully support.

I think we all agree on the role and importance of sport which, at both competitive and amateur level, is an excellent tool for the education and social integration of both players and spectators.

Of course, sport is also an extremely important economic phenomenon and, as such, it must follow and comply with certain market rules, as indicated in the famous Bosman judgment.

However, as has already been pointed out this morning, sport must preserve its unique features, which are primarily of a social and cultural nature.

Precisely to avoid sport being reduced to nothing more than a business, we must call, loud and clear, upon the forthcoming Intergovernmental Conference at Nice to expressly insert a significant reference to the institutional recognition of sport into Article 151 of the Treaty.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, we have three closely connected items on our agenda today.

But the problem is that media interest will focus not so much on the Mennea and Zabell reports as on the Commissioner's announcement.

I think that is a pity.

We are now more worried about the apple of Germany's eye, football, than about what is really at stake today.

I have no hesitation in supporting the two Commissioners whose task it is to implement the Bosman judgment.

If FIFA had done its job, the Commission would not have needed to get involved in this.

I hope that FIFA recognises that and will now finally come up with something that the Commission can include in its proposals, as long as they do not run counter to the Bosman judgment.

So I think that everyone has a job to do here.

As regards the reports, I would like to say that, in view of the big business sport has become, the social and educational importance of popular sport needs to be highlighted.

There is a danger that sport as a whole will sooner or later be badly hit by rules on competition.

We would like to prevent that, which is why the Mennea report quite rightly calls for a reference to sport in Article 151 of the Treaty as an aspect of culture.

I, myself, called for this in my report back in 1996.

That resulted in a declaration at Amsterdam, which was by no means enough.

That is why I am supporting the fact that this is finally being introduced now.

That report also called for the Commission to declare a European Year of Sport.

A European Year of Sport would be an important stimulus, and I hope that the new Commissioner will now take this up.

I am delighted that Mrs Zabell has covered some broader ground in her report on doping and that she has also stressed the abuse of young sportsmen and women, and has given an impetus to jointly tackling doping.

I would like to congratulate the Commission on having joined this Anti-Doping Agency now, so that it can genuinely give an impetus to a harmonised approach towards combating doping on behalf of the Community of Fifteen.

Mr President, Commissioner, sport is, of course, being discussed by a wide range of people and social groups right now, as the Olympic Games begin in Sydney.

The reports we have before us also provide a basis for debate.

The question that inevitably comes to mind is this: what has happened to the idealistic image of sport which is still being portrayed?

It is all too easy to be complacent and attribute a very important social and unifying role to sport, where fair play is held up as a model for our interaction with each other, be it at work, in politics or whatever.

However, both reports show very clearly that sport has become a powerful and extremely tough economic force, and sportsmen and women are its tools.

They are programmed to achieve peak performances on particular days and during particular weeks, with ever shorter gaps in between, and they have to function like machines.

In order to overcome human weaknesses, which cannot always be calculated, and to achieve perfect functioning, people resort to doping substances, and it is now becoming harder and harder to detect their use.

In this way, young sportsmen and women cause damage to themselves, to their health, to their personal development and, last but not least, to sport as an ideal.

Top sportsmen and women are a role model for thousands of young people and thus have a very strong impact on popular sport, which, as I see it, is the level of sport that most needs to be encouraged.

A sense of fair play and social interaction are still easy to find at this level.

But bad examples such as violent incidents, doping scandals, million-dollar contracts and bankruptcies are also destructive at this level.

We need to create legal bases to stem these negative trends.

I welcome the fact that the WADA is now active, and that it is there to combat the worldwide problem of doping.

Measures are needed against violence and racism in sport, in order to guarantee that sportsmen and women and sports fans are protected against rampaging hordes of hooligans and racists.

There is also scope for top sportsmen and women to do more on their part and to make it clearer than they have until now that they want nothing to do with 'fans' like these.

It should be our job to give sport a new role in a changed society, with new and modern technical and medical facilities, and in this way to preserve its values.

I believe that a European Year of Sport could stimulate this debate and make a substantial contribution here.

Mr President, after congratulating our colleagues Mrs Zabell and Mr Mennea on their reports and the suggestions they contain, of which I very largely approve, I shall make do with two observations.

Firstly, I should like to stress the need for Community participation in the World Anti-Doping Agency, which would enable the European Union to make a vigorous and coherent contribution to the struggle against doping.

Secondly, as I did yesterday, I plead again today for the inclusion in the Treaty of a legal basis relating specifically to sport.

I am thinking here of a compatibility clause of the sort that exists in the cultural and environmental domains, a clause that would make it possible to take due account - and I stress the word 'due' - of the specific nature of sport in the formulation of the general policy or specific policies of the Community.

Mr President, Commissioner, the reason why the Commission submitted its proposal is to stop players being treated like a commodity, which can be bought by clubs because they are good players and, more to the point, because they can be sold on to other clubs for a great deal more money. I welcome this proposal with open arms.

Needless to say, this will cause problems, certainly in the short term, for smaller clubs in smaller footballing nations, such as the Netherlands.

But holding on to the current system would not solve the problem either.

A more structural solution would be if the media millions were better distributed.

I therefore hope with all my heart that the large clubs will realise that ultimately, without the small clubs, their future will be bleak too.

I would like to say the following on the transfer system.

I back the Commission proposal but I do hope that it will make provision for recovering training expenses for players between the ages of 18 and 24, as, for example, is being proposed at the moment by FIFA, the international football association, and FIFPRO, the organisation for players.

I very much hope that UEFA, the European football union, will go along with this request and will stop being the last, self-appointed defender of a system which has created such absurd situations in the first place.

Mr President, sport, like culture, education and health, is gradually being hijacked by commercialisation and the so-called law of the market.

Three million people dancing attendance at major sporting events and huge profits for business have eclipsed the athletic ideal.

Fitness training and sport as a daily exercise and popular sport are in dire straits.

As long as the winners see 'sport plc' thriving, doping will increase, transfer fees will increase - another form of human trafficking in a modern capitalist society - and the problem of violence at football stadiums and various other signs of degeneration will increase.

Despite acknowledging that the main reason for the increase in doping is excessive commercialisation, the Commission is doing nothing to combat it.

How could it, when the entire structure of the European Union is built on the principle of 'there is nothing which cannot be bought or sold' ?

It confines itself to half measures.

Studies, codes of conduct with passing references to controls.

If they intended, and really wanted, to combat doping, they would have already done so.

But it is not in the interests of the International Olympic Committee, the international federations, the sponsors who invest in sport or the pharmaceutical industry.

The two reports do contain positive elements, but they go so far, in the Zabell report, as to state that the pharmaceutical industry cares about the health of athletes and, in the Mennea report, as to suggest that Member States adopt practical measures in their legislation to encourage private investment in sport.

Unless we crack down on commercialisation, unless we erect barriers to speculation by big business, unless we introduce basic and efficient controls, nothing will change in sport.

We do not expect the European Union to take any such action, so we are struggling to develop a popular movement which will fight for modern sport to rediscover the principle of 'a healthy mind in a healthy body' .

Mr President, the over-commercialisation of sport has clearly led to the exploitation of many young athletes.

Proven cases of doping in sporting competitions have diminished the reputation of many sports in the eyes of the public.

At last, the International Olympic Committee has faced up to its obligations to combat the widespread use of drugs in sport.

Up to 2500 drug tests will be carried out during the Sydney games.

I welcome the IOC's announcement that heavy penalties will be imposed on sportsmen and women caught using drugs in Sydney this month and in the future.

The way to stop the use of drugs in sport should be coordinated on a worldwide basis.

The Union must continue to work through the World Anti-Doping Agency to ensure that uniform and structured guidelines are implemented for all sporting activities.

In conclusion, we should recall that the Treaty of Amsterdam emphasises the social significance of sport, but the European Union has no powers under the Treaty to take action on sport.

That is an issue that should be addressed in the ongoing discussions on the reform of Union policies and initiatives.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I believe that this debate and the reports are both a step in the right direction.

Our 700 000 sports clubs are pillars of Europe's civil society.

The Council Presidency has said that sport is education for life.

Sport is a part of youth work, a part of education policy, a part of leisure activity, a part of health policy, a part of international understanding, a part of the information industry, and a part of economic affairs and of competition.

Let me stress that I am saying a part.

To reduce sport to an economic and competitive level is to deny its wider social significance.

It has to be said that, up to now, Community law has been applied to sport in a very indiscriminate way, because it primarily treats sport as an economic activity.

This means that insufficient account has been taken of the special hallmarks of sport and its 700 000 clubs, and of voluntary work done in areas like youth work and training for children and young people.

Unless we can work successfully with children and young people, and unless Europe has an effective system of sports clubs, we cannot make our aspirations for popular sport a reality.

Doris Pack has already referred several times to the consequent need to root sport in the EU Treaties and have it influence the Treaty of Amsterdam.

The importance of sport was also mentioned in the conclusions of the Feira Summit.

It is therefore both a logical and desirable consequence of all this that sport should be given a legal basis in the Treaty.

We do not want to interfere in the affairs of Member States.

Sport comes under the principle of subsidiarity.

We simply want the overall social importance of sport to be recognised by the Commission and in European law, perhaps giving it its own budget heading so that it does not just have to be promoted through pilot projects.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, everyone acknowledges that sport is a means of personal development and a special opportunity to meet other people.

But does everyone see and recognise the different purposes of participation in sport?

For some, it may be a question of keeping fit.

For others, it may be part of their personal education process, while for others it is the presentation of a spectacle or a quest for victory at all costs.

We all know that sport is a tremendous instrument of national cohesion and of social integration.

However, we are also aware that sport can sometimes be accompanied by horrific acts of violence, abominable racist outbursts and unacceptable strident nationalism.

And for all of these reasons, we cannot accept the idea that sport should be considered in its economic dimension alone.

Voluntary organisations and individual volunteers are every bit a part of the sporting world, and it is surely thanks to them that sport is alive in our countries and that mass sport will be able to survive in future.

Not every human act can be priced with a pocket calculator.

The effect of that approach on human relations is too dangerous for us to remain silent.

Where there is no money to be won and no obligation to show a profit, there may quite simply be the desire to share these special opportunities, and sport undoubtedly has its place - indeed its foremost place - in such encounters.

This quest for human bonds in an increasingly commercial society contains the seeds of resistance to the commercialisation of the world and of human relations.

We cannot accept this excessive striving for profits to the detriment of human development.

The protection of young sportspeople is a priority of the French Presidency.

It is our priority, and we must demand the prohibition of commercial transactions relating to these young people.

We must also, of course, provide for the introduction of sport into the Treaty - if not in the short term, then at least in the medium term.

It is certainly a challenge, but we must accept it for the sake of coming generations.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, both rapporteurs speak from experience, as is evident from their first-rate reports.

As far as Mr Mennea' s report is concerned, I have attempted to highlight three points in the amendments which I tabled, and which have fortunately been adopted in the final motion for a resolution.

One is the importance of sport as a mental activity in order to learn a number of social skills.

Secondly, sport helps us appreciate activities in forma pauperis which involve minority groups that deserve more support, also at European level.

My third point serves as a warning against the yawning gap which can arise between top sport and smaller sports associations on the one hand and professional and amateur sport on the other.

In both cases, one very much relies on the other.

As to the question of whether sport should be dealt with at European level, I certainly believe it should.

Therefore, this report does not mark the end of the game, quite the reverse.

The role and impact sport has in society have become so enormous, and the entire sports scene is undergoing such change, that as far as the social debate is concerned, we are only just in the first heats, if at all.

The European Parliament needs to ensure that it is not left on the sidelines in this debate, but plays an active part so that we can help decide the shape of the game.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, action has to be taken in three directions.

First and foremost, we must wage a relentless fight against doping.

The financial and political commitment of all the countries of the European Union to the World Anti-Doping Agency is imperative, but it is not enough.

The most important thing is that governments should arm themselves with proper structures to combat doping.

France has marked out the path, and I should be interested to know how the President of the Council sees the interaction between the Agency and national initiatives.

We must also combat the excesses of the transfer system, especially the trade in young professional sportsmen.

Finally, we must strengthen the real driving forces of sport, namely the federations and sport at school.

I support the efforts to secure recognition of the key role of sports federations and to protect them from the depredations of financial and media giants.

Young people must be the main target in the rehabilitation of sport.

I support the call made by Mr Mennea in his report for sport to be accorded a higher status in the school curriculum as well as his plea that the specific nature of sport be enshrined in the Treaties, otherwise we shall tend to see sport as little more than another domain of free economic competition.

Is humanity regressing towards the decadence of ancient Rome? Is competitive sport once again becoming a gladiatorial conflict, waged now by robotic humans armed with the latest bio- and cybertechnology and funded by politico-financial interests?

The time has come for politicians and sporting authorities to exercise their responsibility.

Mr President, Commissioner, Madam Minister, I am speaking on the Zabell and Mennea reports today in my dual role as a Member of the European Parliament and as president of a professional basketball club which takes part in the major European competitions.

I wish, first of all, to express my thanks and congratulations to the two rapporteurs for their excellent work, and I should also like to highlight the action of our colleague Doris Pack, who paved the way for the negotiation of the protocol on sport which is annexed to the Treaty of Amsterdam.

Doping is a scourge from which sport has to protect itself.

It undermines both fair play and genuine competition, and endangers the sportspeople who indulge in it.

I am personally shocked by the ease with which young sportsmen and women can supply themselves with performance-enhancing drugs, without being checked at all, through the Internet or in certain countries of the European Union.

Mrs Buffet has been tackling this issue in France, and I congratulate her for it.

Nevertheless, this evil can only be rooted out if it is combated at European and global levels, and I encourage the Union to work with the World Agency to that end.

The European Union must also rise to the challenge of the modernisation of sport.

The European Commission is questioning the system of transfers between clubs, believing it to be contrary to players' freedom of movement.

But the Commission is totally ignoring the distortion of competition between Member States, the social and fiscal disparity among professional sportsmen, which encourages the best of them to migrate to certain countries. We in France should know, because out of our pool of 22 players for Euro 2000, no fewer than 20 have gone off to play in other countries of the Union.

This phenomenon falls under the heading of social and fiscal dumping, but the Commission, for all its high principles, does nothing to combat it.

Professional sportspeople are also preyed upon by numerous agents who have exclusive rights to negotiate their employment contracts.

Not only do the agents charge the players; they are also paid by the clubs, from which they extract commission, and I have first-hand knowledge of this.

These agents hand over their protégés to the highest bidder, like common merchandise, after having whipped up competition for the players' signatures in order to raise the bidding.

The abolition of transfers will induce agents to break their clients' contracts several times in the course of a year in order to earn new commission each time a new contract is signed.

The system of agents must be brought under control by the Union, or perhaps even scrapped.

I shall conclude by adding that sport must be brought within the scope of the Treaty Establishing the European Community.

I therefore appeal to all those who govern us, particularly to the French Government, which is currently guiding the work of the European Union, to ensure that the Intergovernmental Conference to be held at Nice in December confers a share of responsibility for this matter upon the European Union and involves Parliament in the implementation of this initiative through the codecision procedure.

Mr President, sport has become a magnificent form of international entertainment.

It is a source of inspiration for millions and huge sums of money are involved in it.

Thousands of Finnish people travel to Hungary to see Mika Häkkinen drive, while a Vietnamese hotel receptionist asks the right way to pronounce the name Jari Litmanen.

The importance of sport and exercise both for societies and for individuals must not, however, get buried under professionalism and commercialism.

Exercise is educationally important and vital for health.

Sports societies bring people together to do self-sacrificing voluntary work.

Along with the positive aspects, we have to remember the flip side of the coin - drugs, violence at sports events and the negative elements associated with player transfers.

To prevent these we need joint action on the part of the Union and a legal base for sport.

As we shape sports policy we have to take account of sport' s various structures.

For that reason, we must ensure that we continue to listen to sport' s NGOs at the Olympics in the wake of the sports conference held in 1999.

Finally, I would like to turn your attention to the need to improve levels of gender equality in sport and exercise.

The European Woman and Sport network conference held in June in Helsinki made recommendations which I hope will be taken into consideration at both national and Union level.

I would like to thank the rapporteurs for their exhaustive work, and I want to express my heartfelt thanks, too, to the President-in-Office of the Council and the Member of the Commission for their excellent speeches at the start of this sitting.

Mr President, the powerful role of sport in economic, social, and cultural terms and in terms of health cannot be denied.

It is incomprehensible why sport lacks a legal base in the European Union.

The European Parliament must frankly force the Commission and the Council to look at themselves in the mirror.

The status of sport must have a watertight definition produced for it at the next intergovernmental conference so that sports organisations can participate in decision-making on sport themselves.

As huge sums of money are involved in major sports, common rules and regulations should be drawn up to take account of the system' s basic pillars, sportsmen and the organisers of sporting events.

The interests of team-game players must be safeguarded, all the while honouring the principle of the free movement of labour, not forgetting financial reward for the so-called trainer associations.

We have to find a balance in the question of televising the most important sports events, one between the economic power of the organisers on the one hand, and the so-called public service principle on the other.

When we talk about drugs we have to make a clear distinction, as we do when it comes to any other discussion on sport, between keep-fit exercise and major sporting events.

The ethical problems associated with the latter are known to all.

Too little attention has been paid to the spread of the use of drugs among ordinary people who do sports, proof of which lies, for example, in the trade in banned substances which is rife in gyms generally.

The problem can be considered on a par with the narcotics problem, especially the use of synthetic drugs, so, simply out of concern for public health, the EU must do its bit to beat the problem.

With regard to what has just happened, I am sorry, but, as you could see, it is very hard to make a speech when the Members are in the Chamber to vote.

I am sorry, but many Members did, however, listen attentively to you.

Some of them even gestured to me to resort to an Olympic sport - gavel-throwing - in order to silence certain other Members who were making too much noise.

Unfortunately though, I only have one gavel: I would have needed 80 or 100 to throw at all the Members who were not listening to your speech.

The vote will take place at 12 noon.

Mr President, in West Timor, or rather the Indonesian part of the island of Timor, at least three United Nations officials from the UNHCR were violently beaten and killed yesterday.

The European Parliament must denounce this barbarous and despicable act, which according to some eyewitness reports took place with the complicity or connivance of the Indonesian military authorities.

Secondly, this act occurred on the same day that the majority of Heads of State and Government were meeting in New York at the Millennium Summit organised by the United Nations itself, which demonstrates the weakness of this organisation and of the instruments at its disposal to protect men and women far from their own countries who were simply endeavouring to defend human rights and the rights of refugees.

