The majority, not all, but the majority, of these rights involve legal redress, in the last instance, after having been subject to a complaint to the competent governmental body.

And neither does this rule out legal proceedings.

This is because American legislation, in relation to economic damages, does not consider moral damages and we cannot demand that they change their legislation.

This goes against the principles established by the OECD in 1980.

I hope that tomorrow this House will support this position which, as I have said, is ultimately in the interest of the citizens of Europe.

Mr President, I should like to compliment the Commission on sticking with the negotiations with the USA over the last two years.

The reality is that data is flowing across the Atlantic and we, and our citizens, have no protection at present.

So the question for us must be: do we give them the protection that is on offer or do we say it is not enough? If we do that, then what will happen?

Concerns have rightly been raised about the access for individuals to redress and compensation.

But this raises the fundamental debate about the clash of legal cultures which has been so central to these negotiations.

Clearly, as an elected Parliament, we have a duty to protect our citizens, but I fear that the conditionality in paragraph 7 of Mrs Paciotti's report endangers the whole agreement, for it could hardly be more fundamental to the debate about adequacy or equivalence.

We are in a global context here and e-commerce will continually throw at us clashes of legal systems and style.

Yet we cannot attempt to change the way the Americans deal with their own national legislation and legal system.

They have their way and we have ours.

They will come to their own conclusions about how they will change their system.

Yes, they are considering it; yes, they have had several annual reports about the protection of personal data.

I wish we had that within our European Union.

I urge colleagues in the vote tomorrow to give protection to our citizens now.

Conditionality will mean no protection now.

But if we express our very strong reservations and to ask for clear review, this will give our citizens protection now and offer us progress in this very difficult area.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, Mrs Paciotti has produced an excellent, very logical report, precise in its observations and balanced in its conclusions.

She has taken account both of the requisite protection for individuals against any misuse of their own personal data and of the need to reach an agreement with the United States as quickly as possible so as not to put a brake upon the development of trade.

At a time when it seems certain that an information society will be developed on the back of the new technologies, we think it vital immediately to implement the means needed to protect the consumer and the citizen from the abuses inherent in the marketing and innovative techniques that are so greedy for accurate information.

In the context of an agreement with the United States, the rapporteur emphasised the extent to which this country lacked any legally binding standard on personal data protection.

So American firms may use all the data they wish without the Federal State finding fault with this.

We feel that it is particularly dangerous that the Commission should be willing to ratify an agreement that offers so few guarantees for the citizen.

The 'safe harbour' system proposed by the American authorities offers no protection at all.

It is a voluntary standard which American firms would themselves apply internally and then only with regard to Europeans.

This text, moreover, does not give citizens the right to go to court if their rights are flouted.

It would be a great shame, particularly now that, after years of discussion, the Council appears to be willing to set up a proper European body to monitor the use of personal data, if we were to ease off the pressure in terms of our demands on the subject with regard to third countries in general and the United States in particular.

It is a condition sine qua non for any real protection of citizens' individual liberties.

In conclusion, I should like to remind the Commission that personal data protection is an integral part...

(The President cut the speaker off)

Mr President, we fully support Mrs Paciotti' s report and its conclusions.

The 'safe harbour' agreement would mean that we would have to transfer data to American businesses, companies and corporations without the possibility of recourse to an independent authority in the event of improper or illegal use of the data, and that we would therefore not even be protected by those minimal guarantees which exist in the Union.

During the hearing held by the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs, we took on board the concerns of the representatives of American consumers regarding the inadequacy of the American protection system and we also noted the need, expressed by President Clinton, for the United States to introduce an organic law on the protection of personal data.

If we adopt this report, we will not only be expressing our political will to succeed in concluding an agreement containing protection clauses which respect European legislation, but we will also be encouraging a large proportion of Congress and of United States' public opinion to develop personal data protection laws.

If such laws are not produced and the changes called for in the Paciotti report are not made, we may as well call the agreement with the United States the 'dangerous harbour' agreement.

Mr President, I would like to congratulate Mrs Paciotti for the work she has done on this report and to extend my thanks to Commissioner Bolkestein, who has regularly sent his officials to assist the work of the committee I have the honour to chair in dealing with this report.

Data protection, which is essential to privacy, poses huge challenges in an age of electronic communication.

If we are frank, we will admit that no government has yet found a way to offer adequate protection to its citizens.

In the European Union the route of regulation through legislation has proven far from perfect.

In the US, the route of self-regulation has also brought up serious problems, as the report from the Federal Trade Commission to Congress last month shows us.

Liberal Democrats have taken the view that the proposals in this draft agreement beg many questions, but that on balance, and since this is the deal on offer, it is better to have regulation to allow this valuable trade to grow than to allow anarchy to reign.

There has been much debate in my group about the impact and the legal effect of this report.

I take the view that this report says yes, but - quite rightly - requires firms participating in the safe harbour to agree to pay compensation in the case of individuals suffering damage from abuse of data held on them.

In my view this is necessary for consumer confidence, which is a fickle thing, but others, probably the majority in my group, will support Amendment Nos 1 and 2 which they believe clear up all legal uncertainty.

Clearly, we cannot know how the United States will react to our concerns.

I am guided by the considerable economic interest of the USA in having this agreement, but I recognise that others are guided by a deep concern about the current lack of protection and a burning desire to see even the limited protection offered by this agreement.

Either way, it remains our hope that legislative developments on the other side of the Atlantic will render the safe harbour obsolete and we salute the Commission in the work they have done in achieving what they clearly believe is the best achievable result.

The vote will take place on Wednesday at 11.30 a.m.

The next item is the report (A5-0179/2000) by Mr Lehne on listing the third countries whose nationals must be in possession of visas when crossing the external borders and those whose nationals are exempt from that requirement.

(DE) Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, there is a story behind this regulation too; its history extends over the whole of the last parliamentary term.

You will remember that at that time, after the entry into force of the Maastricht Treaty, uniform rules on visas were to be introduced within the European Union for the first time.

This meant that people from third countries entering the European Union were in principle to be subject to the same visa requirements in all countries in the European Union.

At the time the Commission had already made a proposal which on the whole was very good and which also received support in Parliament.

Unfortunately the Council then made fundamental changes to this proposal and more or less declared the entire visa list to be as good as non-binding when it said that anyone could go beyond it and either impose visa requirements on additional states or leave it at that; they simply had to notify this.

At the time the European Parliament considered that its views had not been properly taken into account and, moreover, that this result was also contrary to what the Maastricht Treaty actually intended.

We won the case before the European Court of Justice.

The Council regulation concerned was declared null and void.

The result was that the Commission made a new proposal to us which was very similar to its first proposal, to which we again gave an essentially positive assessment in Parliament, and which then, because of the change of legal base - Maastricht gave way to Amsterdam - had to be recast in a new proposal, which is now on the table here and which we must once again debate.

Parliament continues to believe that the visa list in this visa regulation must be definitive, which means that there must be no more exceptions to it, so no black, green, blue, yellow or grey lists, but please just one list, one list which is binding and no other.

This is a crucial point if we are finally to have uniform rules on visas in the European Union.

In addition, the Commission has given ground on one important point, which Parliament regarded as essential even last time round.

It concerns the visa requirements for two associated countries, which are now of course already a long way into the accession process, namely Bulgaria and Romania.

Parliament has always been of the opinion that these states should be exempt from visa requirements.

We came to this conclusion on the basis that much progress has been made in these countries on internal security and many other issues.

The Commission has now also accepted this and is proposing to include Bulgaria and Romania in the list of states which are exempt from visa requirements.

We see this as a step forward.

Obviously these countries have in the meantime also managed to convince the Commission.

Now we can only hope that, if possible, after listening to the European Parliament, the Council makes the same decision and also recognises that important progress has been made here.

My plea to the Council would be that it should debate this regulation as soon as possible.

I should like once again to extend my warmest thanks to the plenary, but also this time to the Conference of Presidents, which put this report on today's agenda even though it had not originally planned to do so, precisely because this makes it possible to complete our business quickly and send out an appropriate signal.

In the run-up to this debate a whole series of requests for amendments, which it was hoped we would adopt here, were sent to me from the Council.

For example, there was a proposal to introduce so-called reciprocity.

Quite simply, citizens from individual Member States are subject to visa requirements in some third countries.

These Member States should, it is argued, have the possibility of demanding visas from citizens from these same third countries.

Not because I do not have sympathy for these Member States' demands, but because I believe that in introducing this we would again be contravening the overall principle and we would again be in breach of the provisions of the Treaty, which provides precisely for a standard visa list comprising a list of countries which are subject to visa requirements and a list of those which are not.

For this reason I do not believe that we can introduce a provision of this kind.

In Europe we have come so far - I only need to mention the implementation of Schengen, meaning that there are no longer any controls at the vast majority of borders - that nothing else is simply good enough anymore.

We need standard rules on visas, and I think that the Commission has tabled a good proposal.

We have also debated it in Parliament accordingly, I hope, as the Commission had in mind.

Now it is the Council's turn.

As soon as possible it ought to produce a result which is as constructive as possible.

Mr President, I should first of all like to pay tribute to the rapporteur, who has put forward a very concise and well-presented report and one that we are happy to support.

I would like to draw attention to one or two points from it.

I hope that most Members in this House will agree with me that we should be moving towards a visa-free Europe, a Europe without barriers, at ease with itself and the rest of the world.

I know we still have some stumbling blocks and Europe and the world are not quite ready for that at the moment.

But the rapporteur has spoken about no exceptions and I am delighted to support him in that we have one single list.

I also want to draw attention to a few amendments.

It says it is essential that we have procedures that are as smooth and as simple as possible and do not cause unreasonable expenditure for the applicants.

Many of us in this House know as well as anyone that getting a visa can be a time-consuming and expensive business.

We want to make certain in Europe that is not the case working in the opposite direction.

Similarly, Amendment No 6 speaks about young people and encouraging them to take part in youth programmes by not giving them the extra burden of visas.

That is important because young people are enthusiastic about the European ideal and we do not want to put anything in their way that makes them think that Europe is not welcoming and not moving in the right direction.

My last point concerns Romania and Bulgaria, particularly Romania, a country I know well.

Every time I go there I have to go through the procedure of getting a visa and the Romanians say that as long as the European Union wants visas from them they will demand them from us.

So we are taking a step in the right direction and I am happy to support the amendments and the report.

Mr President, the introduction of a European visa policy is the occasion to debate an important issue, and here in this House we are today discussing the latest developments in this visa policy.

Mr Lehne's report gives important momentum to this process and we support his report.

He is already aware of this, so I do not need to thank him yet again because I have already done so in private.

The matter I should like to address here, something which I have reflected on many times, because I am of Turkish origin, is the following. We considered whether we should table any amendments, but in fact we decided not to do so.

We will not therefore be making any recommendations here on how the report should be dealt with.

However, I should like to take the opportunity today - because otherwise no one listens to me - to voice my opinion for once on something which I am very uneasy about.

In my opinion, it cannot be right for the European Union to offer Turkey a chance to accede while at the same time maintaining the entry restrictions.

I am surprised that we cannot manage to find an alternative way to deal with the Turkey issue, particularly within the context of this harmonised list.

I am aware of the reasons for this, but I should nevertheless like to use our Parliament as a platform.

Around 3 million people of Turkish origin live in Europe and it is for this very reason that our Commissioner ought perhaps to consider in the future how we are going to resolve this problem reasonably and humanely in the coming years.

Mr President, the Commission proposal which is now under discussion is to be seen against the background of the new architecture resulting from the entry into force of the Amsterdam Treaty.

That architecture rests on two cornerstones, namely the creation of an area of freedom, security and justice in accordance with the new Title IV inserted in the European Community Treaty, and the integration of the Schengen acquis into the Union framework, to which is added the dimension of variable geometry resulting from the different protocols annexed by several Member States to the Amsterdam Treaty.

The Commission proposal has a legal basis taken from the Amsterdam Treaty, and its content and wording take account of the institutional constraints that I have just mentioned.

The Commission has carefully examined the report by Mr Lehne, whom I would like to congratulate.

In the past, as rapporteur, Mr Lehne has already had the opportunity to show his interest, expertise and commitment in this subject that he has just presented.

The Commission is pleased to note that the report adopted by the Committee of Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs broadly supports the Commission's proposal.

But this is hardly surprising since, as Mr Lehne himself pointed out, the proposal meets a number of requests that the European Parliament itself put forward in various resolutions.

As regards the amendments to its proposal, the Commission appreciates very much the Parliament's constructive contribution.

To clarify our position: Amendments Nos 3 and 4 can be accepted, as the changes they make to the wording avoid any contradiction with other provisions of the regulation.

We can also accept Amendments Nos 1 and 5.

Amendments Nos 7 and 8 are prompted by a wish to clarify the demarcation line between the scope of the regulation and other matters, some of which are governed by the Schengen acquis, integrated into the Community.

The Commission is sensitive to the desire for clarification which it furthermore took into account in its explanatory memorandum.

It takes the view, however, that the appropriate place for such clarification is not in an article of the regulation, and it is prepared to draft a new recital based on the gist of these amendments.

Amendment No 2 in our opinion cannot be accepted since it relates to the conditions for the issue of visas, which do not fall within the scope of this regulation but will have to be addressed in a different instrument.

Finally, the Commission is also unable to accept Amendment No 6.

Despite all the sympathy that can be felt towards the possibility of exempting young people taking part in European Union Youth Programmes from visa requirements, the Commission must stick to its aim of maximum harmonisation and avoid cases creating derogations from, or exceptions to, the visa requirement.

The Commission is convinced that efforts to ensure that the need to obtain a visa does not constitute an obstacle to young people wishing to take part in European Union programmes will have to be made in the rules on the conditions for the issue of visas which will be dealt with by a different instrument and which are not covered by this regulation.

To sum up, I would like to thank the Parliament, the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs, and Mr Lehne, the rapporteur, for their constructive approach and also, especially, for having examined the Commission's proposal on visas so swiftly.

Parliament's swiftness is appreciated by the Commission, and it will help it, in the field of visas, to meet the deadlines set in the action plan adopted in Vienna and reproduced in the scoreboard drawn up following the European Council in Tampere.

The vote will take place on Wednesday at 11.30 a.m.

(The sitting was closed at 9.45 p.m.)

Approval of the Minutes of the previous sitting

The Minutes of yesterday' s sitting have been distributed.

Mr President, I speak on yesterday's Minutes and something which is not in them.

Yesterday evening I raised two points.

One was on the success of Euro 2000.

The second one was on whether or not Mr Helmer joined with me in congratulating Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II on welcoming the introduction of the euro into the UK.

I do not see that minuted.

Mr President, there was a very large number of MEPs who could not be here yesterday because we were let down by the flight connections.

I can inform you that 25 Scandinavian MEPs and interpreters took between 10 and 20 hours to arrive here in Strasbourg.

I hope you will convey this to our French President and tell her that our having to meet here in Strasbourg is almost intolerable and a constant strain.

I would also ask the President to contact Air France, which is about to take over the carrier which cancelled its flight to Strasbourg yesterday.

I would ask her to urge Air France to retain the route and to operate it punctually so that we might avoid these constant problems in connection with our meetings.

It would be best, of course, if we did not have to come to Strasbourg at all, but that is an entirely different matter.

Mr Haarder, I shall of course take note of your comments.

I think that in most of your cases you must also have seen that a survey is being carried out by the French Government, specifically asking you to say what problems you have in getting to Strasbourg by air.

I am aware that many Members of Parliament had problems yesterday, but let me point out that when I am in the chair I am no longer French but European.

Mr President, I would like to take up this issue. Many people were unable to get here on time because of air traffic problems.

I actually managed to, but I did not even find a list to sign, so I hope that this will be recorded in today' s Minutes.

Mr President, I was on the flight concerned yesterday.

It took me 12 hours to get to Strasbourg.

What is more, I also had problems obtaining a seat at all on a flight to Strasbourg.

It is quite unacceptable for MEPs to have to spend time which should be devoted to political work or to their electorate at home on wondering how they will manage to get to their place of work and also on working out where they are going to spend the night.

MEPs who are not so lucky as to win the lottery here in Strasbourg and to have permanent hotel rooms have, on each occasion, to ponder such matters as where they are going to sleep and how they are going to get a room at their hotel in town. We need some orderly arrangements if this Parliament is to continue.

I address you as a Frenchman - even though I appreciate that your nationality has nothing to do with your role as President - for the EU has a French Presidency now, of course, and, as far as I know, it is in France' s interests for the Parliament to remain in Strasbourg.

I would request that the President of France be informed of the impossible working conditions to which we are exposed because Parliament meets in Strasbourg.

Mr President, I just want to say that, after 11 years as an MEP, I am familiar with the French airline concerned. For that reason, I chose another and arrived on time.

Mr President, I understand our Danish colleagues' concern about this air traffic problem.

Yesterday was quite catastrophic, but I would remind you all at the same time that when the Danes' problems started, I myself had already been travelling for five hours on my way to Strasbourg.

I took the shortest route possible from a European capital to Strasbourg via another European capital, and the journey took fourteen hours.

I have always cast my vote in favour of Strasbourg' s special status, including on Friday.

But things cannot go on like this.

I am gradually coming round to the opinion that we must assemble in Brussels, which does not take fourteen hours to reach.

Ladies and gentlemen, your comments are completely justified, and will be passed on to the relevant departments.

I can see the requests to speak piling up on my desk.

I hope your points are not just to do with problems of air travel to Strasbourg, as we have a lot of work on this morning.

Mr President, this is nothing to do with aeroplanes, although I could speak about flights if you wished me to.

I want to refer partly to a point of order and partly to yesterday's Minutes.

As you will recall, the first thirteen items of yesterday's agenda took the best part of an hour to get through.

We then had the privilege of the Prime Minister of Portugal speaking.

At the moment the Prime Minister spoke about half the Chamber got up to walk out.

This may have been because they had other meetings, or whatever, but it is a gross discourtesy for people to walk out when the Prime Minister is speaking.

I would ask you to ask the political groups and Parliament to try to ensure that when there are heads of state or prime ministers speaking in this Parliament there are not other meetings happening at the same time, which give people the opportunity to walk out.

Your comments will be passed on to the leaders of the political groups and we will have an opportunity, in a few moments' time, to see if the message has been received.

Mr President, I wanted to briefly draw your attention to the admission procedure for visitors in Brussels.

I can inform you that, when we receive visitors in Brussels at the moment, they are admitted and then required to identify themselves. Subsequently, however, their identity cards are collected at reception.

I must admit, I find this rather an odd procedure.

Why should someone who comes to visit us, one of our citizens, hand over their identity cards?

The cards are then thrown into a box and when they want to leave the Parliament building, they have to wait for fifteen minutes before they get their identity cards back.

I would like to ask you what the reason is behind this procedure.

If someone has identified themselves, surely that is sufficient?

Surely there is then no need to seize their identity cards or driving licences?

I would like to ask you, Mr President, to change the admission procedure in Brussels back to how it used to be: you identify yourself, a badge is made and you are admitted.

Mrs Plooij-Van Gorsel, the simplest way of dealing with the problem you raise is to refer the matter to the quaestors directly.

I shall, of course, ensure that this is done.

Mr President, I should like briefly to draw the House's attention to current developments in Cyprus.

The Turkish checkpoint has been moved into the buffer zone, thereby hampering the movements of the United Nations forces and cutting off a Greek village.

Turkey is a candidate country and should show more willing, through Turkish Cypriots, as regards the commitments which it entered into in Helsinki.

The situation could spiral out of control and I would like the support of the House on this and, more especially, of the British Government, which has a special responsibility in Cyprus.

I too wish to raise exactly the same issue: as you know, the third round of talks between the two communities is about to start.

Despite the fact that the Greek-Cypriot side has no intention of boycotting the third round of talks, the Turkish side has invaded the buffer zone, creating problems for the United Nations Organisation. I should like to ask the European Parliament, through its President, to write to the Secretary-General of the United Nations, Mr Kofi Annan, on this matter and to draw attention to Turkey, a candidate country which, in essence, is inciting the Turkish-Cypriot side to take certain measures or is tolerating the measures being taken.

Turkey cannot behave in this way and continue on its path towards Europe and the European Parliament should make that clear.

Mr President, I wish to raise the same issue and to condemn the provocative action by the occupying forces in Cyprus.

Turkey is obviously feeling daring as the result of the policy applied to it by the European Union, a policy which, in the final analysis, rewards its provocative actions.

Turkey has also been encouraged by recent statements by Mr Verheugen in connection with the role of the Cypriot forces and the way in which G7 is dealing with the Cyprus problem. Under these circumstances, the future of Cyprus should give us serious cause for concern.

Mr President, I merely wished to inform you in this connection that Turkish forces have proceeded 300 metres into the buffer zone alongside the British base in Cyprus and that they did so with the blessing of the British.

What my fellow member Mr Ályssandrakis said is true; this is the outcome of several events which have encouraged Mr Denktash and the Turkish Government, such as the Helsinki conclusions, which, to all intents and purposes, recognise the invasion and occupation of 38% of Cyprus in that they state that the Cyprus question need not be resolved in order for Cyprus to join the European Union, the declaration by G7, which has abandoned action under the UN resolutions in order to resolve the Cyprus question - and G7 includes Member States of the European Union - and the Verheugen statements, which basically recognise the occupation and the partition of Cyprus in that Mr Verheugen has stated that there is no problem and that the free part of Cyprus will be able to join the European Union.

The question, is this: what is the European Parliament doing in order to get the Turkish forces to withdraw immediately from the 300 metres which they have occupied, thereby extending the territory which they occupy and, more to the point, what is the European Parliament doing to free Cyprus from the occupying forces?

Mr President, I am taking the floor regarding the issue of Cyprus and the situation there because I do not think that it should only be our Greek colleagues who alert us to the problem which has now existed since 1974.

It is unacceptable that a country seeking membership of the European Union and with which negotiations to accord it pre-accession status have now been going on for 27 years can occupy an area covering 40% of Cyprus.

I think it is crucial for Parliament to make known its position on this problem and for us to make it clear to Turkey that the continued abuses - the green line has been overstepped - will lead to the immediate cessation of all negotiations with Turkey concerning the latter' s membership of the Union.

If I might be permitted to make an observation, when chairing a sitting one is forced to note that every time the Minutes are adopted there are some Members who want to embark upon a political debate, and as soon as the political debate gets under way, the Members leave the Chamber.

I think that one day we shall have to rethink the way in which these debates are conducted here in this Chamber.

The next item is the joint debate on:

the report (A5-0190/2000) by Mrs Stauner, on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control, on giving discharge to the Commission in respect of implementation of the general budget of the European Union for the 1998 financial year (SEC(1999) 412 - C5-0006/1999 - 1999/2050(DEC))

the report (A5-0167/2000) by Mrs Rühle, on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control, on giving discharge to the Commission in respect of the financial management of the sixth, seventh and eighth European Development Funds for the 1998 financial year (COM(1999) 227 - C5-0003/1999 - 1999/2004(DEC))

the report (A5-0189/2000) by Mr Kuhne, on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control, on giving discharge in respect of the implementation of the general budget of the European Communities for the 1998 financial year (Section I - European Parliament/Ombudsman Annex) (SEC(1999) 414 - C5-0008/1999 - 1999/2051(DEC)).

I understand your concern, Mr Poettering, but I do not wish to get involved in an argument and I hope that your comments are not going to start one.

Mr President, on a point of order, I wish to point out that it was the PPE who insisted that we looked at the whole question of the funding of political parties in this report.

It was the PPE and it was you, Mr Elles, who insisted on that.

We are responding to that request.

You insisted on it, we are responding.

Mr President, I should like to make one observation on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation and one on behalf of the Socialist group as a whole.

With regard to the development budget, the cooperation between Mrs Rühle and ourselves was excellent.

Initially, the Committee on Budgetary Control and the Committee on Development and Cooperation kept themselves to themselves, according to their own focus.

Later on, we joined forces and managed, in tandem with the Commission, to put certain things in order thanks to the action plan.

This conceals, of course, a particularly grave situation, which cannot simply be attributed to one single person.

In actual fact, we have a budget for the development fund and, in broader terms, the development sphere, where clear goals are lacking and where staffing levels are inadequate within the critical spheres, which need to be worked on. All of this sets the scene for enormous backlogs and for a control culture dominated by self-interest and fear, rather than actual results and a duty to achieve results and take action.

I believe that we are on the brink of a cultural revolution, which will bring about this change.

This means that the 2001 budget will make it possible to set clear goals within education and health care.

Amounts will be made available which allow for sufficient personnel and which can subsequently be verified to see whether the plan actually worked.

But this requires delegation, responsibility, and - in a word - a modern efficient budget coupled with a modern insight into how budgetary policy works within development policy.

This is how I see the action plan; this is how I see our joint action.

I see it as a joint effort with the Commission.

I am thrilled about the fact that we can, as it were, close off a chapter of fear and a culture of self-interest.

I know there are many motivated officials within the Commission who will now be given the opportunity to perform within the sphere which we would all like to see do well, namely to give people who live in difficult circumstances - one in five still have no access to clean drinking water or primary education - a better chance of a decent life.

We in Europe want to play a key role in establishing this with the necessary resources.

But this means that we need to actually make this change within the next couple of months.

This brings me to the more general comment I wanted to make.

The whole discussion here today will eventually culminate in the 1998 discharge.

For the Socialist group, this will also signify, more generally, the closing off of the chapter of fear and working towards the chapter in which we as Commission and European Parliament take joint responsibility.

In this respect, the Kinnock reforms, or the general internal reforms, are essential.

After all, if we do not succeed in building a new system of financial control and Activity-Based Budgeting, and if we fail to reallocate sufficient personnel to those areas where we need more people, then all we do is create more paperwork, shift more bits of paper with more control and fail to come up with the goods at the end.

And this is, at the end of the day, what the European citizen judges you as Commission and us as Parliament on.

It would mean a great deal to me if in the course of the forthcoming budget, we could, as it were, set our good intentions on a new course for 2001.

I wish the Commission every success in advance.

Mr President, I am going to confine my comments to the general Commission discharge for 1998, which has taken on a highly political and divisive tone right from the start of our discussions.

I feel that we have been through several rounds of a boxing match but ultimately the whole committee, including the rapporteur, said that discharge should be granted.

Rather than stick with the hysterical, drum-beating report that the rapporteur produced, which, if truth be told, had little originality, no sense of direction and no suggestion on how to move ahead constructively, the committee decided back in March to postpone the discharge and to set out seventeen clear conditions which we expected the Commission to sign up to in the space of a couple of months.

We were delighted that the rapporteur saw the error of her ways and supported our way of thinking.

Round one to us, the anti-PPE alliance.

The rapporteur then tried a fast left hook with her headline-grabbing explanatory statement.

Round two to the anti-PPE alliance.

The Commission responded constructively to most of the points we set out in March.

The next Stauner report was in the same hysterical tone as the first round but this time we were ready for her.

Round three to the anti-PPE alliance.

We thought the fight was over, but no, we were in for more with the new explanatory statement.

We have yet to see the result of that round but we are confident about the final knock-out round and we confidently predict what will happen on Thursday.

The only real question that remains is why her name is still on the report.

The truth is, we know that the Commission has a long way to go in getting its act together.

The Court of Auditors was right in not giving its O.K. to the Commission expenditure in 1998, but we are willing now to give the Commission the benefit of the doubt.

We think that this is a genuine attempt at reform and the Commission needs a certain amount of time to implement the necessary changes.

We will keep an eye on the situation and make sure the Commission sticks to the promises it has made.

For example, the promise to cut the number of errors is a major promise but it will not happen unless we have the commitment and the resources to go with it.

Commissioner, can you assure us that particularly in the areas of high risk, agriculture, structural funds and research, we will see more checks rather than fewer, as happened in 1998? Will we see significantly more resources for auditing within the DGs in cooperation with the internal audit service?

Can you give us these figures, please?

You know, Commissioner, that one area where we were dissatisfied with your answers was in response to lessons learned from Fléchard.

We know from the Court of Auditors, unlike Mrs Stauner, that we cannot get the money back.

Will you make a commitment though to cooperate fully with our internal inquiry committee and give us the information we request?

Finally, I hope that in our committee, we will be able to stop fighting each other and get on with fighting fraud.

Mr President, on a point of order I just want to ask you whether it is customary when the spokesman for a political group fails to turn up for the debate that the spokesman can then be inserted later.

It seems to me that if a spokesman cannot take the trouble to be here for this entire debate and be here on time for his own speaking time he should not be allowed to speak at all.

It is at the discretion of the chair, Mr van Hulten.

I think Mr Pomés Ruiz is perhaps just a few seconds late.

It is not always easy to get here on time with the lifts we have in Strasbourg.

So, if you have no objections, I shall give him the floor straight away.

Mr President, thank you very much for your generosity, and thanks also to my fellow Member for his understanding and kindness.

I would like to begin, not with the most important report, but by replying to the comments of Mr Kuhne which I really consider to be unfortunate.

At the moment, the political groups - as you know - do not have a genuine regulation.

My political group, and practically all the others, are complying with the existing regulations.

Your political group has its way of organising its finances, as do all the others.

Fifteen offices of this Parliament are devoted to the European Socialist Party, and a crowd of officials, who are paid from public funds, are dedicated exclusively to the work of one political party.

Other political groups prefer to have their offices outside Parliament, and have their own officials and adopt totally legal financing formulae.

Therefore, at a time when we are asking for a statute for the parties - because Europe needs not only European parliamentary groups, but also European political parties - at a time when there is a certain harmony amongst all the groups, I consider the references in his report to peculiar things to be unfortunate - as the chairman of our group, Mr Poettering, has correctly pointed out.

Mr Kuhne, you know that that is not the case.

My political group, like all of them, is going to comply with the regulations and provide information when it is appropriate to do so.

However, when free to do so, each group has managed its finances in the way they considered appropriate.

I would like to highlight the work of Mrs Stauner in this extremely important report, but I would like to point out, briefly, that we are not trying to weaken the new Commission, on which we have placed so many hopes, as we have on the Commissioner responsible for the budget and for financial control, Mrs Schreyer.

We are analysing a financial year of the last Commission, and we have asked the current Commission to diligently manage issues which were pending from the previous Commission.

The proof that we are fundamentally satisfied with its work lies in the fact that we are going to propose the discharge, obviously with reserves, of the accounts for 1998.

We believe that the Commission is taking its time.

Logically, at the beginning it needs more time, but we hope that other decisions will be taken much more quickly.

We also hope that the Interinstitutional Agreement which we have finally reached will improve our relations, so that we can provide each other with mutual support and build Europe more quickly.

We also understand that you are immersed in a process of administrative reform, which in my opinion and in the opinion of other MEPs, is not ambitious enough: decisions are lacking and there are matters which it is not dealing with.

It is not your direct responsibility, but you already know that we believe that a lot of funds are wasted as a result of this passive attitude, the lack of motivation amongst officials and the failure to take responsibility, because people are too concerned with controlling errors or seeking their own promotion.

To end, I would like to say that we agree with the discharge of the accounts which the three reports refer to.

Mr President, I think that Commissioner Schreyer has already noticed in her first year of appearing before this Parliament that this Parliament is a force to be reckoned with.

I can assure her that this will continue to be the case for the next four or five years.

All I can say is that so far, she has throughout the discussions shown herself to be a worthy opponent.

I would now like to comment on Mrs Stauner' s report on the resolution, which accompanies the discharge. With regard to the resolution, what matters most to the Liberal group is that so far, the Court of Auditors has failed to arrive at a positive statement of assurance.

The error rate is still too high and I feel we need to clearly stick to the points made in the resolution: the Commission must ensure that a positive statement of assurance can be issued by 2003.

Definite deadlines are needed and it would be useful if the Commission could clearly state, both internally and externally, which categories of the budget we want to reach a very low error rate in, where possible.

Another important point is that these days, documents have suddenly gone missing not only within the European Commission, but all over Europe.

We have heard that the Commission will set up an archiving system by the end of the year which will ensure that mistakes which have been made in the past - I particularly refer to the butter export to the Soviet Union - will no longer occur.

As for those butter exports, the Commissioner has already commented on them in her response to the earlier interventions.

There is a clear difference of opinion between the European Commission and the European Court of Auditors.

It was evident from both the European Court of Auditors and the most recent report by the Committee of Wise Men that the Commission did not have the authority in terms of proportionality, retro-activity and such like, which it claims to have, or claims to have at least to a certain extent.

It is up to Parliament to establish this and we will certainly do this.

We expect constructive cooperation from the Commission on this score.

Mr Kuhne has already mentioned the salient points in his report: a neutral staff policy on merit within Parliament, public service contracts and better management of the inventory.

Concerning Mrs Rühle' s report, we could not agree more with the comments she made about the need for better coordination between the Member States and the European Commission.

It is the Member States that foot the bill for the European Development Fund.

If the Member States vote for a certain policy, which the Commission proposes within the European Development Committee, it seems only logical to me that, if they are in favour of this policy, they will pursue the same policy using their own bilateral resources.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, in my opinion, the 1998 discharge was a fascinating exercise in terms of both the budget of Parliament and that of the Commission.

In April, the power of the plenary meeting became evident.

Against the Committee on Budgetary Control' s judgement, we rejected the European Parliament' s discharge, and we formulated five requests for the Secretary-General of this Parliament.

This illustrated that we can be just as firm with Parliament as we can with other institutions, notably the Commission.

I should like to express my personal and heartfelt thanks to Secretary-General Priestley and his staff for the efficient and bold manner in which he met this request and has provided us with the information required.

In my opinion, the 1998 discharge was a fascinating and at the same time useful exercise.

And we can now grant this discharge with a clear conscience whilst taking into consideration the comments included in the Stauner, Kuhne and Rühle resolutions.

But I am left with some concern, as if something bad could happen at any time.

Indeed, the framework agreement between the European Commission and Parliament which is due to be voted on tomorrow is hanging over us like a sword of Damocles.

I call on all MEPs, including the MEPs who are following this debate in their chambers, to study this framework agreement carefully and to examine how Parliament' s powers in respect of the grant of discharge are being whittled away.

I would invite you to read Paragraph 17, which contravenes Article 276 of the Treaty of the European Union, and would also invite you to read Annex 3, which is clipping the wings of the individual MEPs and rapporteurs.

I would call on you to fight the establishment of this Parliament, the establishment within your own groups and not to consent to this framework agreement tomorrow.

Mr President, when we talk of discharge, there is a poor spirit prevailing among the groups.

I would like to show my support for Mrs Stauner, despite the fact that the Social Democrats criticise her.

This may be based on the fact that during the Fléchard case, when Delors was the President of the Commission, the Head of his Private Office was the present Commissioner Lamy.

Under no circumstances can we accept that certain documents, which would shed some light on the use of funds, have vanished.

I would also like to support Mr Kuhne in the assessments he makes in his report, which, for its part, was criticised by members of the European People' s Party and European Democrats.

In my opinion, parliamentary rapporteurs have to speak and write what they think about the use of parliamentary funds, in which case the interests of no group can put up a barrier.

Our group agrees with the conclusion that discharge may on this occasion be granted.

Mr President, the Union for a Europe of Nations Group is unable to recommend giving discharge for the 1998 accounts concerning either the Union' s general budget or Parliament' s budget. We are, however, able to give discharge for the European Development Fund.

It is true that what happened in 1998 is not the responsibility of this Commission, but I think there has been insufficient willingness to assign responsibility for the mistakes of the past.

Where the general budget is concerned, I just want to highlight two serious issues, the Fléchard case and the problems surrounding ECHO's humanitarian aid, and also to emphasise that the whole budgeting process is characterised by a lack of precision.

This is what we normally view as the existence of unused appropriations.

Budgeting is not just about coming up with a few figures.

It is just as much about designing one' s administrative and production machinery in such a way that the objectives laid down in the budget can be achieved.

Like the ECHO case, the Fléchard case is an example of the irresponsible use of European taxpayers' money.

It has not happened during the period of the present Commission, but in both cases I have just mentioned we see an insufficient willingness on the part of the Commission to hold high-ranking civil servants accountable.

The Commission knows that there are criminal activities behind these cases.

The Commission knows that certain illegal forces have made anonymous threats to our colleagues, Mrs Stauner and Mr Blak, and this ought to make the Commission realise that a much more vigorous approach is required if action is to be taken against the internal forces partly responsible for the fact that European taxpayers' money can disappear into the pockets of criminals.

We now seem, of course, to have two spokespersons for the Commission: the official one, Commissioner Schreyer, and the unofficial one, Mrs Morgan. The latter' s statement here aptly illustrates why this Parliament is in no position to be more effective in cleaning up the administration.

In the Danish Parliament, we have a saying about the Finance Committee.

We ask, 'Do you know what a cat is?' , and the reply is, 'A cat is a tiger which has been to a consultation with the Finance Committee.'

That is not the case here. Mrs Schreyer can always come here sure in the knowledge that Parliament' s Committee on Budgetary Control will not hurt a hair of her head.

Where Parliament' s 1998 accounts are concerned, I would note that the problem is the same as in other areas of the Union, namely an all too careless attitude to the way in which the money is used.

On the subject of the Spinelli building, I would point out that it was acquired at too great an expense and in an unusual way, not easily seen through.

I should like to add that this is not a criticism I am directing at the Secretary-General, for I do not believe there is any basis for such criticism. Rather, it is a criticism to be directed against the system itself, for this is not good enough.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I would first of all like to thank Mr Kuhne and Mrs Rühle for their reports, especially the well-balanced one from Mr Kuhne.

We have taken the discharge procedure most seriously and I should also like to thank the administration and the Secretary-General for their collaboration in this exercise.

I think it was a good approach to clarify matters, look into them more carefully and solve some outstanding problems with a properly argued report enabling Parliament to have all the facts in order to grant discharge to the administration and the President of the European Parliament.

This is whom discharge is addressed to, even though it concerns the administration.

I am pleased to see that discharge has been granted to Parliament.

I think we have done an excellent job.

Group finances are also going to be more transparent and more appropriate to the exercise we are making ready for if we wish to continue along the road of financing political parties.

It was a useful exercise, properly carried out, and Mr Kuhne should be congratulated.

I think we should be able to vote broadly in favour of his report the day after tomorrow.

I cannot say the same for Mrs Stauner' s report.

I feel it is misguided to attempt to use the rapporteur' s role to one' s own ends: it is deceiving Parliament and deceiving oneself.

Right up to the very end, we shall have been witness to abuse of the procedure.

More than 60% of the report voted upon consisted of amendments.

Mr President, it is extremely rare for a report to be quite so turned around after the vote in committee.

This clearly demonstrates that the rapporteur must interpret the committee' s opinion logically.

If the rapporteur does not interpret the opinions expressed by the committee accurately then the report will be beset by amendments.

The rapporteur is supposed to be the spokesperson for the parliamentary committee.

I feel that a situation where 60% of the amendments are adopted is verging on the nonsensical, and indicates some deep-seated malaise.

The practice of playing games with the explanatory statement must stop.

It is not acceptable to attempt, as Mrs Stauner did, to include points in the explanatory statement which had not been accepted by the majority in committee.

It is a matter of some importance.

This Parliament has no clear majority or minority.

We have to rely to a certain extent on parliamentary fair play.

If a clear majority emerges, then this majority feeling should be expressed in all the aspects of a report, without resorting to playing on words or abusing procedures.

Furthermore, some of the pictures shown on television from Germany, involving extremely prominent people, suggest to me that one must look to one' s own backyard before preaching to Parliament and to Europe.

We must ensure that private and public matters are not muddled.

We shall therefore grant the discharge.

We shall support this report which the rapporteur is clearly against.

Rest assured, Mr President, that the TDI group will vote in favour of discharge, at least the radical wing of the group which I represent here.

Mr President, they are good reports we are debating today, but I am unable, for all that, to vote in favour of the reports as long as we have no guarantee that those who are to audit the accounts are being given all the information they need.

The ombudsman is not entitled to receive full information; the Court of Auditors has complained that it is unable to obtain full information; in Parliament' s Committee on Budgetary Control, it is a permanent topic on the agenda; and our President, Mrs Theato, has severely criticised the new draft agreement between Parliament and the Commission, for the draft agreement will not give us the documents we are requesting, either.

My personal experience of the Commission is of encountering a good deal of beating about the bush whenever I ask for information which ought to be available.

Those who vote in favour of the draft agreement do not know how many committees and committee meetings they are approving.

Nor do they know if there are any problems regarding the competence of any of the participants.

Indeed, as a rule we do not know everyone involved in day-to-day legislation and in the administration of the now 800 billion being used.

Nor do we know how much is being paid out to, for example, Danisco.

As long as the Commission is not making the information available that the Court of Auditors and elected representatives are requesting, my group can be relied upon to vote against approving the accounts.

Mr President, the European institutions must be aware that they have a responsibility and also an obligation to guarantee the European citizen an efficient and economical administration.

Unfortunately though, the opposite still holds true, as borne out by cases such as Fléchard and the ECHO administration.

The Commission is still denying Parliament access to information on these misdemeanours to this day, which on no account should we take lying down.

Nor should we be surprised if European citizens continue to lose confidence in these administrative systems.

Consequently, we Independents have no intention whatsoever of granting discharge to the report on the general budget.

This ought to send out a clear signal that we are committed to creating efficient and economical administrative systems in Europe.

Mr President, this brings us to the conclusion of a momentous two years for the European Union, which began with the 1996 discharge and its refusal.

I should like to congratulate Mrs Stauner on the courage which she has shown in getting her report - although not much of it is in its original form - through this Parliament.

We need, in this debate, to associate the 1998 discharge with that of the framework agreement which we will be voting on tomorrow.

Hopefully we will see signs of a more democratic Europe as a result of these last few months.

First, Parliament's role in the discharge has been shown to be one of extreme importance.

The Council, by its absence today, shows its lack of interest in the way in which we, as a Parliament, have used our powers to begin the birth of a political Europe.

Without the 1996 discharge there would have been no Wise Men's report, no Commission resignation and no real urgency for Commission reform.

But not all of us in this House have been heroes.

We have found ourselves split between countries, within countries, within delegations, often with strongly held views.

It was the Socialist leader, Mrs Green, who took the biscuit by voting for a motion of confidence on a motion of censure, which she did indeed get.

Miss Morgan now continues this particular inheritance by asking for a depolitisation of the discharge process.

Indeed, one or two of her amendments, like removing paragraphs 47 and 48 of the discharge report today show that some of these amendments look more Commission-born than in Parliament's interests.

Monitoring is necessary to make sure that what we have gained as a Parliament is maintained.

Mr Prodi needs to be supported in his reforms of the Commission.

Last but not least, our most important role is to make sure we have greater accountability and more democracy and that it is not the beginning of the end but the end of the beginning for Parliament's rights in the European institutions.

Mr President, the new Commission should be judged on whether it has the courage and the will to implement reforms and put the legacy of the past in order.

Our granting discharge for 1998 is, in reality, a vote of confidence.

We are giving the Commission a chance to prove that it is different from the old Commission.

I would also take the opportunity to call for a cessation of hostilities here in Parliament.

Let us unite all the forces that are in favour of the Commission' s developing into a modern, open and effective institution.

The European project can only succeed if we show zero tolerance for fraud, nepotism and corruption.

Otherwise, we shall never get the people on our side.

Let us cut across party lines and national allegiances.

Constructive criticism of the Commission must not go unheard due to Parliament' s internal bickering.

There are more and more people who think that we should simply forget the past and concentrate on changing the general way in which things are done, but I disagree with that view.

We need to clean up the legacy of the past, or matters will never improve.

I do not think we have received enough in the way of admissions from the Commission when it comes to the events of the past.

This applies both to the Fléchard and ECHO cases, and I can assure the Commission that these matters have not been buried away, just because we are now giving discharge for 1998.

We shall not forget them until they have been resolved in a proper and dignified manner.

I am, on the other hand, very satisfied with the new initiatives the Commission has taken to clean up the area of development aid, but these have also been overdue.

Both Mr Patten and Mr Nielson have been very critical of the way in which development aid has been administered.

Mr Patten has said it is embarrassing for the EU and the Commission and called it the worst way of providing development aid. For Mr Nielson, it was enough to call it a 'a pizza service without delivery' .

I am also very pleased that Mr Nielson has instituted an investigation into the extent to which the delegations are fulfilling their responsibilities in the high-risk countries.

He has also promised that disciplinary action will be taken if they are not in fact fulfilling these, and I am very pleased about that development, but do not imagine that we shall forget you. Finally, I wish to say that I think it was a shameless attack which Mr Dell'Alba made on Mrs Stauner.

Mr President, could I just remind Mr Poettering and his friends in the PPE group that, when the Court of Auditors drew up its report on the financing of political parties, it was his group which was criticised and it was the Socialist and Liberal groups which received a clean bill of health.

Maybe this is due to the fact that the PPE-DE group is not one group, that the British Conservatives are allowed to run their own shop and that they keep their own accounts.

It is they who must improve their books.

Mrs Stauner had to be stopped for speaking too fast at the beginning of this debate.

It is a telling metaphor for the work she did in committee.

She ran ahead of the committee without the rest of us realising what was going on.

She tried and condemned the Commission for not sharing the outlandish views she has of financial management and control.

Even the Court of Auditors does not agree with her.

The job of the Committee on Budgetary Control is not to hang the Commission out to dry for the duration of a parliament, but to ensure that Europe's citizens are served by an executive that implements its political priorities efficiently and effectively.

Fortunately that view was shared by the majority of the committee.

One of the disastrous consequences of this whole standoff has been the proposal that is before us tomorrow for a framework agreement on relations between Parliament and the Commission.

This agreement will restrict the rights of individual MEPs, of rapporteurs, to ask for information from the Commission.

It is a short-sighted proposal and if we do not postpone the debate until September then we should vote against it.

Finally I should just like to say, as we are about to listen to Mr Chirac and what he has to say about the French presidency, that I hope that he will also listen to what this Parliament has to say, and in particular to Parliament's view that it should be able to decide for itself where it meets, when it wants to meet, and that this should not be imposed by the governments of the Member States.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen of the House, ladies and gentlemen of the Commission, the statements made by some of my fellow Members have already contributed significantly towards expressing the discontent aroused by the report on discharge.

I should like to address you in the same vein.

Mrs Stauner' s initial report on discharge for the year 1998 gave rise to a great many questions and criticisms, which were expressed, in particular, in the vote in favour of an amendment noting the discrepancies between the compromise resolution and the explanatory statement.

In drawing up her second report, the rapporteur apparently did not take account of her fellow members' general lack of satisfaction.

Once again, we must deplore Mrs Stauner' s method.

She kept on asking the Commission for more and more information, going beyond the recommendations made in the resolution adopted on 13 April.

Today she is still asking questions which have already been explicitly answered.

This attitude has led the majority of members of the Committee on Budgetary Control to make radical changes to the draft report.

This is the reason why the text on which we are to vote during this part-session is substantially different from the initial draft.

This text does now afford us a more comprehensive overview of the Commission' s implementation of the 1998 budget, but at the price of a political conflict dominated by a feeling of frustration.

We can only deplore the far from constructive attitude of the rapporteur both within the parliamentary committee and with regard to the European Commission.

We cannot fail to note the same petty political excesses that some of us already condemned in the initial report on discharge for the year 1998.

Our objective must be to work in close collaboration with the Commission in the interest of our fellow citizens and of the implementation of our policies, and to make the discharge report a proper assessment of the implementation of the European Union budget in both quantitative and qualitative terms.

Mr President, I would also like to congratulate the rapporteurs - and indeed the people of Wales, because I did not realize they were so concerned about the Commission's welfare that they had elected someone to represent the Commission's views in Parliament rather than their own!

I would also like to say, just to correct something that Mrs Morgan said earlier, that I am very lucky in this debate, because my party declared in our manifesto - which helped so many of us on this side get elected - that we would not give discharge to any EU accounts until the Commission reform process had been successfully implemented.

I cannot therefore follow the lead of our excellent rapporteur, who recommends granting discharge to the Commission, for the reasons I have already given and because many people outside this place have been wondering what actually improved between 1996 and 1998.

Most people believe that things got worse within the Commission in that time rather than better.

I only joined the Committee on Budgetary Control a couple of months ago, and to me the meetings and the reports of the last two months have raised probably more questions than they have answered.

To close, I would like to ask two of those questions.

Firstly, can the Commission confirm whether Mr Fléchard is related in any way to Mr Delors and/or members of his cabinet?

Secondly, can he confirm whether any of his or Commissioner Kinnock's cabinet have actively lobbied MEPs for support of the Socialist Group, and in particular for Mrs Morgan's amendments on the Stauner report?

If they have, would this not be an abuse of their position?

Mr President, I want to thank Mrs Stauner, my colleague and good friend, for her report.

Sometimes we seem to forget that we are dealing with the discharge in respect of 1998.

I have carefully read the Court of Auditors' report on the accounts for that year, particularly in relation to agriculture and the Structural Funds.

I have come to the conclusion, having had a lot of experience in Parliament and with European affairs, that things have been steadily improving and that 1998 was one of the best performances we had.

The difficulties which occurred - a 4% possible error in the area of agriculture and a little more in the area of Structural Funds - did not result from the failure of the European Commission to dispense those funds in an efficient way, but from a failure - and it was a small failure - to control the Member States and the European governments and to ensure that the Member States and their administrations had done the job in the way it should have been done.

The second point is in relation to Fléchard.

I do not think it is reasonable to inform the people of Europe that there was a loss of EUR 14 million to the European budget arising out of this case.

To say this is to use a sort of accountancy jargon that puts the whole issue beyond the understanding of the ordinary European citizen.

The truth is that in the Fléchard case, Fléchard was suspected of fraud, the Irish government fined and punished them to the extent of EUR 17 million.

Fléchard took the Irish government to court and won an injunction preventing the Irish government from taking the EUR 17 million.

The European Commission intervened at that point and proposed a settlement.

The worst thing you can say about that settlement is that it was made on a legal basis which was not in effect when the crime was committed, but was in effect while the case was still open.

It seems to me that equating that with a loss of EUR 14 million is a gross exaggeration.

Finally, the lesson to be learned from this is that in the future we in Parliament have to cooperate with the European Commission to ensure that national governments do not, as in the past, interfere in their responsibilities, and that when the Commission takes national governments to task, it can rely on our support.

Mr President, I would like to repudiate in the strongest possible terms, the accusation levelled at me by Mr Dell'Alba that I used my role as rapporteur for the discharge of the budget for the 1998 financial year for personal ends - I repeat, for personal ends - and his comment that as a German, I, or rather, we Germans, if I understood the translation correctly, would do well to put our own house in order.

It went beyond personal insult and such verbal attacks are unworthy of our Parliament.

I urge you to take suitable steps towards ensuring that Mr Dell'Alba avails himself of democratic manners like everyone else, even if - as I readily grant him - he obviously finds it difficult!

Statement by Presidency-in-Office of Council - Action programme of French presidency

The next item is the statement by the Presidency-in-Office of Council on the French presidency' s action programme.

It is my very great pleasure to give the floor to the French President, Mr Jacques Chirac.

Madam President of the European Parliament, Mr President of the French Republic, ladies and gentlemen, it is a great pleasure to stand here before you at the start of this new Presidency.

It is always a very exciting moment when the torch is handed over in the race to achieve Europe' s goals, and the fact that we are in the year 2000 makes today even more special.

Europe has already taken great strides towards its goal of economic regeneration during this first half of the year thanks to the Lisbon and Feira European Councils.

Progress has also been made towards an extraordinary enlargement of the Union - enlargement which you have described, Mr Chirac, as a 'fine and necessary project' - and towards strengthening its institutions in preparation for enlargement.

I would like to welcome your incoming Presidency, Mr Chirac, and say a few words on a couple of issues you raised in your speech.

Firstly, I would like to say that I support one hundred percent your commitment to developing Europe' s social agenda.

When I presented the Commission' s strategic objectives for 2000-2005 in February, I announced that one of our major objectives would be to develop a new economic and social agenda for Europe.

Less than five months on, I am extremely encouraged by the progress which has already been made in the implementation of the economic aspects of that agenda.

The social aspects of Europe' s development are the other side of the same coin, and that is where we will focus our efforts during these next six months.

The Presidency will, in particular, have to tackle a whole range of major issues in relation to which the Commission has already tabled proposals.

Just a few days ago, the Commission adopted a social policy agenda outlining what needs to be done over the next two or three years to ensure that the conclusions of the Lisbon and Feira European Councils are translated into practical actions.

I feel that this document strikes a good balance between the political directions agreed at Lisbon and Feira and our duties and powers under the Treaty.

It should therefore meet with consensus at the Nice Council.

Indeed, it is important for the Union to avoid creating inequalities in our society, all the more so in that we now have the right economic conditions to reduce these inequalities.

The Commission therefore supports the Presidency in focusing on these issues.

The anti-racism directive was recently adopted in a record time of only six months, and we now look forward to seeing the French Presidency take up the other aspects of this extremely important anti-discrimination package with the same drive.

Indeed, the primary function of any anti-discrimination programme must be to secure equal opportunities for men and women, and we must also do everything in our power to put an end to that most detestable form of slavery, the trafficking of women and children for sexual exploitation.

One of the forms of inequality still present in European society is inequality of educational opportunities.

At Lisbon, an action plan was adopted which now needs to be implemented, and I know that the Presidency will be taking strong measures to ensure that all our young people develop the abilities they need for integration into a knowledge-based economy.

It is also our duty to advance this knowledge and increase the mobility of students, teachers and researchers in both quantitative and qualitative terms, as was proposed, at last, at Feira.

I am glad that this subject has been raised, for it is an issue of major importance, the furthest-reaching implications of which have not yet been fully examined.

Another source of inequality is the poverty trap in which too many European citizens find themselves.

At Lisbon, the European Council committed the Member States to making great efforts to eradicate poverty, and a High Level Group on social protection is working with the Commission on this ambitious strategy.

It is truly scandalous that extreme poverty still exists within our societies.

At the Nice Council we should be aiming to achieve a consensus of positions on social exclusion, and the Commission has already put forward proposals on the matter.

The Feira European Council also gave strong support to the Commission' s proposals in the area of food safety and committed the Member States to making progress on setting up an independent food safety authority as soon as the European Parliament has delivered its opinion.

I am confident that this opinion will be given by the first October part-session at the latest.

Once we have put forward our proposal, I look forward to seeing the plans for the authority move swiftly ahead under the French Presidency.

We owe this to our citizens, who will not tolerate it if we drag our feet on matters of food safety, but we must also have a common approach to this issue if we are to maintain our internal market.

We have all learnt from the recent problems and I feel that everyone is now ready to shoulder their responsibilities.

The European public is extremely concerned about environmental issues, and I stand alongside the French Presidency in the intention Mr Chirac has expressed to make the protection and improvement of the environment one of our key priorities.

Important decisions on climate change will have to be taken in November at the 6th session of the UN World Conference on Climate Change in The Hague.

At this conference, which will be one of the most important to take place since Kyoto, the Union will have to confirm its leadership role: we must fulfil the commitments we made at Kyoto and maintain the pressure on our partners to fulfil theirs.

The impact of our transport and energy policies on the environment, and, in particular, climate change, will be a key theme in two documents the Commission intends to submit to Parliament and the Council this autumn.

The first is a Green Paper on the common transport policy and the second is a strategic document on different energy sources and the security of energy supply.

These are issues of considerable concern to the European citizens, and they expect us to take effective action, especially as the situation now stands.

The citizens are also extremely concerned about oil pollution disasters on their coastlines, and if we want to avoid repetition of these disasters the Council and the European Parliament must act swiftly and adopt a package of measures on maritime safety, as we have already proposed.

Another important issue which is of concern to the citizens is the use of genetically modified organisms and biotechnology.

We must ensure adequate protection of human health and the environment while at the same time allowing society to benefit from the development of modern biotechnology.

We therefore urgently need to adopt the new framework legislation on the deliberate release of genetically modified organisms.

This series of provisions strengthens and improves the existing framework, and it is important that we achieve a balanced response that inspires both public and market confidence.

We therefore have a common, ambitious programme for the next six months and it seems to me that the various lines of action can all be traced back to a strong desire for a better quality of life.

At all levels of society, the citizens are calling throughout Europe for an improvement in social, ethical and environmental quality. We must heed this call.

This is why I want to end by emphasising the need for a constructive relationship with our new neighbours.

One of the major challenges facing the European Union is the need to stabilise our continent, and promoting stability in the regions on our borders must clearly be a central part of that strategy.

We therefore fully support your proposal to organise a political summit between the European Union and the most democratically advanced Balkan countries.

The Commission has already started to lay the foundations for this Balkan summit and we look forward to working closely with the French Presidency in order to make more detailed preparations.

I have recently had occasion to reflect on the increasingly important continuum of interaction between the European institutions.

Since the Treaty of Amsterdam came into force, our legislative system has been working ever more efficiently under the new codecision procedure.

This procedure applies to a greatly increased range of legislation, yet there has been less need to resort to conciliation.

A recent survey shows that more than half the legislative proposals put forward over the past year were adopted in two readings and almost a fifth required only one reading.

This means that the legislative process is maturing and becoming more and more consensual.

I find this encouraging, given that the Commission has recommended to the IGC that the scope of the co-decision procedure, together with the qualified majority voting procedure, should be extended.

It will give even more democratic legitimacy to the European legislative process, and this is vital to the political health of the Union.

President Chirac, I welcome your commitment to the success of the Intergovernmental Conference negotiations, that is to the necessary reform of our institutions.

Your commitment gives a clear, positive signal to our candidate country negotiating partners.

In Biarritz and in Nice, Europe will need all your skills and a great sense of responsibility on all sides.

We are all aware of how essential it is to reinforce our institutions and make them function more effectively. This is the essential precondition for enlargement.

We will have various other opportunities to go into this question in greater detail. Today, let me simply stress an obvious point, which is, moreover, the crux of what we want to achieve in Nice and beyond.

With 27-28 or more States, the Union will need stronger institutions, not weaker ones. We will need a stronger, not weaker democratic commitment and a stronger, not more elusive legal system.

In this respect, it therefore an illusion to believe that the 'Monnet method' is a thing of the past, something that could be more effectively be replaced with ad hoc arrangements.

The European Parliament, the Council, the Commission and the Court of Justice are our institutions, and they provide the guarantees and the checks and balances without which nothing lasting can be built.

Because they are so essential we must work to improve them, and this is the task to which we are all committed for Nice.

The next six months are clearly going to be busy, and I am convinced that by the time France hands over the torch to Sweden, we will have made very considerable progress in building the Europe our citizens want and expect.

Mr President, there was a time, when you yourself, Mr Chirac, took sides against the foreigner.

What a contrast there is between your Cochin address and your speech to the Reichstag, in which you gave a foreign parliament the first taste of your federalist thinking, supporting the idea of a European constitution!

Have you changed or have times changed to this extent?

Does one have to be modern to have the support of a few well-meaning broadsheets?

Or indeed, as in the case of the Treaty of Amsterdam, is the need of the moment all the explanation necessary?

Was it really necessary - although not very Gaullist even in 1974 - to become a centrist under Mr Mitterrand, even though the support you gained on the left was more than offset by the support you lost on the right?

You recommended saying 'yes' to Maastricht because the 1995 presidential elections were drawing close.

It would have been a simple matter to dismiss the single currency, the so-called single currency, and put it off forever but you preferred to reduce France to the mediocre level of a general council, rather than the rank of a statesman.

Because Mr Mitterrand had had his Treaty, you wanted one of your own, in Amsterdam.

Since the Treaty of Amsterdam proved insufficient, you are looking for another, this time in Nice.

Basically, you are acting like a political schemer of the Third Republic, constantly underestimating France' s potential and overestimating that of your rivals.

You have not noticed that in the nuclear age, the electric age, strength no longer lies in numbers, and that, in order to maintain its leading position, France must continue along the path initiated by General de Gaulle.

(Mixed reactions in the Chamber) Defending France' s interests alone in all areas - but you are, of course, all anti-Gaullist over there, that goes without saying - in all areas and always, being restricted as little as possible by international commitments, such as Europe, NATO, the UN, G7 -8 -9, not waging war on behalf of others, not ratifying the treaties before the others do.

How can you possibly claim that this supranational Europe strengthens France' s hand, when France holds only 11% of the votes within European bodies, a percentage which does not even match its economic power and still less its position in the field of leading edge technology?

By instigating a simplification of the closer cooperation procedures, you have offered our European partners a two- rather than a three-way directorate.

I hope that those who are excluded from this will be opposed to the attempt which, in fact, is playing into the hands of the Germans.

Is that not right, Mr Cohn-Bendit?

Belittling France by allowing important decisions to be taken without France' s agreement, when, through this closer cooperation, European treaties may, if necessary, be amended to the detriment of France...

(The President cut the speaker off)

Madam President, Mr President, France is assuming the presidency of the European Union for the next six months.

While it would seem necessary and legitimate to seek to reform the institutions and to give them a new lease of life, given that the system is so flawed and lacking in democracy, we should nonetheless not forget the main thing, which is the welfare, respect and full development of the peoples which make up the nations of Europe.

I am a member of the Group for a Europe of Democracies and Diversities.

This name in itself represents our programme, whose prime objective is to ensure that the identities and aspirations of each country are taken into optimum consideration, in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity.

Following the crisis of the Santer Commission - which rocked the institutions - why the devil did they bury the expert committee' s report exposing the serious mismanagement within the institutions?

We must learn the lessons of the past in order to make preparations for the future to avoid, once again, strengthening the powers of the Commission, a technocratic structure operating without transparency or democracy.

Should we not challenge the political dimension it has granted itself?

We cannot be content with a Europe adopting ever more dehumanised texts that are too far removed from the needs of the people, who are often the victims of such texts in their daily lives, especially when the vague nature of such texts often means that the final decision is made by the Court of Justice which, by dint of its power of interpretation, sets itself up as a true legislative authority, but without any political supervision.

We reject government by officials as much as we reject government by judges.

Consequently, the IGC must not be the instrument of a reform which will turn the Europe of tomorrow into a technocratic monster, ever more ignorant of the peoples' legitimate concerns and of the opinion of the national parliaments that represent them.

We cannot agree to this reform granting some states the right and the power to force binding texts on states which are unwilling.

The institutional reform we are promised is putting a stranglehold on our nations, especially the smallest ones.

New administrative and voting systems are being created which give power and hegemony to those that some people call pioneer states.

Diversity must be respected, and we must allow diversities to be expressed, for they are the true wealth of Europe.

Whereas the construction of Europe ought to be seeking to achieve coordination between the policies of Member States, the objective of integration is leading us towards an intolerable process of uniformisation.

This accelerated uniformisation, the origin of the single model, runs counter to the very thing that we strive to safeguard every day, namely diversity.

How is it possible to claim to defend the individual' s aspiration for a better life when every day challenging our cultures and our traditions a little more?

The fact is, behind the institutional debates, there are a number of particularly important subjects, such as employment, health, food safety and the protection of local products.

In addition, there is the entire debate on balanced regional development and respect for the users of territories, and also the future of public services and state monopolies.

We maintain that the French-style public service, which is of particular structural value in terms of regional planning and social cohesion, such as postal, railway and energy services, etc., must be defended against the Commission' s position.

Does defending the national interest make one anti-European?

Does asking for the directives such as those on 'birds' , 'habitats' , 'open air markets' or 'biotechnologies' to be amended make one anti-European?

On the eve of enlargement, we need to carefully consider this acquis communautaire that some parties would like to make 'immutable' in principle, with scant regard for democracy and subsidiarity.

In conclusion, Mr President, we hope that you will have the determination to restore the right of expression to the elected representatives and the various peoples of Europe in order to prevent a new rural and territorial divide.

In order for France to speak with a single voice, it is the voice of the people which must be heard. The 'blues' showed us the way.

It was a fine victory, Mr President, but the championship was possible only thanks to the Europe of the nations!

Madam President, ladies and gentlemen of the House, I have listened with great interest to the speeches by the representatives of the various groups and I am pleased to have this opportunity to express a few thoughts on these.

I should like, first of all, to thank the President of the Commission, Mr Romano Prodi, who summed up the situation at the beginning of the French Presidency with great clarity.

I am pleased to learn of the intentions which he announced on behalf of the Commission, which are generally in line with those of the French Presidency.

We already had an opportunity to note as much yesterday as, according to the tradition, there was a working meeting between the government, all the Commissioners, the Commission President, the Prime Minister and myself. This enabled us to observe the synergy between our concerns and ambitions.

Mr Prodi mentioned codecision in particular, and expressed his pleasure at the fact that this procedure was being gradually improved and was becoming more common.

He looked to the IGC to extend the use of codecision.

This is, as you know, one of the objectives of our presidency, along with the extension of qualified majority voting.

Chairman Poettering made a brilliant and generous speech, for which I must thank him particularly. I appreciated it greatly.

He mentioned a number of subjects. Mr Chairman, the presidency can already answer your question regarding greater transparency on the part of the Council.

It has been announced specifically that the French Minister for Foreign Affairs and the Minister for European Affairs will come to the European Parliament after every 'General Affairs' Council to inform Parliament and to ensure the necessary dialogue with Parliament.

This is one step in the direction you suggested, and I hope that it will serve to improve relations between our two great institutions and also, of course, to clarify the development of the subjects under discussion.

We also share your concern to have strong institutions, as you emphasised.

I said as much yesterday in Paris, at the meeting with the Commission.

I said this to Mr Prodi.

This is a prerequisite if our work is to be effective and if the European Union' s role on the international stage is to be asserted properly.

Let me add, to respond to a concern you expressed, that I endorse completely the idea you put forward to the effect that we need a single institutional framework and, above all, no parallel frameworks.

Everything that can give new impetus to the construction of Europe must be achieved both within the institutions and in accordance with the acquis communautaire.

This is perfectly plain as far as the French Presidency is concerned.

I have taken note of the wish to see that the Court of Justice is given the necessary resources.

Chairman Barón Crespo, who appears to be as familiar with the subtleties of the English language as he is with the French, mentioned a number of subjects which lie at the heart of the presidency' s thinking.

Regarding the European social model, one of the main objectives of the French Presidency is to arrive at an agreement on the social agenda in Nice.

We shall do everything in our power to achieve this objective.

Regarding public services, a subject mentioned by a number of speakers, the last of whom was Mr Saint-Josse, I should like to say that the French Presidency is very attentive to this matter.

We are well aware of the need to modernise and adapt public services, but we also know that they are a key element in the equal rights and opportunities of all citizens within a country and that this equality cannot, of course, be subject only or mainly to the criteria of profitability, which would inevitably lead to people in unprofitable situations being deprived of services provided in other circumstances to people in cities, for example, in more favourable economic conditions.

Quite obviously, this is not France' s ambition.

For a long time I have represented an extremely poor, rural constituency in France, and I can tell you that I consider, and have always considered, that it had just the same entitlement - and indeed the same duties to contribute in the form of taxation - with regard to the main public services, the lifeblood of the nation, as any district in Paris.

We shall therefore take great care to ensure that the necessary modernisation of public services is not confused with making them profitable, which would be a serious mistake.

Mr Barón Crespo mentioned many other things, particularly closer cooperation, development of the social model and enlargement.

He also mentioned the charter of rights.

This is something to which we also attach great importance.

We should like to see the convention, in which Parliament is to a great extent involved, issue its conclusions very quickly, before Biarritz, if possible, so that we can discuss them there.

That also means that the charter must include all the values, all the principles and rights on which our convictions and our societies are based, i.e. not only civil and political rights but also economic and social rights.

France is extremely keen to see economic and social rights clearly expressed in this charter.

Indeed, this is the main demand from the European Trade Union Confederation, one I find legitimate and justifiable.

If we wish to have a European social model, then it must be based on clear principles, which must be clearly defined, and they would best be expressed in the charter.

The problem, which a number of speakers mentioned, of integrating the charter into the treaty is one which has yet to be discussed.

The convention' s conclusions have not yet been published. We should await their conclusions on this subject.

At the present stage, the opinions of the various operators involved are still, I would say, rather contradictory and have not, in any case, been firmly expressed.

We need time before we give our opinion on this.

I am not absolutely sure that a clear decision can be taken in Nice.

If it is possible, so much the better.

At any event, France' s ambition is to see the advent of the charter in Nice, a charter with the scope and ambition to which I referred just now.

Chairman Cox, like Mr Poettering, pointed out the importance he attached to strong institutions.

I think it essential to have strong institutions, i.e. which have the necessary power to accept their responsibilities, but also the power to avoid deadlock.

It is clear right now that we are in a situation where the prospect of enlargement may lead to deadlock if we do not take the action required to enable Europe to overcome the sluggishness which is going to increase with enlargement.

This, indeed, is the reason why we attach so much importance, firstly, to the problem of the weighting of votes and, secondly, to the problem of closer cooperation.

Closer cooperation is in no way intended to create a Europe divided between those in the vanguard and those lagging behind, but simply to give the necessary impetus to the proper operation of Europe and thus to enable those that wish to go slightly faster in certain areas to do so, which will necessarily result in others being carried along in its wake.

This is an extremely important and almost institutional factor in pulling people along.

Mr Cox, you need have no fear on the subject of enlargement, which other speakers also mentioned, and which President Prodi discussed in a particularly firm manner.

If we want to make absolutely certain of the success of institutional reform, i.e. the IGC and the related Treaty of Nice, it is because we want enlargement to go ahead as speedily as possible.

Enlargement as quickly as possible is not, of course, synonymous with political decision.

Enlargement is not a political decision.

It is a shared political determination to be capable of applying the same rules throughout the Europe of tomorrow.

Of course, it presupposes a determination to enlarge on the part of the European Union: this is clear and not seriously challenged by anyone.

It also, however, presupposes a determination on the part of the candidate countries to undertake the reforms necessary to be able to join the European Union, without which the Union would be disrupted and the states joining without having undertaken the necessary reforms in order to adapt to the Community standards would face major social, economic and political difficulties.

In this spirit, we are absolutely determined, Mr President, to ensure that the negotiations undertaken with each candidate country are continued and intensified.

We shall carry out our work in this field as quickly and as well as possible, with a view, I would stress, as President Prodi said just now, to enlarging as quickly as possible.

There is no doubt about it.

The point of constructing Europe in the first place was to establish peace, and to cause it to take root, after so many pointless fratricidal wars; establishing peace and, consequently, democracy, since they go together.

Peace and democracy cannot be established within just one part of Europe, they must be established throughout the whole of Europe.

We can discuss Europe' s frontiers afterwards - that is another matter - but peace and democracy must apply to the whole of Europe.

Enlargement, then, is not just a moral requirement of candidate countries, but is also in the fundamental interest of a Europe that one wishes to see existing tomorrow, based on the principles of peace, democracy, human rights and freedoms.

Mr Lannoye specifically mentioned the problem of closer cooperation.

He also mentioned the state of the world today in terms which, I must admit, moved me and which I endorse.

It is true that we live in a world where the gap between rich and poor is increasing.

The UNDP report for 1999, by which I mean not the report tabled this year but last year, gave an example which, although not significant, is still striking, saying that the three largest private fortunes in the world today are equivalent to the sum of the gross national products of all the least developed countries, representing 600 million people.

What is more, it can be observed that this phenomenon is on the increase, and so is the resulting exclusion, and this is one of the main dangers of today' s world.

Major debates are underway on the subject of globalisation, as Mr Lannoye pointed out.

I am not, of course, going to enter into such a debate right now, even though Europe cannot remain apart from these debates, and so the Presidency, like the Commission and Parliament, must necessarily get involved.

Globalisation is clearly inescapable and inevitable and is, for the most part, the result of the development of techniques and technology.

It also provides some advantages because it does facilitate trade and, nowadays, trade is the greatest creator of wealth.

It does, therefore, have positive aspects, which it would be foolish to deny.

It also has dangers, however, in three areas in particular.

Firstly, the danger we have just mentioned: the exclusion of those who cannot go as fast as the others.

This is true in terms of the citizens within a single country and today we can observe an increase in exclusion despite strong growth and declining unemployment.

It is also true in terms of nations, where we can see rich counties getting even richer and poor countries, alas, becoming even poorer, as Mr Lannoye said just now.

This is a shift in world society to which we must be very attentive and which we cannot, of course, accept.

The subject is to be discussed, moreover, in the near future in G7 and G8, but it is a subject of concern to everyone, especially Europe.

The second risk of globalisation which has also been mentioned is the serious threat to the world' s ecosystem.

As soon as one seeks to maximise profits, which is understandable to a certain extent because profits are a factor in progress, but as soon as one seeks to maximise profits without real restrictions that are internationally acknowledged and imposed in order to prevent excesses, then there comes a time when the damage inflicted on nature is such that it is no longer able to regenerate.

It is not obvious, but it is a real problem, which must be taken seriously.

The typical example mentioned by a number of speakers was the Hague Conference to be held in autumn on greenhouse gas emissions.

If, as seems likely and even highly likely, scientists' conclusions indicate that these emissions present serious risks to the ecological balance of our planet, thus seriously compromising the legacy we are leaving to future generations, then there are grounds for carefully researching ways to control these emissions.

For, as things stand at present, it is true to say that globalisation is going in exactly the opposite direction to this.

The final disadvantage, the final risk of globalisation, involves everything related to large-scale crime.

With the development of globalisation and advanced technology, with the Net, we can clearly see a trend for the considerable development of cybercrime in all areas: drugs, terrorism, crime of every kind.

Therefore, globalisation does entail risks, but what exactly does that mean?

It means that we cannot challenge globalisation as such, because it is going to spread, whatever we do. We have to make the best of it, and this can be done by controlling it and giving it a human face, which means that we must be aware of the risks it involves.

This is the clear message that all major institutions, particularly the European Union and its institutions, must send out throughout the world.

This answer is also addressed to Mr Wurtz who also mentioned these problems, along with others, of course, particularly with regard to the Europe of the citizens.

I of course share his feeling that Europe must be first and foremost a Europe of the citizens.

We must respond to the concerns of everyday life.

We do not do this enough, that is true, even though, in my opinion, a great deal of progress has been made in this area.

The social debates which have been underway for three or four years now within the European Union could not have taken place seven or eight or ten years ago, when they would not even have been considered.

So, there has been some progress.

I have expressed my views on globalisation.

I do not believe, Mr President, that Fortress Europe is any sort of ambition or, indeed, any sort of reality.

Europe' s commitment is to supporting a range of values, a culture and an identity which represents, I would say, the synthesis of the cultures and identities of each of the nations in Europe, hence the importance of maintaining cultural diversity and defending each European nation' s right to retain its own culture, identity and language.

On this basis, union, according to the old adage of strength through unity, is the only way to safeguard these cultures and identities in future when confronted with the multipolar world which is developing today and which is universally in evidence.

Tomorrow, we will be faced with a vast China, a vast India, a large South-East Asia and an organised South America, not to mention North America.

It is quite clear that if we are content to remain where we are now, divided to a greater or lesser extent, then we shall purely and simply vanish.

It is only by being united and, at the same time, retaining our own identities that we will be able to survive and, in this context, we must not be a fortress but we must, nevertheless, combine our forces and our efforts.

Finally, Mr Wurtz mentioned the notorious Tobin tax.

I should just like to tell him that the reform of the international monetary system is on the agenda, as he well knows, and that, clearly, we must combat the instability of the financial markets.

That is obvious, and I am, of course, committed to this.

It is one of the subjects we shall also be discussing at the G7 meeting in Okinawa.

In this spirit, I am willing to admit that we shall have to look closely into all the possible means of achieving this twofold objective of stability and equity, adopting an open-minded and realistic approach.

For a long time now I been taking not of Charles Pasqua' s comments on gastronomy, and indeed on other matters, and so I was very interested to hear him speak, there is no question of that, even if I did not completely recognise the Europe that we are building together from his remarks and description.

Clearly, we are not looking at matters from the same perspective.

In particular, he brought up the word 'federal' or 'federation' many times in his speech.

This is an old and very French argument that we have had in France and, indeed, it is based on the fact that the meaning we give this word in France differs from that given in other languages, especially German, and this interpretation has led to misunderstandings that have, of course, degenerated into arguments.

Both Charles Pasqua and I have served a man who we admired greatly, President Georges Pompidou, who was accustomed to saying, as he did not appreciate pointless arguments, "Federation, confederation or a federation, it is all a con federation in the end" .

(Laughter) Perhaps it was a rather provocative thing to say, but there was also an element of Cantal or Auvergne good sense behind this comment.

I would make a friendly suggestion that Charles Pasqua thinks about this.

Mr de Gaulle will probably understand that I do not share his views.

Once again I heard him out, but let me take the liberty of saying that there is one right that I am not prepared to grant him, and that is the right to claim to be speaking on behalf of General de Gaulle.

Last but not least, Mr Saint-Josse mentioned a number of matters which have already been touched upon, and I should just like to pick out one or two of the arguments he pointed out.

Firstly, cultural diversity and implementation of the principle of subsidiarity.

I unreservedly endorse the expression of this necessity, and the spirit thereof.

It is true that our cultural diversity is a source of wealth, and that the principle of subsidiarity is an absolute necessity.

Decisions must be taken at the right level.

Let us not go back over the past, or over a few examples that would make easy targets. In order for the principle of subsidiarity to be properly applied, however, we need standard rules.

I am thinking of a specific decision taken by the Commission, and subsequently challenged, particularly on grounds of non-compliance with the principle of subsidiarity.

I observe, however, that it was the governments that asked the Commission to take this decision in the first place.

(Applause)There is therefore some ambiguity, if you will, and the more of us there are, the more essential it will be to enforce strict application of the principle of subsidiarity. This, of course, means that there must be a standard set of rules to avoid any sort of ambiguity.

I repeat, and I said this in Berlin in another context and from another angle, we must be able to identify clearly who is responsible for doing what, otherwise it just will not work, as we saw in the example I mentioned just now.

(Applause)We must make ready to state clearly what Europe is doing, what each of the nations that make up Europe is doing, and what, within the nations, a number of administrative levels participating in the political and human life of these nations are doing.

I am thinking, for example, of the German Länder, but there are, of course, many other examples that could be cited.

Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, I am delighted to have had the opportunity to make a few comments on the very interesting contributions made by the representatives of this House, and I thank you for the welcome you have given me here today.

I should like to thank the President, Mr Jacques Chirac, for the very full answers he has given the group chairmen in this House.

We shall carry on with our debate.

The President is forced to leave us because the family of the hostage held on Jolo, Sonia Wendling, asked to meet President Jacques Chirac, in his capacity as President-in-Office of the Council, to see how all these poor hostages might be released as quickly as possible.

I am sure, Mr Hager, that you share the anxiety of these families.

Madam President, you could not be more wrong. It is a matter of deep regret to me that the President-in-Office of the Council left the House just as the representative of the last group of delegates was about to speak, thereby registering his disinterest.

The honourable members are left wondering whether this is an act against the Independents or against the first Austrian representative to speak in this debate.

I fear that in behaving as he has done today, the President-in-Office of the Council, who spoke out against exclusion earlier on, is guilty of that very thing I therefore refuse to give my opinion on the programme of the French Council Presidency, owing to a suspected lack of interest, and I regret that such a signal has been sent out at the beginning of the Council Presidency.

In spite of the foregoing, being an optimist, I hope that in future this Council Presidency, like others before it, will take cognisance of its neutral position, and that at the end of the day, normality will also return to the group.

Madam President, President of the Commission, ladies and gentlemen, it is an honour for me, as president of the French delegation within the PPE-DE Group, to take the floor on the day that the French Presidency of the European Union presented its priorities.

In his speech last week in the Reichstag in Berlin, which was universally recognised as historic, the President-in-Office of the Council opened up new perspectives for the French Presidency, and also, I hope, for the presidencies which are to follow.

He not only asked the real questions as to why we should build Europe, who should be involved, and how it should be done, he also provided answers key to the future of a European Union embarking on an unprecedented enlargement.

To those who prefer to focus only on the short-term but certainly essential reforms that are awaiting the French Presidency and that must result in the future Treaty of Nice next December, I shall respond that these major reforms will only be achieved successfully if they are guided not only by modern European history, but also by an ambitious and realistic vision of what the Europe of tomorrow must be - a strong, democratic and free Europe that carries some weight in the eyes of the world.

We all know that in order to meet the considerable challenges which Europe faces today, we shall together have to work out how to clearly define our plan for Europe, all together.

We must be grateful to the President-in-Office of the Council for having had both the courage and boldness to encourage our partners to engage in discussions but also to suggest the guidelines for these.

Our fellow citizens await a Europe which at last has the determination to review its modus operandi and to strive to achieve greater clarity, greater transparency and greater efficiency.

The reforms of the Commission and the Council must respond to these requirements.

We must keep in mind that, even if it is not an easy task, France and its partners are under an obligation to achieve results.

We must reach an agreement, and a good one at that.

Far from clouding the issue, today' s debate has offered some clarification as to the direction of the action to be undertaken in the months and years to come, which I shall sum up as follows: bringing Europe closer to the citizens, all the citizens without exception, be they close to the decision-making centres or remote, economic modernisation and a social Europe, efficiency and a strong presence in the world.

I have every confidence in Jacques Chirac, President-in-Office of the Council, and in his ability, along with our partners within the European Union, to meet these historic challenges.

Mr President, I have a point of order under Rule 120 of the Rules of Procedure, which moreover is expressly quoted on page 25 of today' s agenda.

According to the schedule, the Council was to have 30 minutes' speaking time.

President Chirac spoke for one and a quarter hours.

According to the schedule, Members of Parliament were to be allowed to speak, but the President did not silence the people interrupting Mr de Gaulle.

Instead she cut his speech to a strict three minutes, even though she had allowed the other speakers an extra minute and, finally, she did not allow the speaker on behalf of the Technical Group of Independent Members to speak.

He was entitled to speak before the response from the President-in-Office of the Council.

The President has not fulfilled her obligation to run debates in this House objectively.

Mr President, Minister, ladies and gentlemen, we all agree on setting the course we are heading for beyond the French Presidency, but this forces us to mention the questions that will be raised, regardless of whether the intergovernmental conference is successful.

Our heading cannot be just the institutional construction which we know particularly appeals to the French.

It must also answer the question: what do we wish to achieve together?

Are we ready to draw the conclusions of the great leap forward undertaken by the French President' s predecessors?

I am thinking particularly of the matter of adopting the euro.

The questions that we must also answer are those that our fellow citizens are asking.

They aspire to see Europe operating better.

Whatever the advantages of talking about our visions for the future, right now we have to respond to the aspirations of the men and women who make up Europe, and in order to do so, all the members of the French executive must be involved in order to make a success of this presidency.

I believe that the projects undertaken by Lionel Jospin' s government, in France and in Europe, give the President-in-Office of the Council every opportunity to fulfil this objective.

We must also make a success of this agenda, and this means, first and foremost, making a success of the Intergovernmental Conference.

Key political questions will have to be settled, but if we want the European Union to be in a position to make decisions, then first and foremost we have to move into the realm of the qualified majority.

Moreover, Parliament requested that intensified cooperation be included on the intergovernmental conference agenda.

We are pleased to see that this has been possible.

We should like to see the right of veto cancelled for the transition to intensified cooperation, but this increased flexibility should not pave the way for an increasingly intergovernmental mode of operation.

Then, I should like to tell the French Presidency that it can count on Parliament' s support to prefer rather that we have no Nice Agreement than a mediocre Treaty.

Beyond the Intergovernmental Conference, we are also awaiting a review of the working methods and organisation of the European Union' s institutions.

We are thinking, obviously, of the reform underway within the Commission, but also and perhaps more importantly, within the Council.

The French Presidency has set itself the objective of placing Europe at the service of growth and full employment.

This is a renewed objective, for which we think a necessary objective is to step up work within the euro-11 group, soon to be the euro-12.

We are delighted that the French President has made a commitment to the greater visibility and authority of this body, which we consider to be a useful one.

As regards the social agenda, once again we are pleased to see that the prospect of full employment is henceforth seen as embracing the whole of the European Union.

We are delighted, moreover, to see the commitment of Lionel Jospin' s government to bring a number of essential directives to a successful conclusion.

I am thinking primarily of the directive on information and consultation of employees, as well as the working time directive for mobile workers.

The French President spoke of the Europe of men and women, the increased attention we must pay to the concerns of our fellow citizens.

In this respect, the work undertaken within the Convention on framing the Charter of Fundamental Rights is absolutely essential.

At the European Council in Biarritz, the Convention members will be ready to propose a comprehensive text which is to include economic and social rights.

However, the European Council will also have to be prepared for Parliament demanding time and again that the possibility of incorporating the Charter into the Treaty should be tabled. We consider this to be an essential point.

What is the point in recognising rights if no legal recourse is possible?

With a view to creating a Europe that is closer to the citizens, I shall not go through the French Presidency' s entire programme, I have just two points to make.

One of these concerns the "money laundering" directive which, I believe, offers the progress that our fellow citizens wish to see.

They cannot comprehend our reluctance in this area.

In the field of reciprocal recognition of legal rulings, we are continually faced with situations where the divergent nature of our judicial structures involve our fellow citizens in serious personal deadlocks.

Mr President, one final word to express how important we think it is that the French Presidency should also transform the acquis of the Treaty of Amsterdam on the subject of services of general interest.

These services of general interest contribute to the social and territorial cohesion of the European Union, as enshrined in the Treaty of Amsterdam.

The test we are going to have to face in this respect concerns the directive on postal services.

Such services are also part of the modern world, for example Internet access for all.

We hope that the French Presidency will be able to propose a framework directive on this subject.

Mr President, the programme which the French President has just presented is both ambitious and realistic.

I was, however, hoping for a clearer commitment regarding the fundamental rights included in the Union' s agenda, for two reasons.

In the first place, these rights must be enshrined in the forthcoming Charter of Fundamental Rights.

In his speech, however, the President did not cite the examination of this charter as one of the main points of the European Council in Biarritz.

In his response to the first speakers, he suggested that there could be some discussion of a proposal for a charter in Biarritz, but with a content that, he is well aware, would make it almost impossible to incorporate into the Treaties at the European Council in Nice.

Is France, the homeland of human rights for two centuries, not going to set a more ambitious objective?

This would be a great disappointment.

In the second place, since Amsterdam, fundamental rights have formed the foundations of our Union and should represent the constant reference for any Member State action.

The creation of an area of freedom, justice and security is the most difficult undertaking before us, especially given that unanimity is still the rule.

This is a good subject of investigation for the intensified cooperation to which the President recently referred once again.

The President was the first to refer to the terms of Article 6 of the Treaty in connection with the Haider case.

In adopting such a stance, he set a very high standard, not just for the Austrian Government but, indirectly, for all the others too.

The measures the French Presidency has already announced in the areas of justice and home affairs appear to live up to this challenge.

They are, however, merely plans at this stage.

Let me therefore address the French Presidency with the words the Greeks used to address the most promising athlete in ancient times: hic rhodus, hic salta [here is your Colossus, now jump!].

Mr President, Minister, let me share a few comments with you in the intimate surroundings of the end of the day's sitting.

Apparently, Europe is some sort of vamp provoking everyone into political promiscuity.

I do not know, after listening to President Chirac' s comments, what political party he is going to wind up in at the end of his career, but the transformation is extraordinary, and it is true that we have taken twenty-one years to persuade President Chirac that Europe is something other than that which he believed when he made his Cochin address in 1978.

I should like to say that I am still convinced that we are not going to have to work so hard over such a long period to persuade Prime Minister Jospin to at last grasp the European cause firmly.

He is not always against it and it is safe to make minor observations like that without getting irritated!

I simply meant that I am convinced that it is no longer enough today to repeat things endlessly: President Chirac said many things that I agree with.

Ambitious, yes, it is ambitious, but let us see tangible proof of this ambition!

I am sorry, for example, that he did not repeat what he said in Berlin regarding the agenda for a constitution.

In Berlin, he said we should have enlargement plus constitution at the same time.

I would have liked him to say the same thing before this House: enlargement plus constitution, at the same time, so that we might have a constitution by 2003 or 2004 or 2005 as well as enlargement.

Secondly, speaking of a constitution, we must be careful not to be too naive.

It sounds good but what does it actually mean?

For Europe means shared authority, and increasingly shared authority: in other words, the constitution ought to tell us who does what, and how, together.

If it were quite as simple to perform political surgery, we would make faster progress.

And then I must say that, as Paul Lannoye said, I am saddened when I hear people discussing foreign policy and sparing no expense on arms and defence without even mentioning conflict prevention.

Europe' s role is also to invent an alternative foreign policy based specifically on preventing conflicts, on the need for ever fewer arms.

I am not saying that we do not need arms, I am not so naive, but I do not want European foreign policy to be exemplified merely by top fighter planes and soldiers obliged to go to Bosnia or Kosovo, but instead by our ability to prevent a conflict arising in Bosnia or Kosovo.

From this point of view, I would say that President Chirac is going in the right direction and I think that Prime Minister Jospin would be able to catch up with him if he were more clearly and resolutely pro-European.

Mr President, Minister, one presidency follows another, but, hearing Mr Chirac, we realise that the speeches and the pious hopes regarding exclusion remain the same.

It must, however, be noted that the fate of the fifty million poor people or the fifteen million unemployed people in Europe remains the same, whatever the presidency.

Europe is democratically bankrupt. The operation of the institutions is quite outside the concerns and outside the control of the citizens.

Europe is a liberalising machine deregulating public services at the expense of the people' s basic needs.

Europe is a fortress favouring illegal trafficking in modern-day slaves, as the Dover tragedy showed.

The demonstrations in Seattle, Geneva and Millau, however, show that another sort of Europe, another sort of globalisation, is possible.

To achieve a democratic Europe, let us begin by bringing down the Schengen fortress and agreeing that all men and women have the same freedom of movement as capital, and let us regularise the situation of illegal immigrants.

To achieve a social Europe, let us begin by banning layoffs on the part of firms in profit.

Finally, to achieve a Europe of justice and solidarity, let us begin by setting up, and not just talking about, a Tobin tax, up to a level that would make it possible to guarantee the subsistence of the billions of children and adults totally without resources.

For the people, these requirements are the priorities in the debate, which is certainly needed, on the weighting of votes or the right of veto.

Mr President, Minister, I am speaking on behalf of the Italian radicals in the TDI Group who, as everyone knows, are European federalists.

For this reason, we will be paying extremely close attention to any institutional steps towards closer cooperation, which must be clearly and firmly established within the Community framework.

I shall use my speaking time, however, to remind you that this Parliament asked the IGC to grant Parliament the right finally to decide on its own location.

This is a fundamental right, and three hundred Members of this House, moreover, made it very clear that they are unhappy about being forced to come to Strasbourg twelve times a year.

I hope that the French Presidency will take due account of this issue, which we consider to be extremely important.

It is no coincidence that the Friday sitting has been abolished, Minister.

It is because many Members of this Parliament are fed up with the problems they experience in getting to Strasbourg and in working properly in these conditions.

Mr President, in view of the way in which the list of speakers has been manipulated today in order to put paid to my colleague Mr Hager, I have only this to say to you: if the Austrian referee Benko had broken all the rules in the game between France and Portugal, as Madam President has done today, then France would not even have reached the final.

That is the funny side of it.

The less amusing aspect of the conflict we are engaged in today is that there are several hundred delegates sitting here who are actually willing to accept this without protest!

Mr President, we are delighted with what Mr Chirac, the President-in-Office of the Council, has said at a time when we have the strong feeling that there is a deep crisis in Europe and when we would like to know where we stand.

I should like to discuss the three factors which I think are at the root of the crisis in Europe today.

The first is a profound questioning of all the institutional players in Europe; the second factor is the distance and the lack of understanding that separate the general public from the European institutions, and the third factor, which is the key to the first two, is a loss of perspective.

For a long time, we in Europe felt that we knew where we were going.

This is no longer the case. That is why many of us welcomed the speech made by the President of the French Republic to the Reichstag, particularly his decision to declare the European Constitution to be the key to all future mechanisms for change.

Today, he has chosen not to use the same words.

Many of us regret this because we feel that his statement that the ideas he expressed in the Reichstag went beyond the French Presidency of the Union, represents a fresh approach.

We feel instead that the issue of Europe' s prospects, the issue of the architecture of a new Europe and the issue of the future European Constitution belong right at the heart of the French Presidency of the Union.

These are not secondary or incidental issues, to be addressed at a later date; they should be addressed as a matter of priority and are at the heart of the discussions that we will be holding.

If we are unable to respond to the issue of Europe' s prospects, we will not be able to respond to the technical issues that face us.

This would be a missed opportunity for us.

I shall sum this up in one sentence: work on the Constitution and therefore on Europe' s prospects must be clearly launched during the French Presidency.

It must be launched at Nice.

Mr President, Mr President, the French presidency' s programme is interesting and in no way devoid of substance.

There is a lot one can agree with.

I nonetheless wonder whether it is in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity to talk about housing, health care and sport.

Ought the EU really to be devoting itself to those kinds of issue?

The idea of a community of values is important, but opinions are divided on how this is to be achieved.

Many of us are disappointed at Prime Minister Jospin' s statement to the effect that there will be no change during the French presidency when it comes to the 14 countries' boycott of Austria.

The intensive discussion in recent weeks of our visions of Europe' s future has been stimulating, but it causes disquiet in the candidate States.

Where exactly does the EU stand?

This is an issue to which Mr Cox also referred.

The unclear signals give scope to populists with nationalist agendas in the candidate States who want to prevent their countries from becoming Members of the Union.

Was it a coincidence that no statement was made at Feira to the effect that we should be ready for enlargement by the year 2002?

Does the French presidency' s policy concerning a further Intergovernmental Conference at the end of 2003 or the beginning of 2004 imply support for Chancellor Schröder' s proposal for a new conference on the division of labour?

Even in that case, the signals are unclear, which is alarming for the candidate States.

To conclude, I would point to one instance of unilateral action which is worrying.

Why did France discontinue Slovakia' s membership of the OECD, citing the EU' s directive on TV issues?

Was it right to do this off its own bat, without checking what the other Member States thought?

What was the reason for its action?

This has also given rise to concern in the candidate States about the attitude we take to their legislation and to their legitimate interest in being involved in OECD cooperation, which is economically important.

Mr President, Minister, ladies and gentlemen, the French Presidency' s ship is heavily-laden and we hope, particularly having heard Mr Chirac' s answers, that it arrives safely in Nice, in six months.

Nice is founded on an ancient Phoenician settlement, originally named Nicaia, meaning victory, and we are certainly expecting victory on the part of the French Presidency, both for the current citizens of the Union and for those who will be joining it.

We were pleased to note the Presidency' s will, ambition and clear-sightedness, particularly with regard to the contradictions inherent in some of our European policies.

Global warming is one such problem.

Like a sword of Damocles, it hangs over not only the Union, but over the whole world.

Integrating this essential factor into all European policies is the political challenge to which we must respond.

I am not convinced that this is the direction we are currently taking, in spite of all the fine words that have been spoken here this morning.

Mr President, the historical issue concerning the French Presidency, for I do feel that it is a historical issue, is first and foremost to open up the way for the construction of a Europe for all Europeans.

We invited the new democracies in Eastern Europe to join us now that they have put the ordeal of Communism behind them and we were right to do so. Nevertheless, we were fully aware that we would not fit greater Europe into the institutions of little Europe.

Since then we have dawdled and dragged our feet over the reform of these institutions.

Ten years after the fall of the Berlin wall and one year after the Helsinki decisions on enlargement, I see the new Intergovernmental Conference under the French Presidency as the kick-start that all Europeans expect of Europe. I say this because it is not only the size of Europe that is changing; it is also its very nature.

If we consider Europe as a whole, we must define Europe and define its borders, its values and the European project. Any definition of borders raises the problem of Turkey, which, to my mind, should become an associate country rather than a fully integrated one.

We must also think of Europe in a different light, not as a huge nation-state, with a super-government, a super-president, a super-administration or even a super-tax.

Instead, we should see Europe as the construction of an area of genuine federalism, which protects the diversity of people and of nations, which has a clear constitution that defines and limits the powers of Europe and which applies the principle of subsidiarity and ensures that this will be strictly complied with.

Today, the French Presidency has an obligation to achieve results.

As the French President said, unless the IGC is successful, there is no point in thinking about the following stages.

A review of decision-making mechanisms in order to prevent paralysis and a review of the functioning of the Council and the Commission are all on the agenda and I think that the projects for tomorrow and beyond must not conceal what is required today.

The success of the IGC now will actually be the best basis on which to build the huge project for the greater Europe of tomorrow.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the French Presidency is going to be a particularly busy one.

The Portuguese Presidency has done a great job and achieved major, innovative results at the Lisbon Summit. Now the Member States of the Union need to implement the results swiftly.

However, not enough progress is being made at the IGC.

There is a need for stronger political will and for the political level of the negotiations on reforming the Union to be raised immediately. It is therefore important that the debate on the future structure of the Union has been reopened following the positions adopted by Minister Joshka Fischer.

Now, the first task must be to define at Nice certain priority issues referred to by President Chirac in his introductory speech, such as closer cooperation, the adoption of majority voting as the rule and the adoption of a decisive Charter on Fundamental Rights which will be included in the Treaties. This would be a basic step towards defining a European Constitution.

We feel that these decisions are crucial in terms of the reform of the Union: without them any discussion of its structure will be academic, and it is clear that, now that the single currency and the Central Bank have been established, Europe is in need of new political unity and, as has been said, a fresh boost for economic growth and social cohesion.

I therefore feel that we can assure the French Presidency that we will make every effort to make these next six months a success: we are aware that there are considerable political differences between the countries and that now is the time to adopt clear positions.

In our opinion, there is a clear dividing line between those who want enlargement to bring less political integration and those who consider that greater political integration and clearly defined timeframes will be necessary.

We feel that opinion is also divided over the form that the Union' s institutions should take after enlargement. There would appear to be a choice between developing the supranational components - strengthening the role of Parliament and the Commission - and enhancing the intergovernmental aspects.

We would like to make it possible for the countries who so desire to cooperate more closely to present a united front in a number of sectors such as economic and monetary union, which is still far from being fully achieved, internal security, and defence and foreign policy, which represents an open, dynamic core of more advanced integration.

As regards management of the economy, we support the establishment of a Euro-12, for we feel that, with the introduction of the euro, this is necessary for the Central Bank as well.

We consider it essential to maintain the fundamental goals of the European Social Model - adapting it, of course, to the diversification requirements determined by the new economy - and introducing new forms of flexibility which are different from those governing the labour market: flexibility which makes its own rules.

We believe in increased synergy between the European Parliament and national parliaments, but we are against commingling which undermines the fundamental consideration that the European Parliament is the parliamentary organ of supranationality elected by direct universal suffrage.

I would like to make one last point regarding the European Union' s role in the international institutions.

President Chirac delivered a highly Europeanist speech to the Bundestag, and committed himself to revitalising the development of the European Union and providing it with a Constitution voted in by the European citizens.

President Chirac once again expressed French support for the German application for a permanent seat at the United Nations Security Council, confirming his intention to strengthen the French-German axis in the context of a purely intergovernmental vision of the future structure of the European Union.

For a long time we have felt a review of the membership of the Security Council to be necessary, but we consider that it would be more appropriate for representation to the Council to be by major continents, such as Africa, South America and Europe.

Since we feel that the intergovernmental, supranational and parliamentary aspects should be balanced within Europe, we consider that it is the European Union as a whole which should be represented at the Security Council.

Mr President, President-in-Office of the Council, President of the Commission, Ministers, ladies and gentlemen, the requests, proposals and projects presented during these past weeks by Mr Fischer, Mr Bayrou, Mr Monti and Mr Védrine and by President Chirac in Berlin, and Mr Chirac' s speeches here today are all evidence of the fact that, despite setbacks and despite our differences, we have entered a new stage of European construction.

The positive results we hope for from the Intergovernmental Conference should allow us to proceed to the necessary reform of the institutions in preparation for enlargement.

In this context, the Council, the Commission and the European Parliament will each have to play an equally important and equally influential role, but these roles must include active cooperation.

It is the citizens who are calling for it, the citizens who are the true protagonists of the Europe of today, but, more importantly, the protagonists of the Europe of tomorrow, an enlarged, integrated Europe which is capable of meeting the challenge of globalisation. The success of the euro will not be sufficient on its own for us to hold our ground against the United States and the China of tomorrow.

It is true that we must move forward in the area of the common foreign and security policy and support our currency politically as well, but progress has to be made in the defence of the fundamental values of our Union, and the Charter of Fundamental Rights must reflect this.

It is the duty of confirmed Europeanists such as ourselves, who believe in the social market economy, to fight the scourge of unemployment, and in order to do this Europe must encourage the small and medium-sized businesses and foster the development of trade, agriculture, tourism and craft trades, but, in the context of subsidiarity, it must also reduce the burden of taxation.

However, as President Chirac stressed, we must educate our young people, prepare them for the challenge of globalisation, and not only from a professional and cultural point of view. We must educate young people to stand up for principles, and the fight against drugs and the development of the social function of sport may well play a significant part in this.

But, Mr President, the best results take time to achieve: they are like mosaics, built one piece at a time.

Yet are we sure that this Presidency will achieve the goals it has set itself just because it is French and France was one of the founder countries of the Union?

It will have the sure political and parliamentary support of the Forza Italia delegation in the PPE-DE Group, for the Italy of today and of tomorrow will certainly be a protagonist in the construction of that Europe in which we all believe so strongly.

Mr President, what a change we have seen from Mr Chirac' s speech of a few years ago!

He is a President who in fact started out as an extreme eurosceptic, if I may use such an expression, but today he has made a truly European speech, which was applauded equally by the left and the right in this Parliament.

I feel that I must congratulate the Socialist government on having convinced the French President so thoroughly.

It is greatly to the President' s credit that he used words which sometimes tend to divide us.

I am thinking here of the word 'federalism' , and he said that everything depends on what one means by this.

That is precisely the problem with several words that are used in the current debate.

The European Union has always had certain federalist characteristics such as qualified majority voting instead of unanimity in decision making within the Council; a directly elected Parliament, an executive Commission which is independent from governments; Community law which takes precedence over national law, amongst other things. All of these are federal characteristics.

On the other hand, the European Union is a long way from being a centralised federation, like many of the world' s federations.

This is a decentralised federation in which the Member States play an extremely important role in decision-making and remain in control of the Treaties.

All this ambiguity means that we should perhaps not allow issues of terminology or theology to divide us, but should instead unite on the specific changes that we need to make to the system.

The same applies to the word "constitution" , which can also evoke quite different things.

As a citizen of the United Kingdom, a country which does not even have any kind of written or codified constitution, I should like to ask the following question: what is a constitution?

This depends on what you mean.

People interpret things differently and, with this word too, we run the risk of allowing vocabulary and theology, if I may use that term, to divide us, instead of uniting over the content.

To some extent, we already have a constitution, which consists of the Treaties.

The Treaties, after all, define the Union' s sphere of competences, the powers of its institutions and the procedures for adopting legislation or the budget.

To some extent, therefore, they form a "constitution" .

Mr Pasqua defined the constitution as the foundation of a new legal order.

Is this not precisely what we have founded in Europe?

Instead of allowing ourselves to become divided by the philosophical point of what makes a constitution, we should look at how our present constitution needs to be improved.

First, it must be more readable and easier to use by consumers, i.e. the general public.

The European University Institute in Florence has submitted a fine project for our consideration, which makes our Treaties considerably shorter, more readable and easier to use, without even altering their content.

We must also look at the changes we need to make to our constitution.

On this subject, we must above all do what President Chirac suggested, which is to ensure that, in a Union of almost 30 members, there is no risk of action being blocked.

This is not really a question of creating a hard core.

There is no hard core. What is a fact, however, is that certain areas, or certain States, sometimes create delays, which are sometimes temporary.

There is therefore no need to create a hard core and we should instead create a situation in which our constitution prevents action being blocked.

We therefore need to strengthen qualified majority voting, to extend it as far as possible, and where this is not possible, to return to the issue of closer cooperation.

These are the two crucial points for the IGC.

Concentrate on these and above all, do so before enlargement.

Do this at Nice then, and not afterwards.

Mr President, I congratulate the French Presidency of the European Union on its ambitious approach in all areas and for its intention not to end the Intergovernmental Conference with a minimal agreement, but with results which make enlargement a real possibility.

Due to time restrictions, I will only refer to three points.

They will only be useful, Mr President, if four conditions are met: firstly, the Community dimension of the Union must be increased, rather than the intergovernmental dimension; there must be more integration, not more cooperation.

Secondly, the existing institutions must be used, not replaced with new bodies.

Thirdly, we should not have cooperation or integration of a variable composition, since that would mean a Europe á la carte, that is to say, an ungovernable Europe.

Fourthly, in the same way, we should prevent this leading to factions or closed blocs which would divide the Union.

In other words, we want closer integration which is open to all current and future members of the Union.

My second point relates to the functioning of the Euro-12, which must be improved, but not by reducing further the current democratic deficit.

The Commission must therefore have genuine powers for making proposals, and not only for recommendation, and Parliament must participate seriously, starting with consultation, but extending to codecision.

My third point, Mr President, is that I am also one of those who believes that we need a Constitution for the Union.

My question is, why not take a first step now by approving the basic treaty prepared in Florence on the initiative of the Commission?

This does not change anything, but it does mean something very important: that the citizens may finally become aware of which system is governing them.

It would at least be a step forward in terms of this clarification which we are all requesting, but which we never get to see, at least with regard to something which must not be forgotten, Mr President, i.e. the distribution of competences in the European Union.

We are leaving it for the future.

Is the ratification process in certain countries not going to jeopardise this?

The ambitions are fine, but we want facts and we expect to see them at the end of the French Presidency.

Mr President, since we are in the run-up to the Treaty of Nice and since we have had the pleasure of reading a number of valuable speeches by Mr Joschka Fischer and President Chirac, it may be a novel idea for Germany and France to share the Union' s presidency for a year.

But under one proviso: that a fundamental breakthrough be reached in the field of European cooperation in line with all these fine speeches we have had the pleasure to hear and read.

This is not only meant as a pleasant intro, because what I want to establish above all is that the French-German axis should not only generate philosophies for the future but should also solve the institutional problems of today and tomorrow.

Whatever happens in Nice, decisions need to be taken on decision making.

As we see it, all European legislation, which does not affect the constitutions of the Member States, should be decided on by qualified majority, with codecision from Parliament.

In addition, decisions need to be taken on vote weighting and as we see it, it should be the size of the population in the Member States, as is the case in this House, that is the deciding factor.

Decisions need to be taken regarding the number of Commissioners - in our opinion, this should be one per Member State - and on the number of MEPs - we said a long time ago, 700 is more than enough.

Also, decisions need to be taken on the Court of Justice and the Charter of Fundamental Rights.

I completely echo Mr Gil-Robles' views that this should be included in the Treaties and that cooperation should be stepped up.

As far as the latter is concerned, it is vital that we tackle the Union' s structure.

Both Mr Joschka Fischer and President Chirac are right in this.

I am not averse to a federal structure for the European Union.

It could even be termed confederation, as President Chirac said earlier today.

It is high time that we had a European constitution which is organised in the way that the university of Florence recently proposed.

It is high time Mr Prodi had the authority and rights which a European government should in fact have.

It is also high time we had a bicameral system, but not of the kind proposed by Mr Joschka Fischer, with a European Parliament, as we have now, and a second parliament comprising representatives of the parliaments of the respective Member States.

It would be far better to convert the European Council of Ministers to a kind of Federal Council.

Interestingly, this is a term which Mr Chirac used in his response to the questions.

Surely this is the most natural way to provide Europe with a bicameral system consisting of a parliament and senate.

All we need to do is to turn the European Council into a senate.

Finally, such a constitution should very clearly and precisely define Europe' s and the Member States' respective remits.

As far as I am concerned, the European package as a whole could quite easily be fleshed out a little bit and the powers of the European Member States could be increased once again, as long as it is clear what is European and what is national, and as long as we find our way out of the diffuse intergovernmental and Community structure in which we find ourselves at present.

It would be ideal if the decision was taken in Nice to devise a project of this kind in two to three years' time.

I hope that the words of Mr Joschka Fischer and those of Mr Chirac will not remain words but will be turned into action.

I should appreciate a reaction from both honourable gentlemen who stayed behind during lunch.

Mr President, Minister, the French Presidency has committed itself to a courageous, ambitious, brilliant agenda, considering some of the difficulties we are experiencing at this time.

The important aspect of President Chirac' s speech was, we felt, our common values and intentions.

In our opinion, a Europe which builds its future with constancy, continuity and responsibility is the best guarantee that the founding fathers' blueprint is implemented faithfully, that the endeavours of all those who have worked on it over the past 50 years are at the basis of its success and that Europe is built on solid foundations.

It seems appropriate to break down the complex problem of the institutions: we must conclude the IGC on the three topics left over from Amsterdam and closer cooperation.

This is the only way we can move forward in the intense debate on the future of the European Union and reconcile the economic development of Europe with the strengthening of the European Social Model and with the fight against social exclusion and modern forms of poverty, in order to bring Europe closer to the citizens, step up negotiations on enlargement and increasingly consolidate the European Union' s role in the world.

In this context, we consider it essential to reinforce the European Commission, a supranational, independent body, the full expression of the unique characteristics of the structure of the European institutions.

Enlargement is the conclusion of a political process which began with the reconciliation of the countries of Western Europe 50 years ago.

This historic event must not be dismissed by replacing the Berlin wall with another wall, the wall of specific interests, egoism and bureaucracy.

However, as the French Presidency rightly pointed out, enlargement must not weaken the Union' s action either.

Mr Chirac' s words on the future of the European Union are reassuring, particularly because he spoke of a new stage which would start after the conclusion of the IGC, on subjects such as the consolidation of legitimate democracy in decisions, security and defence, the accentuation of the unique characteristics of the European institutions, a clear definition of responsibilities and the consolidation of the principle of subsidiarity, matters which cannot be ignored in the near future.

The subject of closer cooperation has been widely debated and disputed. It used to be known as the 'two speed' Europe and is now referred to as the 'hard core' .

Some see it as an opportunity and some as a threat. In any case, all are in agreement that this situation should not lead to division but should spur us on to reach together those new frontiers which the current European model does not allow us to reach but which, in the future, it will have to.

I would inform our French friends that Italy, which has been at the forefront of the European project ever since the beginning and which, we hope, is soon to enter a period of political stability, will be become increasingly active, implementing tangible actions, alongside the countries which sincerely desire to reinforce the Union' s foundations and to achieve the most important and ambitious cooperation objectives.

Mr President, Mr President of the Commission, honourable Members of the European Parliament, I shall not speak for long, so as not to delay even further the lunchtime of those Members who are still present.

First of all, I wish to say how delighted I am to be here with you and to be speaking on behalf of the French Government, since I was a Member of the European Parliament, before it was located in this superb hemicycle - between 1994 and 1997.

I should like to thank the numerous speakers who have expressed their thoughts, all of which were extremely useful, and particularly those who spoke in French, although it is not their mother tongue.

More specifically, I should also like to acknowledge the encouragement given to the French Government by Pervenche Berès and Klaus Hänsch, as well as the ambition sought by some speakers, such as Mr Watson. I would also like to reassure Mr Cohn-Bendit with regard to the vision that drives my government and which has perhaps made an effective contribution to certain positions.

This presidency is being held against the backdrop of a vast movement, which has two components.

Firstly, we are in the process of preparing for an enlarged Europe, the united Europe of tomorrow and, as Mr Madelin said, this may involve changing the nature of the Union in addition to changing its size.

Secondly, we must bring this Europe closer to its citizens and ensure that it goes further towards fulfilling their aspirations.

It is quite clear that, in the wider debate on this issue, there are two phases.

There is the shorter-term phase of this Presidency, which is taking place at a pivotal and undoubtedly decisive moment, and then there is the longer-term phase, in which broader approaches will be outlined and in which the future of Europe will really take shape.

Here I am talking about a Europe of thirty Members.

Unlike Mr Bayrou, I do not think that it is fair, appropriate or timely today to eradicate these two phases, as it were, and to introduce them both under the French Presidency, because that would entail the risk of complicating the outcome of the IGC or, quite the opposite, to minimise this outcome, and ensure that it would only appear as an annex.

Let us focus on the task in hand.

Let us see this IGC through with ambition.

In doing so we will have established the basis which will enable us to move further towards European construction.

What will we be doing, specifically in this IGC?

It is our view that the IGC must succeed, that it is absolutely crucial that it succeeds, but not at any price.

Our obligation concerns the means, not the outcome.

As Mr Barón Crespo said just now, we want a "nice treaty" in Nice, which means a good treaty, not any old treaty.

As Mr Corbett pointed out, it is true that the most important points are, in particular, the extension of qualified majority voting, which generally goes hand in hand with codecision with the European Parliament, and closer cooperation, because this is a bridge between the first and second stages, between the present and the future, since it improves the functioning of the European Union and because it enables us to think about the Europe of tomorrow.

At the same time, however, the French Presidency considers all these things to be connected.

Now, following the Feira European Council, and we are delighted that this is the case, four issues have been raised and we must reach a substantial agreement on all of them, by which I mean all four of these questions, and not only concentrate on one or other of them.

That is why we will be changing our working methods.

We intend to apply ourselves to this task, fully aware that it will be difficult, and we offer our thanks, of course, to the Portuguese Presidency, which has prepared the groundwork very well for us.

We shall work with determination, specifically by taking the negotiation into a more political phase, which will perhaps be more ambitious.

To this extent, Mr Hänsch is right: the Franco-German partnership that has been re-established and the Franco-German ambition that has been recharged will prove extremely useful.

With regard to the Charter, I must pay tribute to the work carried out by President Herzog and to the Convention. This is a very original type of body, which brings together members of national parliaments and the European Parliament, representatives of Member States and of course, a representative of the Commission.

I wish to assure the European Parliament that this Charter is one of our priorities and we hope that the Convention will prove worthy of the task so that we will be able to discuss it in detail at the Biarritz European Council, with a view, as the French President has said, to making as much progress as possible with the content.

I am aware of the more or less unanimous feeling of the European Parliament about the restrictive nature of this Charter.

We shall see how much arbitration is required, but the French Presidency takes the view that priority should be given to the substance of this issue, given that any kind of text will be a source of inspiration for all of the European Union' s institutions.

Beyond these issues lies that of the European Union' s constitutional prospects.

The first problem with this issue is the agenda, which I think would be difficult to set at this stage.

The important thing is to pursue this idea whilst seeking to define its outlines more clearly and whilst thinking about the best method for continuing this exchange of ideas. Like Mr Corbett once again, I feel that we must realise that the term "constitution" may mean the will to speed up European construction and European ambition, but that the term "constitutional" leads, and will inevitably lead, to debate, because it could give rise to, or be nourished and fed by, or include, contents which may turn out to be rather different.

Several Members of this Parliament have proposed that we should start by adopting the study carried out by the European University Institute in Florence. From what I have seen, they are certainly interesting, at least at this early stage, but I am bound to say that they will require a thorough examination.

The Commission will shortly be giving its opinion on this study, Mr President, next week, I believe.

Member States will also have to study this document, which inevitably raises many questions.

It makes some useful contributions, but, at the same time, the question of whether it really simplifies the situation remains.

This is an important matter that cannot be taken lightly and that is certainly not what the French Presidency will be doing.

To conclude, I shall just make two observations on issues that have been raised by two Members of this Parliament, specifically Mrs Isler Béguin, who talked about environmental problems.

Our commitment to firmer Union action with regard to the environment and our will to put the conclusions of the Kyoto Summit into practice should not be underestimated.

I also wish to say that, with regard to the size of the environmental dimension in all policies, the French Presidency will fulfil its obligations during these six months, in collaboration with the Swedish Presidency, which will follow us, to ensure that continuity is maintained

I shall now finish, but nobody in this place will be surprised, particularly coming from me, if I say a few words about Strasbourg, specifically in response to Mr dell' Alba.

We have taken note of the fact that the European Parliament voted to remove Friday mornings from the part-session.

I will say quite frankly that the result of the vote gave us cause for regret and we hope that this is not an attempt to whittle away at Strasbourg' s role or to revive the issue of Parliament' s location.

I shall say quite clearly that France, - and here once again for a moment I am speaking on behalf of a major national delegation in the Council - would not be able to accept this.

We should really stop endlessly trying to keep the debate on Strasbourg alive.

The Treaties, particularly the Treaty of Amsterdam, are very clear on this point.

Instead, we should concentrate on the practical, material aspects of the issue.

I am fully aware of the problems encountered by some Members of the European Parliament and I must tell you that the French authorities are extremely sensitive to these issues.

We are anxious to see improved air connections to Strasbourg.

Through the Presidency of the European Parliament, we have sent a questionnaire to Members, in order to find out their specific, individual needs.

We hope that we will have a large response.

We are also considering establishing a cross-border platform to coordinate neighbouring airports, which will make it easier to reach Strasbourg, both by air and by road.

Honourable Members of the European Parliament, Mr President of the Commission, these are some of my thoughts, certainly not all of them, that have been stimulated by this debate, which was of extremely high quality and very encouraging for our Presidency.

Knowing that they both have pressing engagements I should like to pay particular thanks to Mr Moscovici and President Prodi for staying with us until the end of the debate.

(The sitting was suspended at 2 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m.)

Delegation of EU observers at the Zimbabwean elections

Ladies and gentlemen, I apologise for the fact that we are starting a few minutes late. However, there has been an important trialogue meeting, which the representative of the Council, Minister Moscovici, had to attend, and because he was held up, we have waited for him.

He will have no chance at all to acclimatise because we are going to start straightaway with the statements from the Council and the Commission on the delegation of EU observers at the Zimbabwean elections, as per the agenda.

Mr President, honourable Members of the European Parliament, Commissioners, please forgive me first of all for my lateness, which is not due to any lunchtime whim but simply to the fact that Jacques Chirac, the French President, was with us.

Mrs Fontaine accompanied him, which prolonged the essential trialogue that we held with Mr Prodi, the President of the Commission, by a few minutes.

Zimbabwe is experiencing a serious economic, social and political crisis.

Despite some infringements of human rights, which have been rightly condemned by the international community, the country has remained, in essence, under the rule of law. It has been able to do so largely because of the dynamism of civil society and of the independence of its judicial system.

Over the last three years, a reversal in its external economic situation has weakened its economic fabric, which is structured but ageing.

Shifts towards authoritarianism and lax management of the economy have continued to tarnish the country' s image, undermined the confidence of the community of sponsors and has encouraged the people to challenge the government.

This discontent was expressed in February' s referendum on the constitution, which was the first time that the Presidential party had lost an election since independence in 1980.

Legislative elections were therefore a major issue for the ruling party.

In order to hamper the success of the opposition, the ruling party risked heightening tensions by conducting a tough election campaign and by making the unequal distribution of farmland the issue for mobilising the rural world and veterans of the war of independence.

With regard to this issue, the Head of State has allowed a huge movement for the occupation of properties to develop and has halted the legal framework for future compulsory purchases.

These shifts, which I have just mentioned, have resulted in the deaths of 33 people, they have made the economic crisis worse and have distorted fair competition in the elections, thereby creating a real risk of instability in southern Africa.

The European Union nevertheless considered it important that elections should be held and that the results should be credible and acceptable.

It therefore sought the agreement of the Zimbabwean authorities to send, as far in advance of the elections as possible, a large mission of nearly 200 observers, thereby demonstrating the Union' s interest in seeing democracy consolidated in that country.

Nobody can deny the fact that this presence contributed to reducing tensions and to restoring a climate, which was as conducive as possible, in such a highly sensitive context, to the free expression of the whole population' s right to vote.

I wish at this point to pay tribute to Mr Schori, who led this mission, and to the remarkable work accomplished by his team.

Although our observers noted that the degree of violence, irregularities and intimidation in the period leading up to the elections meant that the words 'free and honest' could not be applied to the fifth legislative elections in the history of Zimbabwe, they nevertheless emphasised the efficient organisation of the voting itself, the large turnout - I believe it was the largest since independence was achieved - and the peaceful atmosphere in which it took place.

The vote-counting processes were not cause for controversy either.

On behalf of the European Union, I should also like to congratulate the Zimbabwean people, who, by taking part in these elections in such numbers, have proved their determination to take their destiny into their hands in a peaceful and democratic way.

I am also pleased to note that the results of the elections have been universally accepted by all participating parties.

The entry into Parliament of a significant opposition - in fact it almost has a majority in the seats that were contested in these elections - suggests that constructive debates will be held.

Zimbabwe has undoubtedly turned a new page in its young history.

The fundamental problems still remain, of course, and they remain intact.

This is why the Union is urging all political forces in Zimbabwe to mobilise and to bring together the threads of dialogue, in order to set the country firmly on the road to recovery.

The Union hopes that the new government will adopt, with the help of the country' s new representatives, credible measures for getting the economy back on its feet, measures which are likely to restore the confidence of local operators and of donors.

For twenty years, the European Union has shown itself to be Zimbabwe' s leading partner in its development.

Zimbabwe is a friendly country and a partner country under the Lomé Convention and the European Union hopes to continue this policy, with acknowledged respect for human rights, for democratic principles and for the primacy of law.

Because the Union wishes to continue to intervene on behalf of those who have been worst affected by the crisis, it is particularly willing to provide assistance for the necessary land reform in order to reduce poverty, despite the fact that this has not been implemented in an orderly, transparent or rational way.

The European Union wants to believe in the future of a democratic and prosperous Zimbabwe, which is a factor for the stability and the harmonious development of southern Africa.

Mr President, first of all may I say that I would have been delighted on this occasion to have spoken after Mr Schori who has obviously done an outstanding job - as the presidency said - in Zimbabwe.

I think all of us who wish Zimbabwe well would want to congratulate him and all those who were in the EU observation team.

They have all done a magnificent job.

They clearly managed to fulfill their objectives under very difficult circumstances and they discharged their mandate in an extremely effective way.

The mobilisation of a full and experienced team on the ground less than four weeks after an informal decision by European Union foreign ministers is a tribute to the enormous efforts of everyone concerned.

This and the professionalism of the observation mission enabled them to surmount numerous political hurdles.

It made the operation a reference point for electoral observation in countries in crisis.

It is widely acknowledged that the European Union mission contributed to reducing the levels of violence, and I think it is also recognised that it helped to build up the confidence of civil society during the elections.

Once again may I stress that the reputation of Mr Schori and the role that he played were key factors in our judgment for the success of the mission.

I believe that the mission constituted the most credible observer voice during these critical times in Zimbabwe.

This was reflected in extensive press coverage during the whole period, both locally and internationally.

What is more the European Union mission being by far the largest observer mission deployed in the country and operational right across the nation, also contributed significantly to the coordination of the overall electoral monitoring effort in Zimbabwe.

We have of course had a chance of becoming acquainted with the main outlines of the report, though we are looking forward to the opportunity of studying it in detail.

I know that the first part of the report follows the interim report which the honourable Member made, and is an account of the violence and intimidation which sadly marked the early stages of the election campaign.

We know from what he has said that the report analyses the voting process and the conduct of the poll and I think - though I would not want to take words out of his mouth - that by and large the actual conduct of the poll seems to have been pretty satisfactory.

Finally, and most importantly, and this is what we are looking forward to hearing from the honourable Member, the report focuses on the consequences for Zimbabwe's future.

The honourable gentlemen is right to recommend that the European Union should in the coming weeks and months monitor very carefully what is happening in Zimbabwe and provide assistance and support wherever it is appropriate for us to do so.

We would certainly want to endorse this, and my colleague Commissioner Nielson and I will certainly intensify our efforts to strengthen channels of communication, both formal and informal, with President Mugabe and his government, to facilitate the transition to effective multi-party democracy.

The honourable Member has spoken of how important it is that the government should prosecute those who have been involved in political violence or guilty of other human rights abuses; he has also stressed the importance of the courts determining the outcome of any challenge to the election results.

It is very important that the government should respect their decisions.

These are both enormously important points and touch, of course, centrally on the credibility of the whole democratic process.

Zimbabwe is plainly at a crossroads.

The outcome of the legislative elections could mark a major transformation in the country's political culture, the transition to a multiparty system in which Parliament will replace the ruling party Zanu PF politburo as the main policy-making institution.

President Mugabe's electoral strategy, focused on land reform and support for the war veterans, failed to address the country's economic plight and this was obviously reflected in the votes polled by his party.

The new government of Zimbabwe and all those who want to see the country rise above its present serious difficulties, whether they relate to the economic situation, the question of land reform or the terrible scourge of HIV, must now address the challenges effectively, collectively and constructively.

We have considerable influence as a major donor.

This influence has to be used to encourage the government to take positive steps for re-establishing the rule of law and good governance as a first step towards a more general recovery, and I know this is a point which my colleague, Commissioner Nielson will want to speak about after me.

But, once again, I would like to offer my personal congratulations to the honourable Member on a very difficult job, extremely well done.

Thank you very much, Commissioner Patten

You have already indicated that owing to the problematic nature of the issue, two Commissioners are going to give their opinion on it today.

I am therefore looking forward to hearing Commissioner Nielson' s opinion.

Mr President, I would like to start by echoing the congratulations to the EU electoral observation mission.

They have managed to do excellent work under very difficult conditions.

The result of these elections offers the EU a new opportunity for reviewing our cooperation with Zimbabwe.

According to the report by the heads of mission there is scope for positive development in Zimbabwe in the political, economic and social fields.

Options for the EU to assist in such development should not be excluded, as they say.

Zanu-PF will have to develop new and more appropriate policies in order to approach the international community for finance to stabilise the economy and restore growth, but the legitimacy of Zanu-PF is at stake because of the extent to which intimidation and electoral malpractice helped it gain victory and because, even discounting the impact of such factors, the MDC won 58 seats, almost as many as Zanu, with 61+1.

The Movement for Democratic Change will not want to share responsibility for the crisis the country is undergoing or for the painful measures which will be necessary for economic recovery.

Zimbabwe's EUR 110 million 8th EDF national indicative programme has a direct poverty alleviation orientation.

Its main sectors of cooperation are agriculture, health and education.

The Commission's approach so far has been that aid directed to the protection of basic social services and the reinforcement of civil society should be maintained even during periods of crisis.

A total of EUR 19 million is about to be released for a micro-projects programme which in the interests of consensual policies has been delayed until after the elections.

It can thus now go ahead.

The Commission has maintained its support for land reform through this micro-projects programme, which is actually for poverty alleviation assistance for legally acquired land in resettlement schemes.

However, in April the Commission froze the EUR 2 million for technical and policy support for land reform.

Until the government's land reform policy was clarified, there seemed little point in continuing a technical and quite academic discussion on the principles of land reform.

The Commission and other donors are ready to support the process, provided it is in the framework of legality, transparency and poverty alleviation objectives, in accordance with the 1998 donor land conference agreements.

The Commission is preparing a cross-sectoral programme to deal with the HIV/AIDS epidemic in Zimbabwe, which is in itself a development crisis and a major cause of present and future poverty.

This programme is to be financed from the EUR 33 million in the 8th EDF second tranche.

I will take a decision on this in the next few months depending on developments in Zimbabwe.

In any event the European Commission is continuing to support poverty alleviation schemes.

If the government seizes the opportunity offered by these new elections, EU support could be more substantial in the future.

As noted by the heads of mission in Harare, it is premature to jump to conclusions on the election and its consequences.

I fully share the view that EU-Zimbabwe development cooperation will depend on real progress in the fields of democratisation, rule of law, human rights and economic reform.

Finally I would like to stress that there is potential for increased cooperation with Zimbabwe, but this will clearly depend on how the situation develops there.

Mr President and Commissioners, I am speaking English not out of distaste for two languages that I like very much - French and Swedish - but because it was the working language of the mission.

Thank you very much for your kind words.

It is my pleasure to give the first presentation of the final report of the EU Election Observation Mission to Zimbabwe here in the European Parliament, an institution that has taught me so much and been such a joy to work in.

"These were not perfect elections," said the opposition leader Morgan Tsvangirai drily.

Indeed, in the view of our 190 election observers with experience of seven observation missions as an average, the pre-election period was one of the worst they had ever been in, while the actual election days, the polling, voting and count were among the best they had been.

What should one make out of such a schizophrenic picture, where, on one hand politically-motivated violence and intimidation cost more than 30 people their lives, with many more being threatened, persecuted, injured, raped and tortured, and, on the other, where the voters turned out nevertheless in record numbers, giving the opposition party almost half of the votes?

All along in our mission I refused to use the term "free and fair elections", because it is not applicable.

It is too blunt an instrument, in such a complex process as the one we witnessed in Zimbabwe.

Our mission had, therefore from the beginning stressed that we were not only there for the election process, but that our final report would also attach great attention to the post-election phase.

In this phase, the role and responsibility of President Mugabe, whose mandate lasts another two years, is crucial.

I underlined this in a conversation with him as well as in my public statements in Zimbabwe, saying that after revolution comes nation-building, after elections reconciliation.

Our hope was that, in spite of the extensive violence and intimidation campaign for which the ruling Zanu-PF had by far the greatest responsibility, the people, aided by a large international and national monitoring presence, could cast their votes in a relatively free, fair and non-violent environment on election day.

Thereby the period after the elections would be essential, and so would the role of the president and the Zanu leaders, and they would hopefully contribute to a climate of reconciliation and calm.

To a certain extent our strategy proved to be right.

People did vote in great numbers.

Violence and intimidation did not seem to scare them off from the polling stations.

Many also openly showed their sympathies for the opposition parties.

It is not that we were partisan, we had our code of conduct of professionalism and strict neutrality, but we did want the people to feel that their vote was secret, that on election day the President and the peasant are equal, and that democratic elections are the power of the people.

There was much violence and terror in the run-up to the elections and we condemn it.

But I would also like to stress that there was much more non-violence in the form of the millions of people who wanted to exercise the democratic right to vote.

The main opposition party, while challenging the results in 20 constituencies, has also accepted the results of the elections.

I believe that the people of Zimbabwe, who cry out for peace and law and order, progress and a decent life, deserve a better deal.

Allow me now to summarise our conclusions and recommendations in four points:

It is imperative that the government moves swiftly to re-establish the rule of law and to allow the police and prosecution services to act against those who have been involved in or encouraged political violence or other human rights abuses.

A new independent election organisation above partisan interest, and with sufficient human and financial resources to operate effectively is needed.

The government must also allow the courts to determine the outcome of any challenge to election results in particular constituencies, and must respect their decisions.

The European Union should endeavour to ensure that international observers are deployed in good time for the presidential election scheduled to take place in 2002.

The European Union should make a particular effort during the coming weeks and months to monitor events in Zimbabwe closely and provide assistance and support where appropriate.

I am glad to hear that both the presidency and the Commission also take this line.

For that purpose, our central election unit in Harare will remain for some time, as well as 25 EU observers deployed through the country.

Add to that our 14 heads of mission who will be on red alert.

Let me use this opportunity to pay tribute to the Election Unit, to the EU observers including friends from Norway and Kenya who were integrated into our mission, as well as five Members of the European Parliament.

The Commission, of course, responded in a swift and commendable way to the decision of the Council, and the continuous cooperation and dialogue throughout the process has been invaluable.

Let me end by saying that the EU mission was a high-profile one, very well received among the people in general to a point that would be the envy of several Member States, including mine, Mr Patten.

The mission can also be seen as an efficient conflict-prevention exercise.

It was quickly on the spot, in great numbers spreading calm and peace; it was operational in no time, with a good national coverage and with a sustainable strategy also for the post-conflict phase.

Our mission was an act of commitment to the people in Africa and to democracy worldwide.

I see the mission to Zimbabwe as a natural consequence of our support for the struggle for African independence and of our wish to build a strong partnership with a peaceful and democratic Zimbabwe.

Thank you very much Mr Schori, also for the fact that together with your five colleagues, you left Zimbabwe with a good impression of the European Parliament in Zimbabwe, under difficult circumstances.

The elections in Zimbabwe have been both a victory and a defeat for Mugabe.

They were a defeat in the sense that, for the first time in its short independent life, Zimbabwe has a multi-party political system, which was something that Mugabe clearly opposed.

Apart from tolerating, and even, as we know, promoting, a climate of intimidation and violence, Mugabe has made considerable errors of judgement.

On the one hand, he has underestimated the European Union' s seriousness, willingness and capacity to act in the case of Zimbabwe.

However, he has also confused the factors within his own country.

I wonder if this is due to the arrogance of a former, although once respected, African freedom fighter, or to his ignorance of the sociological and political evolution of his country.

It is probably a combination of both things.

Mugabe has brought to these elections the customs and methods of a war of liberation, on occasion treating political rivals as if they were colonial occupiers who needed to be banished.

However, he was unable to appreciate that the emergence of the middle classes was an element which was going to have a different effect for the first time on these elections.

This relative consolidation of a new urban vote, together with the manipulation of official democracy and the violation of human rights, would not otherwise have led to many citizens voting against him, and that is what they have done.

The country and the population will gain as a whole if the current government and the emerging opposition show sufficient political wisdom and common sense to generously and cautiously deal with the transition from former political customs to other new ones.

In this area, the opposition also has a role to play.

Now, after all the accusations and condemnations, in the coming weeks we must watch carefully for any signs of verifiable reconciliation and self-critical acceptance of the errors made.

Mr President, this will help the future of Zimbabwe, its society and the new political culture born of these elections.

We must give decisive support to its future.

Mr President, the fact that the EU observer mission has garnered great international acclaim reflects the fact that Mr Schori has done an excellent job in raising the profile of what we were doing there.

I pay great tribute to him.

There is no doubt in Zimbabwe that it has been a case of "Power corrupts, and absolute power corrupts absolutely".

Mr Mugabe has much to answer for.

If the result may be said to have a positive side, it is the fact that there is now no longer absolute power.

Much of the violence that took place before the elections can be based directly back to the leadership of Zanu-PF and to President Mugabe himself.

The so-called war veterans - they must have been very young when the war of independence was on - have been paid to be on these farms.

This is a grave problem which be traced directly back to the leadership.

There were problems too with the fact that the postal votes, which were sent directly to the army in the Congo on Thursday, miraculously returned on Saturday, all in due form going into many marginal constituencies.

Threats of violence against supporters of the MDC have continued after the elections.

The Archbishop of Bulawayo has been threatened.

All these things must be stopped.

We cannot possibly support a regime that carries on this intimidation.

The fact that President Mugabe wants to stifle inward investment by nationalising the farms, and threatening to do the same with the mines, will do nothing to resolve the economic situation in Zimbabwe.

What Zimbabwe needs is much more inward investment from outside the country.

This will not take place under the present regime.

There is a great and wonderful opportunity in Zimbabwe now with the emergence of the MDC, for all races to work together.

There is great hope for the future, but we must make sure that we keep up the pressure on Zimbabwe and especially on Mr Mugabe.

We should take direct action against assets that President Mugabe owns outside of Zimbabwe.

We must take the argument directly to the man who has created the problems.

Mr President, my speaking time is too restricted to describe the fate of a country for which, for so many years, the situation was in fact quite hopeful, but which for the past couple of years has been on a slippery slope towards greater underdevelopment, whilst the population of Zimbabwe is highly developed.

This is probably one of the things we should give the Mugabe government credit for during its early years.

The population is knowledgeable despite the fact that the opposition was prevented from taking part in the election propaganda in a normal way, at least as far as the official media is concerned.

I know Zimbabwe quite well. For quite a few years running, I visited the country and followed the situation from close by, but I was surprised at the extent of intimidation prior to the elections and I fear that this may continue, even after the elections.

Accordingly, I think we should act within the remit of our international responsibility and ensure that we continue to exert the same benevolent influence after the elections that we had in the run-up to them.

We can do this by driving a hard bargain, yet remaining specific, regarding the planned reforms in Zimbabwe.

A reign of terror pervades the countryside, and this cannot be allowed to continue, of course, because this affects the quality of life of the white and black population alike.

I would like to underline this because these people are also being sucked into a maelstrom of events which are beyond their control.

I hope that we will be able to keep the dialogue going with the government, the opposition and the civil society.

Mr President, the political pressure that preceded the elections and the flagrant manner in which President Mugabe encouraged the violence means that we are not talking now about free and proper elections, although we were sincerely convinced on polling day itself that we were witnessing a desire to hold an irreproachable election.

Everything spoke of a genuine desire on the part of the people of Zimbabwe to build a democratic civil society.

The events of Zimbabwe compel us, however, to consider the relationship between democracy and values, and this may be the right forum for that, as we refer to the EU as a society of values.

At the same time we openly admit that the EU cannot dash about the world paternally handing out advice to others from on high. It is a matter of dialogue.

That was what Pierre Schori, as leader of the EU delegation of election observers, also demonstrated admirably.

Something happened in Zimbabwe that should make every politician consider how we can prevent the demoralising effects of power - among ourselves also.

Why does a former hero of a nation, the father figure of a struggle for independence, now allow the use of violence simply to underpin his own authority?

And what has happened to a person' s soul and sense of morality when he has the audacity to proclaim during the elections that the government will be staying in power, no matter what the result?

The philosopher and theologian, Niebuhr, once said that a person' s sense of what is right makes democracy possible, but his inclinations in the opposite direction make democracy absolutely necessary.

In other words: a person' s virtue makes democracy possible; on the other hand, his vices make it necessary.

I think this is one of the truest remarks ever made about democracy.

It follows that, in order to flourish, democracy needs its internal structures to be looked at critically and, indeed, has to be prepared to submit to criticism.

That means that we are willing, in the name of democracy, to encourage people to take a critical stand as citizens.

On the other hand, it requires transparency in decision making and the flow of information.

Only in this way can democracy preserve its self-remedying nature.

In Zimbabwe I also realised very clearly that we cannot speak of human rights without the recognition of human dignity.

It is just empty talk unless it is committed to the unique value and integrity of the individual.

At the same time, I would like to pay my respects to those thirty or more victims of violence who were to die whilst expressing their desire to struggle in favour of a free civil society.

Mr President, Commissioners, ladies and gentlemen, these elections certainly mark an important moment in Zimbabwe' s national political life.

They also augur extremely well for the European Union' s future cooperation with that country.

There are many things that now seem possible or, in any event, easier, between us.

The report drawn up by the mission led by Mr Schori, the thoroughness of whose work I must emphasis once again, as did Commissioners Patten and Nielsen, provides us with a perfectly clear and impartial analysis of the way in which Zimbabwe' s legislative elections were held.

The electoral situation was particularly tense, not to say violent.

I am convinced that the Union was right, profoundly right, to send this mission, a long time in advance, in order to bring an element of calm to this campaign.

The benefit of this mission in this regard, as in many others, is undeniable.

The mission must continue its work on the ground, as Mr Schori requested.

The Council Presidency is delighted at the generally smooth running of these elections, even if, here and there, the voting conditions might have left us rather perplexed and the mission' s conclusions on this matter are extremely enlightening.

It is now time to forge ahead in conjunction with Zimbabwe.

The Council Presidency fully supports the Commission' s analysis of the need to cooperate with Zimbabwe.

Numerous areas in which we can work have opened up, and they deserve our full involvement. Amongst these are the strengthening of democracy, poverty reduction, and the fight against Aids.

It is crucial that European aid has a direct bearing on the economic and social problems that are besetting the people of Zimbabwe.

Community funds must now be released, as Commissioner Nielsen suggested.

For its part, the Government of Zimbabwe must also move forward and fulfil its commitments to land reform, to respect for court judgements and to economic transparency.

I am convinced that this process needs to ensure the stabilisation of the country and also its democratic involvement in regional integration.

This is why the Council Presidency, and you can be sure of this, ladies and gentlemen, will commit itself to achieving this aim with the same determination as the European Parliament and the Commission.

I would like to inform you that pursuant to Rule 37 (2) of the Rules of Procedure, I have received five motions for resolutions.

The vote will take place on Thursday at 12 noon.

The next item is the statements by the Council and the Commission on trafficking in human beings.

Minister Queyranne will deliver the statement on behalf of the Council and in fact he has just arrived, punctual to the second.

Minister, you are in the fortunate position of being able to start your speech immediately.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, the Council of Ministers has been deeply shocked by the events at Dover and the deaths of 58 Chinese nationals in tragic circumstances.

These events demonstrate the increasing pressure that migration is putting on Western Europe, which we have been aware of for some time.

In order to respond to a situation which is of great concern to our continent, European solidarity must be considerably strengthened.

Firstly, the point must be made quite forcefully that the existence of organised criminal networks, as well as the scale of professional smuggling, which is contemptible but lucrative, plays a central role in illegal immigration, both in increasing the flows themselves and in the methods for smuggling people, of which the tragedy at Dover is an extreme example.

We know that most illegal immigration arrives in Western Europe, as a result of smugglers, particularly in the case of those people coming from far-off destinations such as China.

This point must be emphasised in order to respond to those who say that it is immigration control that creates illegal immigrants.

The increase in non-lawful immigration, on the contrary, leads to greater activity by gangs providing illegal entry to our countries.

It is quite clear that this activity benefits from legislative or operational weaknesses in the destination countries and from all factors that allow the illegal immigrants to enter and remain in these countries in violation of their laws.

That is not all, however. Behind the smugglers, we are beginning to see mafias operating to an ever-greater extent.

Police Chiefs have identified a Russian mafia, exploiting Sri Lankans and Chinese, and a Turkish mafia is taking charge of Kurds, Afghans and Iranians.

We also know that illegal immigrants from the Balkans are under the protection of Albanian mafias.

The fact that many of these illegal immigrants are concentrated in Calais, a bridging post for the United Kingdom - more than 10 000 have been arrested since August 1999 - shows the extremely active nature of the smugglers: 400 of them have been arrested since August 1999.

We should also no longer hide the fact that illegal immigration has become the subject of a veritable traffic in human beings, which consequently leads to crime, even to major organised crime.

Since it is easier, more lucrative and less risky than other forms of trafficking, such as drug trafficking, for example, trafficking in illegal immigrants is becoming a major issue in police and judicial action and cooperation.

The trade in human beings for the purpose of sexual exploitation is one of the most odious aspects of this trafficking.

When there is this level of organisation, it is no longer simply a question of combating illegal immigration, but of properly fighting crime itself.

The real culprits are those who organise illegal immigration, in whose hands those people hoping to emigrate are merely the playthings of a script that could easily become a tragedy.

We must therefore combat these smugglers first of all.

Non-lawful immigration or the trafficking in human beings is a new form of slavery that cannot be tolerated in our democratic societies.

We know, for example, that in order to use the services of a smuggler, it costs a Chinese national between EUR 10 000 and EUR 20 000 and years of illegal work to repay this debt. They generally live under constant threat, without rights or any protection, often in horrific conditions.

The rhetoric of calling for a massive opening up of immigration for work or for the automatic right of residence for all immigrants only feeds this dream of Europe and helps to push hundreds of thousands of people every year into the clutches of criminal networks working in illegal immigration.

The European Union must therefore not make the mistake of targeting the wrong people. It does not intend to do so and will concentrate on those who organise this traffic in human beings, which is one of the most cowardly and odious forms of trafficking.

The Council is determined to implement all necessary measures to combat this odious trafficking.

European cooperation must be based on the means available to the Member States, and the States have clearly decided to provide themselves with the means to fight this scourge effectively.

Since 1995, France has had a central office for the prevention of illegal immigration and employment, which has greatly enhanced its action in breaking up criminal networks in the last two years.

This body has succeeded in breaking up and halting the activities of around fifteen criminal networks per year.

Given the reality of the trade in human beings and of the traffic in illegal immigration, the French Presidency wishes to promote European cooperation, based on the conclusions of the Tampere Summit and on the following principles: co-development, the integration of foreigners, the fight against illegal immigration and the common policy on Asia.

The first point involves taking account of the situation in the countries of origin.

How can we deter people from wanting to leave their country for Europe under any circumstances and thereby often putting their fate in the hands of slavery networks?

The Council must base its action on the guidelines adopted at Tampere and I quote: "The European Union needs a comprehensive approach to migration addressing political, human rights and development issues in countries and regions of origin and transit" .

Migratory movements are actually due to numerous factors: demographic differences between the North and the South, the continual increase in inequalities of income and wealth between the richest and poorest countries, the instability of certain political situations and the often false image that immigrants have of what a future in Europe might hold for them.

Illegal immigration and the trafficking in human beings are not inevitable, however.

They can be combated by means of a firm political will.

In a world that is undergoing profound upheaval, the task of controlling long-term flows must shift from politics to co-development and the stabilisation of the countries in which immigration originates.

The whole purpose of co-development is to link up these countries' policies for development in order to exercise control over migration flows.

France will strive to provide new impetus to this progress towards co-development, making use of its experience in this area.

An agreement has already been signed with Senegal and others are being negotiated with Mali and Morocco.

There are two questions to be answered: how can we encourage the development of local projects, specifically through aid for training and the resettlement of foreigners who wish to return to their mother country in order to contribute to its economic development, and how can this local development contribute to controlling migration flows by stabilising the population?

The study being carried out on these two issues will benefit the future work of the High Level Working Group on Asylum and Immigration, which is today striving to implement the specific measures established in five action plans, covering Morocco and Sri Lanka.

Implementing this priority led to a seminar being held on 6 and 7 July in Paris, in which experts and several Ministers will take part.

The purpose of this seminar is to draw up the text which will guide the work of the European Union, on the basis of a few pilot experiments carried out with countries that have cooperated in this area and which have stable state structures. I am thinking here of Morocco.

The European Union' s second main priority, which was established at Tampere, is to integrate foreign nationals who are legally entitled to be in our countries.

This is an important point with regard to the fight against trafficking in human beings, which feeds off the fact that some foreign nationals in the European Union are on the margins of, or excluded from, society.

This integration requires a firm policy to provide equal economic and social rights and an equally staunch fight against any form of discrimination, particularly in the field of employment.

The French Presidency is planning to hold a seminar in October on this theme, with a view to presenting the Council with a draft text on the harmonisation of permits for extended periods of residence, which is an essential mechanism for integration.

The opportunity to adopt the nationality of Member States is also a fundamental aspect of integrating foreign nationals in Europe, but we realise that, in this area, each country applies its own laws.

The third point emphasised at Tampere is the fight against the criminal networks that I mentioned just now, and against the traffic in human beings. This aspect is clearly one of the French Presidency' s central concerns.

The Tampere Council specifically stressed this priority, and I quote: "The European Council stresses the need for more efficient management of migration flows at all their stages.

It calls for the development, in close co-operation with countries of origin and transit, of information campaigns on the actual possibilities for legal immigration, and for the prevention of all forms of trafficking in human beings.

The European Council calls for closer co-operation and mutual technical assistance between the Member States' border control services" .

Following the events in Dover, the Feira European Council called once again for rapid action by the European Union.

This Council, and I quote, "condemned the criminal acts of those who profit from such traffic in human beings and committed the European Union to intensified cooperation to defeat such cross-border crime, which has caused so many other deaths across Europe" .

The Council has urged the forthcoming French Presidency and the Commission to ensure that the Tampere conclusions on this subject are implemented as a matter of urgency.

The French Presidency has already proposed four initiatives to the Council.

The first of these is a draft directive establishing sanctions against transporters who give lifts to illegal passengers.

This draft text would extend the measures provided for in the convention applying the Schengen agreement and the purpose of the text is to provide the Union with a common mechanism for sanctions.

This restates the obligation on transporters to do everything they can to ensure that the passengers they are carrying have travel documents and, if appropriate, the necessary visas. This mechanism also restates the transporter' s obligation to send back or to accept responsibility for sending back foreign nationals who have not been allowed to enter for the reasons I have just mentioned.

This draft directive also provides for sanctions against those who have transported passengers who do not have the necessary documents or visas.

The proposed text provides for a minimum fine of EUR 2000.

A second draft framework decision seeks to increase the criminal punishment for aiding the illegal entry or stay in a country.

On this issue too, by extending the measures of the convention applying the Schengen agreement, covering the obligation of States that are signatories to the convention to provide for sanctions against anyone aiding an illegal entry or stay, France has presented a draft framework decision whose purpose is to encourage the harmonisation of national legislations with regard to defining offences.

This text will therefore play an important role in more effectively curbing the traffic in human beings.

The French Presidency' s third initiative was to also submit a draft directive on cooperation in the matter of expulsions.

The purpose of this draft directive is to facilitate the implementation of an expulsion measure passed by one Member State against a foreign national who is not legally entitled to stay, when this measure is taken by any other State, the foreign national having been arrested in their territory.

Fourthly and finally, an improvement in European cooperation in the area of controlling migration flows and increasing control over external borders is one of the Council of Ministers' priorities.

In its capacity as holder of the Presidency, France has submitted new proposals in this field, specifically an action plan, which the European institutions are about to discuss.

First of all, it is crucial to increase police cooperation in the exchange of information on illegal migration flows and on criminal networks.

The centralisation, cross-checking, analysis and use of this data must be carried out by the existing Working Group.

As the Feira conclusions emphasise, it is particularly important to develop Europol' s role in curbing the traffic in human beings.

The French Presidency therefore intends immediately to ask Europol to submit a report on the action it has undertaken in this area.

The other aim in the field of police cooperation is to strengthen the rapid warning mechanism, which must be made sufficiently effective to enable Member States to be informed about and to react in good time to events connected with illegal immigration.

This mechanism specifically involves the designation of points of contact between Member countries and entrusts the Council Presidency with the task of organising the necessary agreement for implementing the appropriate measures.

Increasing this coordination also involves establishing a network of liaison officers from the Member States in the countries where the immigration originates, in order to improve understanding of particular situations, to control immigration at source, particularly through the checking of travel documents at the point of embarkation at airports.

This whole range of projects, designed to strengthen the fight against illegal immigration, will be the subject of a seminar on criminal networks, which is to be held in Paris on 20 and 21 July, in other words, in a few days' time.

This seminar will bring together high level representatives of the Member States, the countries of Central and Eastern Europe, the United States, Australia, Canada and Mexico.

Several Ministers from the Member States as well as the heads of various immigration services and border police from Member States will be taking part in this symposium.

I should also like to emphasise the fact that one of the fundamental points resulting from Tampere is the principle of harmonising the right of asylum between Member States.

This is another important tool in the fight against illegal immigration.

We have seen requests for asylum increase dramatically in most countries in the European Union.

This increase reflects the higher number of illegal entries, since 80% to 90% of requests for asylum are rejected by the countries to which they are made.

The right to asylum is frequently used by criminal networks as a legal tool to make the entry into a country and the stay there easier for illegal immigrants.

The main difficulty in our task is therefore the need to reconcile this fundamental right to asylum, which is recognised in international conventions, with the fight against fraud.

With regard to this matter too, I shall refer to the Tampere Summit, where the European Council restated the importance attached by the Union and its Member States to fully respecting the right to asylum.

The Summit conclusions state that "this system should include, in the short term, a clear and workable determination of the State responsible for the examination of an asylum application, common standards for a fair and efficient asylum procedure, and common minimum conditions of reception of asylum seekers" .

It is therefore crucial first of all that we make progress with projects that seek to improve the functioning of the Dublin Convention, with regard to determining the State responsible for the examination of an asylum application.

France is paying close attention to the work currently being undertaken by the Commission.

We will have taken an important step forward if we are able to ensure that the State that is the original point of entry for a foreign national into the European Union has sole responsibility for examining that person' s application for asylum.

The Eurodac system, which will soon be up and running, enabling the fingerprints of asylum seekers to be stored centrally, will certainly contribute to the fight against fraud involving multiple applications.

We must also rapidly attain the objective of a fair and efficient asylum system in Europe.

There is therefore an urgent need to harmonise the conditions of reception for asylum seekers, in order to limit internal flows into European Union territory and thereby achieve a more balanced division between Member States.

This is why the French Presidency has submitted a draft set of guidelines, which is designed to make the Commission' s work and the drawing up of a future directive easier.

We hope to reach our first conclusions at next December' s Council, so that we can contribute to the preparation of the Commission' s draft directive, which is planned for the beginning of 2001.

The Council is therefore determined to use all necessary means to fight against the traffic in human beings and to do so in accordance with the Tampere and Feira conclusions.

The Council takes the view that the issue of the ways and means of illegal entry is no longer a question solely related to the problem of immigration. This issue also involves the fight against organised crime.

This is the approach that must inform our work, and the French Presidency hopes to mobilise all necessary means - national, Community and intergovernmental - to succeed.

Mr President, first of all, I wish to emphasise that the Commission shares the sense of grief caused by the tragedy at Dover, which President Prodi expressed at the Feira Council and as I myself have expressed on behalf of the Commission.

We feel that these events are a particularly tragic illustration of the need for a common policy on immigration.

The Commission is pleased at the request made at Feira by the Heads of State and Government to speed up the process, and is firmly committed to play its part in this process, in conjunction with the French Government.

The Commission wishes to reiterate the fact that the framework for such a policy was established by the Tampere European Council and that precise deadlines have been set for implementing it, both by the Treaty of Amsterdam and the European Council itself.

If such a policy is to have a lasting effect, it must form part of the overall approach defined at Tampere, which requires both a more efficient management of migration flows and the development of partnerships with the countries of origin and transit, the establishment of a common asylum system and the guarantee of fair treatment for nationals of third countries who are legally resident in Member States' territory.

It is within this overall framework that efforts must be made to overcome the particularly odious types of crime that are the traffic in and exploitation of human beings.

These crimes are what lie behind the Dover tragedy, as well as all the anonymous tragedies that are played out every day, which we do not hear about since they are not reported in the press.

More specifically, the Commission wishes to point out that a very short deadline has been set for the Council to adopt the necessary legislative measures to be able to prosecute and punish the behaviour of those who profit from trafficking in human beings.

A deadline, which runs up to the end of this year, has been set for the formal adoption of the legislative instruments that will enable the main players in this kind of trafficking to be punished.

The Commission wishes to confirm its desire to cooperate with the Council to ensure that this deadline is scrupulously observed and notes the fact that the French Presidency is about to present its first initiative, which is a framework decision designed to strengthen the fight against aiding illegal entry and residence.

We welcome this response by the French Presidency and we shall study the text closely to see to what extent it covers the objectives that the Commission had set for itself under its own proposal.

There are two aspects in particular to which we should pay attention in this context: employers' responsibility and the consequences of employing workers illegally.

This does not only involve monitoring the European Union' s points of entry, but also monitoring what is happening within our Member States, particularly with regard to the illegal labour market.

Furthermore, the traffic in human beings in particular must be curbed, since it involves trafficking in women and children for the purpose of sexual exploitation, which is a specific feature of the traffic in human beings in general.

The Commission wishes to point out that the protection of victims and the respect for their rights must remain a constant concern of this presidency, as some victims pay with their lives and others are forced into slavery

In this respect, the Commission plans to submit a proposal on providing short-term residence permits to victims who agree to cooperate with the police and judicial authorities in fighting the criminal networks that traffic in human beings.

Victims' testimony is in fact crucial to the police and judicial investigations being able to produce effective results.

If we expect victims to provide this testimony, we must guarantee them a minimum of personal security.

The Commission also urges Member States to increase their cooperation with Interpol, so that this body is able to make full use of all its resources in the fight against organised crime in this area.

In this respect, we wish to emphasise the importance of the conference to be held by the French Presidency on 20 and 21 July in Paris, which the Minister has just mentioned.

We also need to develop and strengthen the Schengen acquis as included in the Treaty of Amsterdam.

Priority must be given to researching the means for ensuring the proper implementation of existing laws on granting visas and controlling external borders by using the surveillance and monitoring mechanisms that are available for this purpose.

A review must also be carried out of existing measures, and, should they be required, the necessary legislative amendments could be introduced to the Schengen acquis.

All means should be investigated in order to facilitate administrative cooperation, following the example of the Odysseus programme, a third of whose projects that have been retained for 2000 are already contributing to the fight against illegal immigration.

Furthermore, the Commission shares the desire of the French Presidency to see the procedures for placing responsibility on transporters reviewed and adapted as a matter of priority and has noted the Presidency' s announcement of an initiative to this effect.

In our opinion, this initiative should form part of the development of the Schengen acquis and should deal appropriately with the various means that could be used in close collaboration with the operators because, without this cooperation, it will be difficult to fight effectively against the trafficking in human beings.

Within the framework of cooperation with countries and regions of origin and transit in general, particular attention must be paid both to combating poverty and to respect for human rights.

More specific action could be also be undertaken with regard to developing awareness-raising campaigns on the real possibilities of legal immigration and on all forms of trafficking, as well as increasing the ability of the authorities in the countries of origin or transit to effectively combat this type of crime themselves.

We should consider the option of increasing the appropriations that have been earmarked for this purpose in the preliminary draft budget for 2001.

In addition to this, forms of closer cooperation could be considered for applicant countries, particularly in the areas of training, equipment, and the exchange of information on criminal networks.

With this in mind, we feel that it is important to develop cooperation agreements between Europol and the police forces in applicant countries as quickly as possible.

The conclusion and the effective implementation of Community agreements on readmission will also contribute to diminishing the attraction of the offers made by traffickers, who claim to be able to provide their victims with guaranteed access to the destination country.

In more general terms, we must review repatriation policies as a whole, including the issue of assistance for voluntary return, so as to guarantee coordination and efficiency whilst respecting the rights of the people involved.

It is imperative that we make rapid progress in establishing a common European asylum system, based on absolute respect for human rights and on the principle of non-refoulement, which seeks to provide the appropriate status for any person in need of protection, through the use of fair and efficient procedures.

The proposals that the Commission has already submitted concerning the European Refugee Fund and temporary protection, as well as the launch of the process of revising the Dublin Convention, should be swiftly followed up by other initiatives on the procedures and conditions for the reception of asylum-seekers.

The Commission is in the process of evaluating the report by the European Parliament on its communication on a common procedure in order to present, before the end of this year, a legislative initiative on a common procedure for asylum in Europe.

By the same token, we welcome the French initiative to submit a set of guidelines on the conditions for the reception of asylum-seekers.

As was said at Tampere, the whole purpose of the exercise is to achieve, in the medium term, a common definition of refugee status and, to complement this, other subsidiary forms of protection.

The Commission feels that any lasting solution will require a genuine immigration policy to be gradually established. This policy must take account of the Union' s views on social, economic and demographic developments, and will consequently guarantee the admission of migrants under an organised and clear framework, as well as their harmonious integration into the communities that receive them.

The Commission is preparing a communication on this subject for the autumn, as well as legislative proposals, which follow on from those covering permission for the families of foreign nationals working within the Union to join them. Those proposals are currently under consideration by the Council, and the new proposals should define the conditions and the methods for admission, particularly for purposes of work and study.

We all recognise the importance of this debate and this exchange of views has clearly been influenced by the emotions caused by the Dover tragedy.

It is tempting to say that the solution lies in increasing repressive measures and, as you see, I am not rejecting the idea of doing so.

What we must understand above all, however, is that, in the medium term, it is by producing a proactive immigration policy at European level, backed by clear criteria, which are shared by all Member States, that we will guarantee victory in this battle.

This must be a balanced policy, both in its measures on "the integration of emigrants" and in its measures on "effectively combating networks of organised crime which exploit the victims of the traffic in human beings" We must never lose sight of the balanced approach provided by the two aspects of the European common policy on this issue.

Mr President, it is a tragedy that it has taken the deaths of another 58 people to get the problem of trafficking firmly on the international, political agenda.

The Dover disaster has once again opened our eyes to the unscrupulous practices of traffickers in human beings and to the powerlessness - or should that be unwillingness? - on the part of the European Union to stamp out this disgraceful type of exploitation.

Trafficking in human beings has grown into a bigger business than trafficking in drugs, according to The Economist last week.

Organised crime has discovered that this business is not only more profitable, there is less risk involved too.

Every year, about half a million people are smuggled into the European Union.

In the port of Dover alone, hundreds of illegal aliens are arrested on a daily basis.

As the trafficking in human beings increases, so does the economic and sexual exploitation of these people.

Traffickers demand astronomical amounts to smuggle their customers to the West.

Upon arrival, their documents are often seized, as a result of which they are completely at the mercy of crime syndicates.

Young girls are frequently raped during the journey and end up in prostitution or the illegal labour market later on.

It is not unusual for victims who are unable to pay their debts to meet with terror and violence.

It is clear that traffickers in human beings are becoming more professional in their activities.

Their infrastructure, communication and control facilities outstrip those available to the police or courts in the countries of origin or transit.

This internationalisation of organised crime is in stark contrast to the inability of the EU Member States to adopt a coordinated approach in dealing with the trafficking in human beings.

Everyone is agreed that the problem transcends the control, reception and repatriation capacities of the individual countries and that we need to join forces.

But despite the best of intentions, European cooperation is leaving a great deal to be desired.

We do not seem to manage, once the police and courts are involved, to rise above the nationalistic knee-jerk reaction.

And organised crime is exploiting that situation.

Enlargement of the European Union would merely aggravate the problem.

The new countries are, due to their location, extremely vulnerable to the trafficking in human beings.

What is more, their police and court systems are even less adequate than those of the current Member States.

In our resolution, we at least call for the application of the principle of solidarity and make a few very specific proposals for far-reaching cooperation in the fight against the trafficking in human beings.

If we want to prevent tragedies such as those at Dover from happening again, extending the Third Pillar should not be delayed any further, and we are hopeful after President Chirac' s address and Minister Queyranne' s speech.

Mr President, I would also like to begin my intervention by saying that my sentiments about the Dover catastrophe are deeply felt.

I live in an area of Europe where, every day, every week, the dead bodies of emigrants from the north and south of Africa appear. These victims do not appear in the news because, fortunately, they are yet to die on a massive scale, but rather they die in a trickle.

Having said this, I am sure, as Commissioner Vitorino has said, that the European Union needs a common policy in order to manage the legal entry of immigrants - bearing in mind our economic, social and demographic situation - in a reasonable way, preventing arbitrary treatment and, above all, turning to legal immigration avenues instead of traffickers in human beings.

I believe that we have the responsibility to establish a legal framework which will allow this to be done.

We also have the responsibility - and I would like to highlight this - to apply laws which already exist in the whole of the European Union and which regulate our labour market.

It is outrageous that some people import and use labour and then go unpunished.

To this end, there is no need to create new immigration laws, but we simply have to use the ones we already have to regulate the labour market and punish employers of illegal workers.

A year ago in October, the Tampere agreements were adopted.

I hope that the Commission will do everything that the Commissioner has said and that the Council is up to the job.

In that case they will have the support of this Parliament.

Mr President, sadly, there will be many more Dovers.

Not so long ago, we talked about the trafficking in human beings at the Strait of Gibraltar, and this was also referred to a moment ago.

Prior to that, we held a debate regarding a ship transporting Kurds which ran aground off the Italian South coast.

Each time, the authorities panicked, as is the case again now.

It is high time we adopted policy.

Because that is what it comes down to: each time a policy is announced, but this time, we need to do something about it, because we know that the trafficking in human beings simply continues.

Minister Queyranne and Commissioner Vitorino already mentioned it.

We need to tackle the causes. We need to set up common immigration and asylum policy, fight cross-border crime and at long last establish surveillance of the EU' s external borders.

But I would like to point out something else.

The heads of government themselves, under the leadership of President Chirac, who were here this morning, could chip in straight away.

When they meet in Nice, they could abolish the right of veto in European justice policy.

In this way, they, and later on the Council of Ministers for Justice, can at long last lay down European immigration legislation by enhanced majority, something which this Parliament has been calling for for many years.

In the case of crime policy, fighting the trafficking in human beings should not be the remit of Europol alone.

It is necessary to harmonise the penalisation of this crime at European level.

Indeed, the trafficking in human beings is a prime example of cross-border crime, which is what makes prosecution so difficult. This is why it is necessary to set up a European Public Prosecutor' s department in this field.

Mr President, there has been enough talk.

Mr President, I would join my voice to those who have talked about the tragedy of Dover and the young lives cut short there, but I also want to add my revulsion at the attitude of many people: well, what do you expect, if you take these risks you have got to expect that you might die.

It is a cruel and judgmental attitude that has appeared in much of the press and it does not help us find a solution.

If governments are serious about combating trafficking, these are three areas they need to think about.

How can people legally enter the countries of the European Union, especially those coming from third countries which experience poverty or oppression?

Secondly, how can we gain the confidence of those who could provide evidence against trafficking organisations.

I welcome what we have heard about that this afternoon.

Thirdly, how the current policies of the European Union and its Member States help to create refugees.

We should not be concentrating so much on a deterrent policy at our borders.

We need to look at how we are contributing to the incentive to leave.

We need to examine the consequences of our policies on, for example, trade, its rules and terms and who we will trade with, the conduct of companies based in the European Union and their operations in other countries such as Nigeria, the arms sales by Member States to repressive regimes.

If we are looking at real co-development, that will be a major step forward and I welcome that.

I think we should be considering how our open market closed-border policies are assisting the market forces driving the increases in human trafficking.

Mr President, 58 Chinese immigrants who arrived at Dover, in the hope of a better life, have died in horrific conditions, surrounded by crates of tomatoes.

I, like all of you, am deeply shocked.

This crime, however, is a daily occurrence at European Union borders.

Let us not forget Yagine and Fodé, the two boys from Guinea, who wanted to see Brussels last summer.

Since the beginning of this year alone, dozens of young people from the Maghreb have drowned trying to reach the Spanish coast.

Fourteen Kurds died of asphyxiation in the hold of a burning ship in Patras.

Dozens of Albanians and Tunisians die en route to Italy.

They should be unacceptable in a European Union that prides itself on being based on the protection of human rights.

How then, can we put an end to this?

The debate that has opened as a result of the Dover tragedy has focused on the traffic in human beings and the eradication of the mafias that organise the criminal networks.

The trade in smuggling human beings is undeniably flourishing.

For a long time, we have known about the existence of criminal networks, such as the Chinese Triads, who make huge profits by transporting desperate people to countries that they are led to believe are paradises.

Mafia networks must therefore be harshly punished, but so must the people who exploit illegal labour, since no immigration networks exist without economic networks.

As a result, in France, Chinese illegal immigrants are forced to work for years in sweat-shops to pay for their journey.

These modern-day slaves supply a cheap labour force to whole sectors of the economy, and bosses are therefore free to move them around, even within the European Union.

The dogma of liberal globalisation has magnified the free movement of goods and capital, but is seeking to stop the free movement of people.

Emigration, whether it is a result of political oppression or poverty, merely reflects global inequalities. It is a symptom of the ever-widening gulf that separates North and South, and the incentive to emigrate is all the stronger since images of Western prosperity are invading the screens of the third world.

It is true that the free movement established by the European Union is a fundamental right, but this is reserved for its own nationals.

Nationals of third countries have seen their movement littered with traps, as a result of the Schengen agreement and the mirage of zero immigration.

All of these factors have simply created new forms of illegal immigration.

A purely repressive European response to the issue of immigration would certainly consolidate Europe' s fortification mechanism, but this would be ignoring the most fundamental aspect, which is the uniting of efforts and sharing at global level.

A seminar is certainly a good idea, Minister, but it should cover a common immigration policy based on the principle of freedom of movement, improving rights...

(The President cut the speaker off)

Mr President, the horrific death of 58 Chinese illegal immigrants, discovered by British customs officers at Dover, highlights, above all, the scale of the pressure that migration is exerting on the countries of Europe.

These people came from China, after all, in other words, from the other side of the world, from a country that has nothing to do with Europe and for which we can certainly not serve as an outlet for resolving their problems of poverty.

In a case which is so typical, the best possible response we can provide is to combat illegal immigration and particularly the mafia-type organisations behind this new form of trafficking in human beings.

We are rather shocked to hear the words of Commissioner Vitorino, who, on 20 June, on the subject of the Dover tragedy, said that this, amongst other events, was proof of the need for a genuine policy on admission and integration, which makes a definitive break with the fantasy of zero immigration.

Those who mention the fantasy of zero immigration unfortunately too often do so in an attempt to provide an advance justification for a lenient policy.

We do not wish to fall into this trap.

On the contrary, we are calling, as a matter of priority, for a halt to this immigration, not only through a policy of co-development and of fighting the mafias, but also through strengthening control at the Union' s external borders and the reintroduction of controls at its internal borders, which have been so carelessly destroyed by European decisions over recent years.

Where internal borders are concerned, of course, we will probably not reintroduce fixed controls in the traditional form.

We must aim for a more flexible network, organised around jointly run border posts, near to borders.

In any event, however, controls will be needed, otherwise we will face the gradual collapse of our societies' structures, which, if the truth be told, match the aims of globalisation too well not to suit Europe' s enemies to a tee.

Mr President, less than 5% of lorries that arrive or pass through the port of Dover are stopped, and even less than that 5% are searched.

So what is to be done?

Is it not obvious that we must step up the controls, section more policemen and carry out 20 times the amount of controls in order to be able to guarantee that controls are being carried out properly?

And the responses from the Council have not changed; they are still the same: Europol, Eurodac, police cooperation.

On behalf of the Council, Minister, you informed us that the immigration policy and the fight against crimes related to illegal immigration are two separate issues.

This cannot possibly be true, it is not true and I would argue that even the Members' speeches illustrate that it is not true.

Parliament is ready to vote on a joint text - and I urge it to do so - a text which defines the direct relationship between restrictions on immigration and the way organised crime benefits from this trafficking, for this connection lies in the prohibition mechanism. Where there is no legal immigration integration policy, when it takes months to obtain work permits, when United Nations reports tell us that our societies, our countries in Europe need a regular influx of hundreds of thousands of immigrants each year, immigrants which are not permitted to enter, not only in the highly-skilled new technology industries but also in the manual labour industries, restaurants and services, when we are under the illusion that we are banning everything and preventing all harm, we find ourselves overtaken by a flood of illegal immigration which is only illegal because it has, in actual fact, been banned by these laws.

Minister, I believe that Parliament may be able to take a stance on this matter which opposes what you have said today.

Mr President, we have a problem: we are not moving with events.

We are here today for the 58 victims of Dover.

Like Mrs Terrón, I am also from a country, Spain, in which we unfortunately witness hundreds of deaths and disappearances in the Straits of Gibraltar and the Andalusian coasts.

There are outbreaks of violence and xenophobia all over Europe and, while here we are talking about a new globalised economic society and a new information society, we do not realise that organised crime, trafficking in human beings, sexual exploitation and drug-trafficking have also become globalised.

That is to say, we are talking about a new form of criminality and human slavery which reminds us of the pre-abolitionist era in the United States.

Chinese, Moroccans, Russians and South Americans are transported, extorted and advised by mafias.

This is the responsibility of some very important international organisations and there is a desperate need for international cooperation to combat one of the most shameful violations of human rights; international cooperation of European police forces and judges with police and judges in the countries where the migrants come from, who also have responsibility for the problem.

If they do not have administrative, judicial or police structures, we will have to cooperate with them so that they may be provided with them.

In this regard, the Action Plans which were mentioned by the representative of the Council may have an important role to play and I hope we can debate them in Parliament more transparently than we have up to now.

We must go beyond words - as he has also said - because words do not solve the problem.

We must give the necessary resources to Europol, so that it can work effectively, and to the Action Plans, so that they can be carried out, to the refugee fund and to our borders, so that they can carry out the corresponding controls, because, unfortunately, without economic resources, nothing can be achieved.

Anything else is mere verbiage and preaching.

Mr President, the tragedy at Dover was one of the most appalling incidents that anyone here can recall.

A tragedy for the people involved, a tragedy for their family and friends, but also a tragedy for Europe and the European ideal.

As a European Parliament, we must do everything we can to prevent a recurrence.

Mr Cappato spoke a few moments ago about the controls at Dover.

But the authorities in Zeebrugge knew that the lorry in question was suspect.

They had never heard of the company on the side of the lorry and the driver paid cash for the ferry.

Accordingly, they alerted the port authorities at Dover.

Had they checked the vehicle in Belgium some of these lives could certainly have been saved.

I thank the Minister for his genuine and honest statement.

He spoke about the real culprits, the organizers.

And of course he is right that we must fight organized crime and global trafficking, but identifying the culprits is only part of the battle.

We must do more to support the countries from which these people came and improve the conditions there.

Can we here in Strasbourg even begin to contemplate the misery and desperation that drove those Chinese people to spend months travelling in clandestine fashion halfway across the world?

Probably to work in Chinese restaurants satisfying Westerners' desire for Chinese food.

But to do this they died a tragic and desperate death because as Europeans we failed to come up with common and workable procedures for asylum and immigration and that must be on all our consciences.

Mr President, the human tragedy and the facts of these cases are well known and, as Mrs Boudjenah quite rightly pointed out, they were well known long before the Dover tragedy.

The political will has been made clear, indicating that it is time to pass a legislative act for identifying, arresting and punishing the culprits.

Minister, Commissioner, you have truly disappointed me.

You are not even following the line taken at the Tampere Council.

The Tampere conclusions make a clear call for the Commission to submit a report on the implementation of the conclusions of the High Level Working Group on Asylum and Immigration for the consideration of the European Council in December 2000.

This means that, in six months, you will have to draw up a report on what you have achieved.

Listening to your speech, I have the feeling that I have been invited not to a Parliamentary sitting, but to a rather posh get-together.

I had hoped that the Commission would go further, that it would have the courage, for once, to submit proposals, and that it would be able to do what the Council of Ministers is asking it to.

Minister, the French Presidency may be content to make the point at the next summit, without any real desire to study the Commission' s report or to tell us whether the Commission is fulfilling its contract with regard to Eurodac. If, however, the French Presidency is not able to establish a concrete schedule for legislative procedures to be implemented at European level and to be transposed to Member State level, we will once again face failure, which will lead to another debate like today' s, following further deaths.

Everyone will complain and Europe will not have made any progress.

What I am really asking for is for the Commission to show that it is up to the task, and, in line with what President Chirac and Mr Queyranne said, for it to feel sufficiently chastised so that the work requested of it is sufficiently detailed for the politicians, Ministers and the Council finally to be able to take some decisions.

Mr President, I would say that although emotions are running high everywhere here, trafficking has claimed 2,000 casualties over the past five years.

What I do see, however, is that the OSCE, the IOM, the Council of Europe, the Commission and Parliament are all coming up with sound proposals.

We talk and talk, draft and produce texts and can be very low, very pessimistic, but it is the first time that we are talking at global level and that something is being done to solve the problem.

I am always a little hopeful, yet realistic on two counts.

Realistic in the sense that practice and theory are two different things.

For example, when we repatriate people, for example when we send illegal Poles from Germany back to Poland, you need to realise that, some of them have train tickets, obtained from their illegal employer, to return to Germany, within two hours of their arrival, because that is where they work, where they have their jobs and where they are able to earn money.

Secondly, we should not overlook the role of the victims.

This entails reception and a document entitling them to walk around freely.

And the Chinese must be able to speak out.

I have experienced this first hand.

Chinese girls, and women, in particular, are more communicative than men, because I have the impression that women are less fearful when it comes to this kind of thing.

I know of Chinese girls whose faces have been slashed with knives.

If they return, if they are repatriated to their countries of origin, the scars will still be visible.

You need to realise that we need to be able to repatriate people of their own free will, but I do not believe in this free will.

I think that for certain people, the situation is more complex than that.

There are some who are very hopeful and want to go back, but you need to think of the role of the victims.

In Great Britain, for example, in Dover, in the UK in general, there are no shelters for victims of trafficking in human beings. There is not even any sound legislation concerning this issue.

Accordingly, Europe is responsible for its own legislation, for what we can do ourselves.

And we can do this, we are in this fortunate position, unlike countries in the Balkans, the Ukraine, Lithuania, all these countries which are lacking money and resources, where the NGOs are embroiled in a lopsided power struggle.

I would like to finish off with a comment on the police forces.

I call on you to provide them with the necessary resources for they are fighting a one-sided war.

Mr President, there have been deaths which weigh like heavy stones on our hearts and our consciences, deaths which call for a European reception policy, a policy of rights and duties for migrants, a policy which says: in Europe, nobody is a foreigner and nobody is illegal.

Since 1993, 2063 victims - men, women and children - have died in the struggle to be allowed to live: the earth' s rejects, suffocating in containers, drowning in our seas and committing suicide in detention centres. The responsibility lies with the traffickers who now form an international network, and the Union will be forced to employ every means and exploit all possible cooperation between countries in order to break these criminal networks; the responsibility lies with a policy which meets the needs of migrant communities with closed borders; an emergency and security policy which induces fear of invasion.

Yet immigration from regions near and far is part and parcel of the history of Europe.

We will overcome illegal trafficking when we tackle the causes of the gap between rich and poor countries, when we practise a policy of cooperation and development which allows everyone to live as a citizen of the world.

Mr President, I would like to thank the President-in-Office and the Commissioner for their words and to add my voice to the many who have expressed their shock and horror at this tragic loss of life discovered in Dover.

The committee which I have the honour to chair has repeatedly made clear its view that we need a European immigration policy.

This tragedy involving those so desperate to reach our shores - and it is of course no isolated incident - throws into sharp relief the lack of an immigration policy.

We know that the numbers trying to come to our continent are not in fact increasing over time.

It is simply that as the legal avenues have closed, so the private sector has moved in to exploit the illegal avenues.

Last year's summit in Tampere gave a mandate to the Commission to start moving towards a common policy and I understand from my meeting last week with Mr Chevenement, President-in-Office of the Justice and Home Affairs Council, that the French presidency will launch initiatives to deal with the persons involved, to deal with the transporters of these victims.

The European Parliament looks forward to being consulted on these initiatives.

How long will it take for governments to realize that they have no clothes in this matter?

How long will it take for them to realize that the criminals are so far ahead of them, and to develop the methods of police cooperation which will put an end to this vile trafficking?

I am even tempted to suggest that they might use things like the Echelon system to start fighting against these traffickers, but that might be rather provocative in view of the vote coming up on Thursday.

The fact is that we should be proud that we have developed a society which is so attractive that people wish to come and join us, but we should perhaps also be rather ashamed that our development aid policy has not been more successful in reducing the push factors in some of the countries of origin.

Until we succeed - and I recognise the work of the high-level working groups - in reducing these push factors, we ought perhaps to open our doors a little.

It might even be in our own interest, rejuvenating an ageing population and enriching our own culture.

I am pleased to hear that Canada is among the countries invited to the presidency's seminar.

We might be advised to take a leaf out of Canada's book.

The Liberal Government's proposals there are to close the backdoor to illegal immigration but at the same time open the front door to a legal migration policy.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I think that this debate has enabled us to see that there is a broad consensus on the Tampere Summit guidelines, and in particular, on the three elements, the first of which consists of our relations with the countries of origin. This element also comprises actions for co-development, which we must improve, since immigration is a result of inequality and of the desire of people without jobs or prospects to come to richer countries.

The second element is the provision of legal residence for foreign nationals and, from this point of view, I do not think that a policy of zero immigration is right for Europe.

I think that this would be unrealistic.

We must allow foreign nationals who live in our countries to live free from discrimination, and to become integrated.

The third and last element consists of combating illegal immigration, and particularly criminal networks.

I share the opinion of many of today' s speakers, such as Mr Cappato, for example, when they say that these criminal networks are part of organised crime.

We must therefore stand up to these international organisations, these powerful mafias, which deliberately try to take advantage of loopholes in the law, problems in cooperation and the extremely high demand in the countries concerned.

Under our Presidency, we have the opportunity to build on the proposals presented in this debate.

I am thinking in particular of the proposal by Commissioner Vitorino on readmission agreements with the countries of origin, such as China, for example, with regard to making the trafficking in human beings for purposes of sexual exploitation a specific crime.

I also think that we must work together on specific proposals, such as the timetable for their implementation that you requested, including the regulation implementing Eurodac, which must be completed by the end of the year, in response to Mr Pirker' s question.

Above all, we must use this presidency to clarify guidelines, particularly those on Europe' s long-term immigration policy.

We have planned an informal Council meeting, a Justice and Home Affairs Council, for the end of this month, in Marseilles, and, to that end, we have tabled this issue on the agenda.

Moreover, the Chairman of your Committee, Mr Watson, is also due to take part in this debate at the end of the month.

I should like to point out that honourable Members of this Parliament are invited to attend the various conferences that will be held within this framework.

Mr President, I am convinced, at the end of this debate, that there are only two fronts on which we can combat illegal immigration and in particular the types of exploitation it involves. This exploitation has been universally condemned following the Dover tragedy, as well as other incidents in the Straits of Gibraltar and on the coasts of several of our countries.

Firstly, we can use the harmonisation of legislation and then closer cooperation.

Legislation must be harmonised because people should no longer be able to play on the present differences in laws on asylum and on punishment between countries and consequently play the free movement card to try to evade European vigilance. We also need closer cooperation because we are dealing here with powerful organisations, which must be confronted.

In my opinion, Europe' s role, through the work of the Council, the Commission, which can nurture these ideas, and Parliament, is to promote our concept of immigration, which is balanced and humane, and to guarantee that human rights are respected in spite of the rising tide of organised crime and trafficking in human beings.

First of all, I should like to state the Commission' s position on the Tampere programme.

I must emphasise the fact that, since Tampere, the Commission has already proposed a number of legislative instruments, so that they can be discussed by the Council and adopted within the deadlines that have been established by the scoreboard.

I am not only talking about the instrument for the regulation of Eurodac. I am also talking about the proposal for a decision on the European Refugee Fund, the directive on temporary protection, the revision of the Dublin Convention, which determines which State is responsible for examining applications for asylum, and the results of the consultation on the definition of the common rules of procedure on asylum issues.

I think that we could even add the fact that, where legal immigration is concerned, the Commission has tabled a proposal for a directive allowing the families of foreign nationals working in the Union to join them.

We carried out these measures in the six months following Tampere, in compliance with the deadline adopted under the scoreboard that the Commission presented to the Council.

The Commission is not behind schedule, and although this is a complex debate, it is under way, both in Parliament and in the Council.

I therefore understand why Mr Ducarme should say that he feels disappointed.

We all feel disappointed and the reality of the situation is indeed disappointing, but I must tell you - and this point needs to be emphasised - that the Commission has tabled the proposals that were laid down within the deadlines that were set.

You said that my speech did not match the deadline that was set for the end of this year, so that the Nice European Council can evaluate the policy on asylum and immigration.

With regard to this point, I suggest that you look more closely at which deadlines we are in fact discussing.

Nice has the task of undertaking a preliminary evaluation of the work of the High Level Working Group on Asylum and Immigration.

These action plans have been drawn up by that Group and I must tell you that the Commission has more grounds for optimism today than it did three months ago, because we have managed to reach agreement with the Member States on measures for co-development that the Commission will have to implement under several Community policies, including those on human rights, economics and development aid. The Commission and the Member States have also reached agreement on measures to be adopted by Member States, with the five action plan countries.

The deadline of December 2000 that I mentioned is another deadline altogether! This deadline was not set for the Nice Council.

This is a deadline that was set at Tampere for the approval of a legislative instrument which establishes common definitions, common incriminations and common punishments for trafficking in human beings, and specifically for trafficking in women and children for purposes of sexual exploitation. The Commission can reassure you on this point.

Both the French Presidency and Mr Queyranne have just said that the French Presidency has tabled a proposal for a legislative instrument, a framework decision for the incrimination of trafficking and smuggling. The Commission itself is fully on time with this deadline and with presenting a framework decision for the prosecution of trafficking in human beings.

I therefore think that we are indeed putting forward initiatives and I am counting on the support both of the Council and Parliament to be able to conclude these legislative procedures within the deadlines that have been fixed.

I should simply like to make two additional comments: the first, which is directed at Mr Berthu, who, unfortunately, is no longer present, is that, when I was talking about the fantasy of zero immigration, I meant that sometimes, the argument of zero immigration is used as a rhetorical instrument. It is also interesting to note that some leaders who use the argument of zero immigration in this way are also those who are largely responsible for immigration policies that are lax in terms of integrating immigrants into the societies that receive them.

When one condemns the fantasy or the rhetoric of zero immigration, one does so in order to suggest that there is an alternative, and the alternative is to have a proactive immigration policy, which puts at the top of the list of common concerns the integration of legal immigrants into the societies that receive them. One condemns it in order to clarify the criteria and the principles of a coordinated immigration policy at European level.

That is the alternative and - I am sorry to say so - I do not share the idea that the alternative is to reintroduce internal border controls by means of jointly run police stations, which would not be on the border, but thirty kilometres away from the border.

Lastly, my second comment is to say that I am delighted at the fact that this debate has achieved a very broad consensus on the priority we must give to the fight against organised crime, and I shall make a wish. My wish is that this consensus still exists when, at the right time, encouraged by the French Presidency and supported by the Commission, and within the deadlines fixed at Tampere, this Parliament is provided with the necessary instruments for combating money laundering.

I say this because to combat money laundering is to have an effective instrument with which to combat organised crime.

That is not rhetoric, because it is taking the fight to the very area in which the battle must be won.

Thank you very much, Commissioner Vitorino.

Pursuant to Rule 37(2) of the Rules of Procedure, I have received seven motions for resolutions.

The vote will take place on Thursday, at 12 noon.

The next item is the continuation of the joint debate on the 1998 discharge.

Ladies and gentlemen, as you will be aware, this morning' s joint debate on granting discharge to the Commission was not closed, since we still had to hear Commissioner Schreyer' s final speech.

The Commissioner is now present and I am therefore delighted to give her the floor, after which we can close the joint debate on the issue of granting discharge.

Thank you very much, Commissioner Schreyer.

The vote will take place on Wednesday, at 12 noon.

The next item is the report (A5-0172/2000) by Mrs Lienemann, on behalf of the Parliamentary Delegation to the Conciliation Committee on the joint text adopted by the Conciliation Committee on the European Parliament and Council regulation (EC) concerning the financial instrument for the environment (LIFE) (C5-0221/2000 - 1998/0336(COD)).

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, they say that every era and every generation creates an image that defines its relationship with nature.

The concept of relationships with nature is changing radically in our own time.

In future we will not be able to subordinate this relationship to profit, selfishness and exploitation.

Whatever today' s policies may be, they must reflect this new philosophy of a relationship between mankind and society with the environment.

With this in mind, the European Union has pioneered legislation in the field of environmental protection and has also been a key partner in international negotiations and agreements on the global protection of the planet.

The transposition of European directives into national legislation has played and continues to play a crucial role in all our countries, particularly Portugal.

The LIFE programme is just one financial instrument at the service of the European Union' s environmental policies and of those of its neighbouring countries in the Baltic, the Mediterranean and in Eastern Europe.

This is not, however, the only financial instrument with repercussions for environmental policies. We know, for example, that regional and agricultural policy, which is to a large extent harmful, has an enormous impact on the environment and on Europe' s land and water.

It is undeniably important for LIFE to be adopted.

Having experienced many vicissitudes and a period of paralysis with regard to the projects financed by this programme, the Portuguese Presidency and the European Parliament finally formalised an agreement specifically on a budgetary framework of EUR 640 million for the period 2000-2004.

LIFE III will therefore be operational before the summer.

The agreement that was finally reached has many good points, part of the credit for which must go to the Portuguese Presidency - which once again demonstrated its constructive and efficient relationship with the European Parliament as well as its ability to mediate.

Credit is also due to the European Parliament delegation and specifically to Mrs Lienemann. I also wish to welcome the agreement reached by the Portuguese Presidency and the European Parliament on the framework directive on water, an instrument that is crucial for the European Union' s environmental policy.

Mr President, the European LIFE programme is the key European Union initiative to integrate environmental measures into the broad ambit of European Union policies.

The Union as a political entity has a moral and legal obligation to ensure that a clean environment is protected and promoted under Article 130 of the Maastricht Treaty.

In fact between1992 and 1992 the LIFE initiative cofinanced nearly 1600 projects with a total Community contribution of approximately EUR 2.1 billion.

I am especially satisfied that the European LIFE programme has promoted the use of cleaner technologies and has also financially supported many waste recycling programmes.

From an Irish perspective over 90% of our waste is still dealt with via landfill sites.

I would like to welcome initiatives taken by the Irish government, including diverting 50% of all household waste away from landfill sites, reducing by up to 65% biodegradable waste consigned to landfill, developing broader waste recovery facilities and reducing methane emissions by up to 80%.

I also welcome the fact that the Member States have allocated an increase of EUR 27 million for the new LIFE programme for the next five years and that the overall budgetary allocation made to the LIFE programme will be in the region of EUR 640 million.

The vote will be taken tomorrow at 11.30.

The next item is the report (A5-0184/2000) by Mrs Haug, on behalf of the Committee on Budgets, on the 2001 budget in view of the conciliation procedure before the Council's first reading.

Mr President, we find ourselves in a phase of the budget which resembles the lull before the storm.

The Commission has submitted a second preliminary draft on which the agricultural sector would certainly like to comment.

First of all, the European budget comes off worse compared to other major continents because there is less public funding available here compared to those other continents.

Secondly, the budget has not yet reached the prescribed ceiling. I hope that the Council will make up the difference, if not, Parliament will be submitting proposals.

There are also a few other issues which have struck me.

We need to try to use the budget efficiently.

On the one hand, there is a reshuffle of the headings, also in this budget, which begs the question as to whether the relative stability or the European Union as a whole are safeguarded.

Does the budget tie in sufficiently with discussions with a social dimension within the European Union, such as those pertaining to consumer affairs, the environment and animal welfare?

The European Parliament' s Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development is open to issues of this kind, also with regard to proposals which may or may not be submitted.

The same applies to the quality of policy, and in this connection, particular attention should be given to whether policy helps maintain a high-grade rural environment in Europe from a financial point of view.

Can Europe' s rural environment count on adequate care and financial means?

The Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development' s report and the opinion show that we welcome the deferment of the discussion regarding the EUR 300 million set aside for the reconstruction of the Balkans as far as it goes.

The discussion has been postponed until October, but the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development has pulled no punches in this respect.

The second point I would like to make in this connection is that, since every year, we have some money left in the agricultural budget, it should be possible to use this money the year after i.e. to earmark it and not to return it.

Thirdly, particularly in respect of agricultural policy, resources must be used more effectively and more pressure should be exerted on the Member States or the Commission in order to speed up the submission of plans which can then be implemented adequately.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, firstly I would like to thank the rapporteur, Mrs Haug, for an excellent report, and for having come to hear the views of the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism.

Our committee tabled two amendments for the report.

Owing to tight meeting timetables, they have been brought to the plenary session via my own group, and I hope that they may be adopted.

Amendment No 19 reminds everyone that there must be adequate payment appropriations for Structural Funds programmes, trans-European transport networks and other budget headings relating to transport, so that the programmes may be effectively implemented right at the start of the programming period.

In this way payments made at the end of the programming period - as was the case the previous year - are avoided.

Amendment No 20 concerns innovative measures.

The appropriation must be kept at the level decided at Berlin.

We have to remember that the Interinstitutional Agreement contains a pledge that the reduction in appropriations by EUR 200 million made the previous year should be made good this year.

Our committee is not proposing to move appropriations set aside under the URBAN initiative to be used for innovative measures: the compensating appropriations have to be found elsewhere.

The importance of innovation was stressed both at the Lisbon and Feira summits.

Innovation must therefore be adequately supported.

The implementation in practice of innovative measures in the area of Structural Funds has not got under way because preparatory work on the part of the Commission has lagged seriously behind.

Our committee supports the policy of support for employment and the importance of SMEs in Mrs Haug' s report.

The Commission and the Member States should also simplify and speed up administration procedures relating to Structural Funds.

More attention should be paid to the success of projects at approval stage.

Mr President, we in the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy are enthusiastic supporters of the common foreign and security policy, and we are also supporters of these Special Envoys which, at the moment, are inscribed in the Commission' s budget. If I need to mention the Special Envoys at all, it is because the Council is insisting on transferring the financing of the Special Envoys to the Council' s administrative budget.

That may sound very sensible. The problem, however, is that, in doing so, there is a loss of the inspection and the control that of course exists in the case of budget items in the Commission' s budget.

I therefore agree with what is stated in Mrs Haug' s report, namely that we must insist that these appropriations for Special Envoys remain on the Commission' s budget, for we in that way ensure continued parliamentary inspection and control and ensure that Parliament continues, for example, to be listened to and kept informed. In the Foreign Affairs Committee, we have been sufficiently constructive, however, as to think also about how a medium-term solution might possibly be found in a situation where negotiations with the Council were taking place.

This can be read about in the Foreign Affairs Committee' s contribution to Mrs Haug' s report. For if the Council definitely wants these appropriations to appear in the Council' s budget, there is, of course, the possibility of the Council' s, in return, entering into a type of inter-institutional agreement with ourselves here in Parliament, whereby the Council promises to give us the same information, control, inspection facilities etc as if the appropriations had appeared in the Commission' s budget.

That is, therefore, the Foreign Affairs Committee' s constructive contribution, and I should like to add that we, of course, also insist that, whenever anything new is adopted concerning the common foreign and security policy - be it in terms of expenditure or of initiatives - the Council must inform the European Parliament.

Mr President, I begin by endorsing the plaudits that have been offered to Mrs Haug.

She has indeed worked quite hard although, in the case of the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy, I am afraid she was working so hard that she was not able to pay anything more than a goodwill visit to our committee.

Therefore we have prepared the opinion which is before Parliament.

I will briefly touch on some of the points that arise from it.

Firstly, I want to support the points that are made by Mrs Haug concerning the implications of spending in the Balkans.

It is a matter that has been of significant concern to the Industry Committee.

We are particularly concerned about the implications for a wide range of the programmes that fall within our remit.

It certainly is the case that, with the move to activity-based budgeting, we are moving away from the concept that everything that was previously in the budget has to be preserved for the future.

Nonetheless a great deal of the programmes that are within our remit would be significantly affected by the spending proposals for the Balkans, unless Mrs Haug is successful.

So on behalf of the Industry Committee I should like to voice our support for her in that regard.

In two particular areas we are affected by multiannual programmes.

I want to reiterate our commitment in the research area.

I recognise that this is not a matter that is affected by the budget on this occasion, but we should not ignore the changes we are seeing in the energy sphere with Save and Altener.

The figures that we see are seeing for Save, where there is a significant reduction in the budget for energy efficiency schemes, are a result of the budgetary process last year.

That is only just now coming through.

The final point I want to make in the trade sphere relates to the need for us to ensure that the omnibus regulation for the transatlantic dialogue is adapted.

I hope the Commissioner will take that on board.

Mr President, the Committee on Fisheries has been calling for the strengthening of the common fisheries policy on an international level as well.

We must support our fishing industry and help it to be placed on an equal level with giants such as the United States, Russia or Japan.

As draftsperson of the Committee on Fisheries, I would like to express my satisfaction with the Committee on Budgets' support for our proposals on the international fishing organisations and agreements.

Firstly, I will refer to our contribution to the international organisations.

In an increasingly globalised world, the Union must increase its presence in these organisations which regulate offshore fishing, for reasons of prestige, good management of resources and, above all, the defence of the interests of our industry and our workers.

My second point concerns the international agreements.

This six-month period, with the French Presidency of the Council, will be decisive in terms of completing the negotiation of these agreements, including, amongst others, the Fisheries Agreement with Morocco.

We are all concerned about the prolonged inactivity - seven months now - of the Community fleet which was fishing in Moroccan waters.

This is by far the European Union' s most important agreement in this area and our main priority: five hundred boats, thousands of fishermen out of work and many economically paralysed areas depend on its renewal.

I would like to congratulate Mrs Haug on her work, which has not been easy, and I am happy that the amounts envisaged by the Commission for the funding of the agreements to be negotiated in 2000 and 2001, the agreement with Morocco amongst others, have been respected.

Meanwhile, Mrs Haug, your report is a clear sign of the European Parliament' s support for the Community' s negotiators and for the thousands of European families who are impatiently waiting for the negotiations to be concluded.

Mr President, first of all I would like to express my gratitude to the Committee on Budgets for their sound cooperation.

Secondly, the Committee on Development and Cooperation is extremely keen to radically expand its budget compared to last year, because we have 45 million children in Africa with no primary education and an increasing number of poor in the world, whilst our continent is becoming increasingly rich.

But we maintain a sense of realism.

We are prepared to make do with reducing spending to the 2000 level and thus cancel out the cut-backs which the Commission proposed in favour of financing Kosovo.

We are aware of the broad support we enjoy in this Parliament.

Thirdly, the issue of modernising the budget is essential. This morning, we talked about the 1998 discharge.

The way this discharge is currently organised leaves a great deal to be desired.

With our help, the Commission would like to change tack.

The new approach involves a clear definition of goals and sectors within regional programmes, explicit grouping of sector-specific goals and a clear division of budget lines. We will, as a result, be able to deploy personnel where they are needed to carry out the activities.

This results in a classification according to DAC sectors.

It is a modernised budget and at the same time, it will inform us whether we have actually achieved the results projected in the budget, as will be apparent from the reports in Parliament.

This budget, therefore, also accommodates the EDF budget, although we are not harmonised legally but we are in terms of content. The sum total will, as it were, show that we are clearly focussed on fighting poverty across different sectors.

We very much hope that with this line of attack, namely a modernised budget, we will be able to turn the negative image, about which Commissioner Patten had every right to complain so bitterly, into a positive image of a Europe which is open to fighting poverty at world level.

- (PT) Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, the discussion on the 2001 budget is progressing.

We are gradually gaining an understanding of the positions being adopted by the Commission, particularly with regard to the preliminary draft budget, and the Council will soon state its position.

I believe that in the course of this complex process, whilst Parliament is working towards consensus on its views amongst Members so that it can advocate these views as vigorously as possible, it must demand complete clarification of the Commission' s proposals, as well as objectivity in the Council' s position. Parliament must then move forward, as a whole, with its own position.

So we have reached a stage in the clarification process when "wait and see" stance is appropriate.

It seems pointless at this juncture to make threats, to proclaim Parliament' s power or to put forward all of our views at once.

Everyone realises, or will realise, the importance of the European Parliament in the budgetary process and how important it is to achieve consensus in this process.

In the meantime, we need to know more about certain fundamental issues, such as:

implementation of the 2000 budget, especially both parts 1-A and 1-B of heading 1, "Agriculture" ;

evaluating the reductions proposed by the Commission in internal policy sectors - heading 3 - particularly bearing in mind the justification for these reductions and their effects on the policies that have been targeted;

promoting an in-depth analysis of the proposals for reforming the Commission, including the staffing needs of the directorates-general and its policy on externalisation;

identifying the priorities of the Council and the Commission with regard to external actions - heading 4 - and clarifying the relationship between commitments and payments under this heading, by investigating the reasons for the worrying delay in the implementation of commitments and by ascertaining the quality of the expenditure;

gaining full information on what is being proposed in the new programme for the Western Balkans, including Serbia and Kosovo, particularly with regard to its financing;

information on how it is intended to finance the common security and defence policy.

As you will see just from these examples, what we need to know goes well beyond the discussion on financing the Western Balkans.

In fact, it would be a mistake for the European Parliament to reduce the discussion of the 2001 budget to this one issue.

I have two final observations. Taking the appropriations for payment as a point of reference, in 2000 these totalled 1.11% of the gross national product of the Member States, but a lower amount is being proposed for 2001, corresponding to 1.0%.

Does it make sense to try to deepen the European project and at the same time to reduce the relative value of the European Union budget year on year?

And, bearing in mind the figures that I have just mentioned, does it make sense to discuss the financing of new priorities and to actually question some of the priorities already established, while at the same time returning considerable unutilised sums to the Member States?

I congratulate Mrs Haug on her fine work.

Mr President, all the points I have to make are addressed to the Council and even though there is no-one on the front bench I am sure the hardworking scribes will relay that information back to the Presidency and to all the Council delegations.

If you look at the Haug report, Parliament wants to find a solution.

We are actually looking for agreement with the Council on the way to get a good budget by the end of this year.

Let us get that point clear.

We are not looking for confrontation, we are actually looking for a way of cooperating together.

But do not be fooled into thinking that we are not prepared to take hard decisions if necessary.

It is pretty hard to get an agreement when the Council just ignores Article 20 of the Interinstitutional Agreement.

Ever since the PDB was published by the Commission they have been duty bound to discuss with us the revision of the Financial Perspective which was proposed by the Commission.

They have failed to do that.

On two occasions we have asked them for trialogues and we have been refused.

And that will be at the forefront of our discussions at the trialogue this week and in the conciliation on 20 July.

Whatever the Council votes on 20 July we will still be making that point in the autumn when it comes to our first reading.

From the very first trialogue of this year with the Portuguese Presidency, the one thing that was obvious to everyone is that we need an agreement between the three institutions on the funding for the western Balkans.

I am pretty sure Parliament has a position now.

The Council's position is about 200 million less than ours, which means that we will not get an agreement on that and unless we have an agreement there is going to be a problem in how we fund the needs in category 4.

It seems now that there might be some possibility of redeploying funds from the MEDA programme to help solve our problem.

For an institution that tells us that what was agreed in Berlin was set in concrete, I think the Council has a bit of a cheek in moving large sums of money from the MEDA programme which they agreed 12 months ago and then lecturing us about what can and cannot be moved.

Having said that, we are of course, prepared to listen to the Council, to hear what their suggestions are and I look forward to our trialogue this week and the conciliation meeting on 20 July.

Mr President, firstly I would like to thank the rapporteur, Mrs Haug, for her excellent report.

The report under discussion concerns Parliament' s provisional position on the budget in the conciliation talks that are to be held.

Just as Mr Wynn said, the problems really mainly concern Category 4: External Action, and the reconstruction of the Balkans.

Last Spring the Commission proposed the so-called CARDS programme for the reconstruction of the Western Balkans. Its total value is EUR 5.5 billion.

EUR 1.9 billion has already been found for the programme; of the remainder, EUR 1.4 billion would be found by the reallocation of Category 4 funds, and 1.8 billion by moving funds from the section of the budget dealing with agriculture.

The sum to be reallocated is therefore approximately 5% of the total sum under Category 4, so that it may be technically possible, given there is sufficient political will.

However, the use of agricultural expenditure for the reconstruction of Kosovo is not fair, as each EU citizen must play a part in the work and not just the farming community.

In addition, the future needs of agriculture are hard to estimate, as the Agenda 2000 reforms are only just starting and the WTO talks are in their elementary stages.

The Commission' s proposal for the CARDS programme is explicit and our group supports it.

EU Member States have to bear the responsibility for the reconstruction of the Balkans, as most of them were keen supporters of the military action there, and many also took part in it.

Unless the countries of Europe help th-e inhabitants of the Balkans in their reconstruction work, honourably and vigorously, then this could result in a deep feeling of resentment and bitterness that could last for generations.

Military action is always an extreme measure, and somebody must always suffer the consequences.

When the Interinstitutional Agreement between the Council and Parliament, which contained the financial perspectives for the years 2000 - 2006, was made, it was forecast that the reconstruction of Kosovo might call for 'fresh' resources.

This is stated in point 3 of Mrs Haug' s report.

The Council has, however, signalled that it will not adopt any amendment to the financial perspectives - not even between categories.

The CARDS programme is so huge that it is impossible to adapt it to the present financial perspectives.

There are two alternatives ahead: to fund just part of the programme, or table an amendment to the financial perspectives.

The Council is responsible for the reconstruction of the Balkans.

If it merely promises money, but is not prepared to give it, its credibility as a global player shrinks.

In that case Parliament will have to act within the framework of the financial perspectives, which will mean severe cutbacks in the CARDS programme.

Mr President, Mrs Haug is rapporteur in a novel situation.

For the first time since the Berlin Agreement, negotiations will take place in the Council before first reading regarding a possible review of the financial perspective.

The Commission' s initiative is necessary in order to finance the Stability Pact for the Balkans.

We also endorse the plan to earmark resources for Serbia in the post-Milosevic era.

Due to the Council' s attitude in last year' s difficult negotiations, there is insufficient trust in political pledges without a financial picture to match.

But although we agree with the thrust of the Commission' s plan, my group would probably have reached different conclusions regarding the size and distribution of the proposed reductions under the external policy heading.

As it stands now, the civil society, i.e. activities by non-governmental organisations in terms of human rights projects, is proportionately having to foot the lion' s share of the bill, and this seems to me a recipe for disaster if we want to achieve stability in the long run.

My group hopes that the Council is prepared to take a constructive stance and at long last to live up to its pledge to make sufficient resources available for new priorities, such as the Stability Pact, without causing lasting damage to existing policy, which is put on the back burner for reasons other than content.

This request has not yet been met - or so it seems, which is detrimental.

The EU' s credibility will be in the balance, and in my opinion, this is a bad start for the further development of the EU' s foreign and security policy.

Mr President, spectrum auctions are pushing up profits in Member States in a manner never before seen.

At the same time the reconstruction of Kosovo, after the illegal war there, is being financed at the expense of other countries receiving aid, in a way that is improper and dishonest.

Our group supports the former position expressed by Parliament, according to which the Council must agree to amend the financial perspectives, particularly with regard to Category 4.

Waging wars and rebuilding countries must not be allowed to happen at the expense of former preferences in the budget.

We also support the committee' s position according to which expenditure set aside for a common foreign and security policy is operational expenditure, which must remain the budgetary responsibility of the Commission.

That will clarify the context in which discharge is granted.

Furthermore, the granting of discharge must also concern a common foreign and security policy.

However, we will not support the Council and Commission line wherein the main political focus will not shift at all towards the prevention of unemployment.

Mr President, rapporteur, ladies and gentlemen, we spent this morning discussing institutional affairs with President Jacques Chirac and this afternoon discussing budgetary matters which really amounts to one and the same thing.

Firstly, the budget with its EUR 93 million in payment appropriations represents a 5% increase, whereas national budgets are subject to greater austerity.

However, the European agricultural budget is also experiencing a period of austerity, even though outwardly it appears to have grown by 7%.

Agricultural revenue has dropped and so this 7% is a mere illusion; we have simply moved from a price support policy to an income support policy.

We are witnessing the continued, and wholly scandalous, misappropriation of EUR 300 million of agricultural funds for the reconstruction of Kosovo, as though the Balkans formed part of the CAP!

The CAP is being drastically cut back to the advantage of the CFSP and, as you will see, this is being carried out with no modification to the Treaties.

We are here as part of a consultation procedure that the Treaties do not provide for and we are operating within the framework of an Interinstitutional Agreement of May 1999 that the Treaties do not provide for either.

Over the past 20 years, non-essential expenditure has increased from 5% to more than 45% of the total budget expenditure without any modification to the Treaties.

We have carried out an institutional revolution, to Parliament' s advantage, without an IGC.

Does this mean that the institutions are to adapt spontaneously or that the European Commission and Council will be able to operate with 20-21 members just as they do with 15 and, empirically speaking, solutions will be found?

If at the IGC in Nice we tried to make enlargement conditional upon deepening, this would be viewed as a pretext for delaying the entry of the countries of the East, and Poland has recently voiced its displeasure at this.

We are all aware that the accession of the countries of the East would mean a budgetary revolution and increased taxes.

In other words, the revolution that looks set to take place in European affairs over the coming ten years is not an institutional one but a budgetary and tax one.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the Haug report is a good report, particularly the part that deals with cuts in agriculture, which, in my opinion, are the key issue.

It is a mistake to make cuts in heading 1, for agriculture is an essential factor in our economy, the economy of the European Union.

Agriculture is certainly a fundamental part of any debate on boosting development or employment, not because any of us are agriculture lobbyists but because agriculture must not lose its funding.

This point must be stressed, although the report also stresses the difficulty of finding sources of funding for that most remarkable and certainly important operation to be carried out in Kosovo.

My question is this: is it possible to carry out the Kosovo operation without taking funds away from other credit lines in our budget?

And the answer is that yes, it is possible, it can be done without cutting other credit lines or interfering with sectors which are fundamental for the development of the economy within the European Union but rather giving them financial security for, if we do not do so, we will certainly weaken the European market and the euro against their competitors, NAFTA and the dollar.

Therefore, since we profess to have an ongoing budgetary policy which must certainly be focused chiefly on boosting economic development and the economic growth of the individual countries, it is not at all sensible to be financing operations such as the Kosovo operation if this means that we cannot predict the extent to which we will be able to finance budget credit lines.

Moreover, the very fact that the Council is setting a precedent by including Special Envoys and all our special interventions in its own budget lines is a serious matter. This must stop.

It must be seen as highly negative. In my opinion, if we invert this trend, we will be doing a great favour to both our economy and Parliament.

Mr President, I congratulate the rapporteur on her report.

I also congratulate her on her efforts to reach a consensus, which is a very difficult job.

There is an irrefutable fact in her report: category 4, which was approved in Berlin, may become insufficient if we continue to add the funding of new commitments.

On the other hand, the implementation figures for programmes outside the European Union are very poor and in some cases this is the fault of third countries and in others, the majority of cases, it is the fault of the Commission.

What is clear is that the budgetary implementations do not match the effort made in recent years to introduce these programmes into the budget.

Furthermore, we have the problem of the European Councils.

Every six months we have new commitments to finance because the Council has identified new priorities without consulting Parliament.

Over time, all of this is resulting in a postponement of the decision on the non-obligatory expenses incurred by the Council, and this decision and postponement were not provided for in the Interinstitutional Agreement.

To sum up, I would like to say that Terence Wynn' s position seems to me to be very coherent.

This is logical, since he is also chairman of the Committee on Budgets.

I believe that - as he says - we must enter into trialogue with very open minds.

It is clear that nobody is managing to give a reliable estimate of what is needed in Kosovo.

It is also true that if we have to cut the external programmes, we must do so according to a principle of linearity and if it is not done in that way, somebody somewhere is assuming a very great responsibility.

Ladies and gentlemen, the Interinstitutional Agreement is something this House must maintain.

If anybody is going to be irresponsible, let it not be us.

Mr President, it was to be expected, but it always causes a certain degree of anxiety, mixed with impatience, to see once again that the negotiation of the European budget still leads to the conflict so typical of recent years.

This is almost a carbon copy of the procedure for the 2000 budget.

Once again, the insufficiency of what was adopted in Berlin, in March 1999, for external policy, rocks the foundations of the Community budget.

The Council' s short-sightedness hinders any logical solution.

Rather than a budgetary cycle, ladies and gentlemen, it appears that we have a budgetary big wheel.

Somehow or other, the Commission has honoured its commitment to propose a multi-annual plan for the Balkans.

However, sincerely, I agree to a large extent with the Council' s criticism that the figures do not seem particularly well founded.

As the former MEP, Lord Tomlinson, said, there is nothing more expensive than a meal amongst Foreign Affairs Ministers: they are always ready to promise money without considering where it will come from.

I truly believe that the proposal is rather inappropriate and has no sense of time.

They are proposing to move funds intended for agriculture to foreign policy and these proposals have not even been accepted by the United Kingdom.

That is no way to make progress.

With regard to Serbia, they propose more than EUR 2 billion over the period.

I would like to remind you, ladies and gentlemen, that in order to topple Pinochet, the European Community spent EUR 10 million.

Our contribution to the campaign against Pinochet in the referendum was EUR 10 million.

We spend EUR 40 million a year on the democratic forces in Serbia and they are asking for two hundred and something more.

When Milosevic falls, I will be the first to accept a revision of the financial perspectives.

However, meanwhile, let us forget the annual EUR 200 million from now until the end of the period.

Let us not push things to the limit.

Ladies and Gentlemen, I do not know if the Council is aware of the real situation.

If it rules out - as it has ruled out - moving money from category 1A, Agriculture, to category 4, and does not accept any increase in the ceiling of category 4 for foreign policy, and all of this must be done by means of a redistribution of resources, we are simply dealing with a case of a non-revision of the financial perspectives.

We are simply dealing with a case of budgetary procedure in the field of non-obligatory expenditure and, therefore, the most that could be said would be that the Council has not complied with Article 20 of the Interinstitutional Agreement.

Mr President, I am grateful for this opportunity to make some general comments about the 2001 Budget.

In respect of the fisheries budget, I note that an increase of over 27% is proposed in the funding of international agreements.

These are the southern agreements with third countries which enable EU vessels to fish in the waters of Morocco, Mauritania, Argentina and elsewhere.

I must remind the House that these agreements currently cost EU taxpayers EUR 269 million a year and are primarily of benefit to the fishing fleets of Spain, Portugal and France.

These southern agreements are always calculated on a cash-for-fish basis while northern agreements on the other hand are arranged on a reciprocal basis.

It is this disparity between southern and northern Member States which is evident in the CAP as well as in the CFP budget.

For example, the Commission recently announced an arbitrary cut in export refunds which will cost the Scotch whisky industry around EUR 32 million a year.

Their explanation was simply that Scotch whisky is a rich industry and therefore does not require any subsidy.

Why then do we discover that it is intended to increase the subsidy to wine growers by 64.5% next year, taking the budget to over EUR 1 billion?

Why is the olive oil industry receiving an 8.9% increase providing them with almost EUR 2.5 billion next year, and most shockingly of all, how on earth can we justify giving to tobacco growers an increase of 2.8% taking their subsidies to over EUR 1 billion when we know that tobacco products kill half a million of our citizens every year.

Meanwhile, the beleaguered dairy sector with dairy farmers suffering across the EU will receive a paltry increase of funding of only 0.3%.

Let us make sure the budget is for all EU citizens and not just for the southern EU Member States.

The vote will be taken tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.

The next item is Question Time (B5-0532/00).

We will examine questions to the Council, which is represented by Mr Moscovici, Minister for European Affairs, who many of you will know since he is a former Member of the European Parliament.

Subject: Common foreign and security policy In view of the imminent development of a common foreign and security policy within the Treaty, what arrangements will the Presidency be making to ensure that Parliament is kept fully informed and is properly consulted in this field?

In particular, when will Mr Alain Richard, Minister of Defence, be willing to appear at a part-session?

Article 21 of the Treaty on European Union provides that the presidency shall consult the European Parliament on key issues and fundamental decisions with regard to the common foreign and security policy, and ensure that account is duly taken of the views of the European Parliament.

Rest assured that the French Presidency will scrupulously adhere to such provisions.

This is particularly true as regards recent developments in common foreign and security policy as a result of the Feira European Council and with a view to the one in Nice.

As you are all aware, the common foreign and security policy is one of the major European projects as well as one of the priorities of the French presidency, as the French President, Mr Jacques Chirac pointed out this morning in his address.

As Mr Alain Richard, French Minister of Defence, has already pointed out, he has every intention of addressing the European Parliament on as yet unspecified dates.

I should also like to point out that either Hubert Védrine or I will address the Committee on Foreign Affairs each month on Tuesday afternoon after the 'General Affairs' Council meeting.

In this way we shall be able to keep the European Parliament informed of defence-related matters.

Thank you, Minister, for your first response during your presidency.

I am especially pleased that we are able to see Mr Richard here.

It is extremely important that the growth of our European security and defence policy commands full public support and respect, and strong and credible parliamentary scrutiny is certainly the way forward.

I simply wanted to highlight the willingness of the French Government and in particular the Minister of Defence, to debate such matters openly with the European Parliament.

Mr President-in-Office of the Council, consensus was achieved at the Feira Summit a couple of weeks ago on the idea that flexibility should be on the IGC agenda.

At the meeting, however, no further details were given as to how flexibility can apply also to the second pillar, that is to say, to a common foreign and security policy.

I would like to ask when the country holding the presidency of the Council will present its own point of view regarding how the flexibility clause can be implemented with respect to the second pillar.

If and when that happens, will those Member States not in NATO be automatically excluded from those decisions, taken on the basis of flexibility, which lead to some Member States proceeding more swiftly along the path to a common defence?

I refer in particular to the statement made last week by Alain Richard, Minister for Defence of the country holding the presidency, in which he expressed his concern in the event that non-aligned countries are fully involved from the start in second pillar development projects.

As you will be aware Mrs Kauppi, the matter of relations between the Member States of the European Union that are not part of NATO took up a considerable amount of discussion time at the Feira European Council and it is well on the way to a successful conclusion.

As regards the flexibility of the second pillar, perhaps you will allow the presidency to take the Intergovernmental Conference in hand, which it will do following the 'General Affairs Council' next Monday, 10 July.

We shall then be able to determine the various views on this matter.

I should like to remind you that the role of the presidency is to successfully oversee the running of the IGC and not state the positions adopted by the various Member States.

I am very pleased to see the President-in-Office here, as a former Member of Parliament.

Will he, in the Nice Treaty or in the negotiations leading up to the Treaty of Nice at the end of the year, propose codecision between Parliament and the Council on matters of common foreign and security policy?

This is to be the lower House, as the President of the Republic told us this morning and if we are to carry public opinion with us in security and defence matters we need a proper position.

So does he agree that codecision is the way forward in this policy area?

Mr Newton Dunn, I stand by my previous response.

I would remind Members in general that we must ask questions.

That is what Question Time is for. The President-in-Office of the Council replies to the questions in the way he sees fit.

Subject: Transport of water from France to Spain and the sustainable management of water resources France is understood to be intending to launch an aqueduct scheme for transporting water from the Rhône to Barcelona, with the participation of the Lyonnaise water company.

The water is apparently intended to be used to develop irrigated intensive farming in Catalonia.

This scheme goes against all principles of sustainable management of water resources at the regional level.

Is the Council aware of this scheme?

Does the Council not take the view that such a course of action is contrary to the precautionary principle and the principle of preventive action in respect of the environment as laid down in Article 174 of the Treaty establishing the European Community, as it removes responsibility from the consumers of water which has been transported from elsewhere?

What steps does the Council intend to take with a view to promoting a policy of sustainable management of water resources in the EU and in order that schemes for transporting water over long distances do not threaten the ecological balance in the regions concerned?

(FR) There is indeed a project, or rather studies, in progress with regard to the transportation of water from the Rhone to Catalonia, but - for the time being at least - it does not involve the French or Spanish authorities.

What is more, the European Parliament and the Council have put forward a proposal for a directive establishing a framework for a community water policy.

It was adopted recently through a conciliation procedure on 29 June 2000.

It should be noted that this framework directive is primarily aimed at conserving, protecting and improving the quality of the environment, as well as promoting the careful and rational use of natural resources.

It sets out the basic principles for a sustainable water policy in the European Union based on the principles enshrined in the Treaty, for example those relating to precautionary, preventative and corrective action by according priority to the source of the threats to the environment, as well as the polluter-pays principle.

It must be noted that this project should also apply to both surface and ground water with the aim of preventing any further deterioration, promoting the sustainable use of water based on the long-term protection of available water resources and helping to mitigate the effects of floods and droughts.

The project is designed to ensure that these water sources are maintained in good condition through a series of measures that Member States are to implement according to a specific timetable.

On the other hand, it follows that all initiatives of this type must automatically be subject to both a socio-economic and environmental assessment.

Thank you for your response, Minister. However, given that you were able to elaborate on the matter, you no doubt have extra information.

When you referred to the studies that have been carried out, I became worried because the reason I am raising this matter is precisely due to the fact that French and Spanish citizens have alerted our attention to it and are asking for more information. Their concern arises because this has already been the subject of a debate in Parliament that was rejected, specifically in the framework of the directive on water.

However, as you are aware, all directives contain exceptions, and this project for the transportation of water could very well come under this exception.

I am therefore seeking your assurance that until impact studies have been carried out and the members of Parliament have been informed, this project will not be the covered by an exception.

I set the project within a global and general framework and stressed that at this stage neither the French nor Spanish authorities are involved.

It goes without saying that as soon as I have further information I shall inform Mrs Isler Béguin.

With regard to her other comments, I should again like to reiterate my final remarks when I said that we must ensure that all initiatives of this type are subject to a socio-economic and environmental assessment as a matter of course.

Mr President-in-Office of the Council, there have been fears expressed repeatedly in connection with the reading of the framework directive on water, that it could be possible later on in the EU to transport water from one Member State to another against the wishes of the first country.

Does the President-in-Office see such a threat as likely, and is there a need to protect Member States against it?

To be honest I have nothing further to add to my previous responses.

Subject: Digital radio Does the Council agree that a political endorsement of digital radio, similar to that given to mobile telephone technology and digital television, could help to enhance confidence in the future of radio?

(FR) I can simply say in response to Mr Perry' s question that owing to the absence of an initiative from the Commission, which should not be long in coming, the Council has still to determine its position on this matter.

Mr President, I am disappointed with that response.

The European Parliament held a hearing just a few weeks ago with representatives from the Minister's country as well as from my own.

The point was made very strongly there by representatives of the radio industry that digital radio is one sector of media communication that is not developing as quickly and as effectively as it might do, and the feeling was that political backing was lacking.

I would like to think that the Council, were they to receive a proposal from the Commission, would behave emphatically in support of digital radio.

A problem has also arisen that various elements of the digital radio spectrum are now being allocated across Europe often quite freely, at no charge at all.

Yet that same spectrum would, of course, be very profitable if were used for telephone communications.

I wonder if can we be assured that the Council of Ministers will look very carefully at this and be sure that it does not pose any threat to the development of digital radio in Europe.

I should like to remind you that digital audiobroadcasting has existed since 1989 and the main problem that still remains to be solved relates to the fact that the receivers are still too large.

One of the key issues that the Council - which is keeping an open approach to all of this - must look into in due course concerns the definition of particular principles that are designed to enhance the legibility and effectiveness of this area of electronic communications.

The issue of convergence between telecommunications, the media and information technology was raised at the end of 1999 during a Council meeting and again on 2 May 2000 during a public debate.

On this occasion the Council highlighted the following points, namely that the regulation should be based on clearly defined political objectives, stimulate economic growth and competitiveness and ensure general interest objectives.

The regulation should also aim at technological neutrality, with the rules that govern communication services being as far as possible independent of the technology implemented to provide these services.

On 2 May 2000, the Council stressed the importance of striking a balance between legal security, chiefly guaranteed by the binding provisions, and the ability to react speedily to technological and market developments, using flexible measures.

In other words, I repeat, the Council continues to approach the issue openly.

Subject: EU-China WTO Agreement Is the Council aware that China has ordered state-run television, newspapers, and billboard owners to stop running Sprite commercials featuring the young pop-star, Sherry Chang Huei-mei, who sang at the inauguration of President Chen Shui-bain?

Is the Council also aware that China has recently warned Hong Kong and PRC business organisations not to trade with Taiwanese firms whom the PRC deems to be pro-independence?

In view of the fact that we have recently signed an agreement with China on their admission to the WTO, how will the Council respond to the use of this type of political blackmail, which is contrary to the principles of free trade?

Mr President, first of all let me congratulate Mr Moscovici on his country winning Euro 2000.

It is very good to welcome a former colleague into a new elevated office but let me remind you Mr Moscovici, of the frustration which we experienced as parliamentarians trying to question the Council.

I hope that the next time that you come back to this chamber you will not respond in the same curt fashion that you did to Mr Newton Dunn, if the presidency wants to work with Parliament.

As to your answer, I disagree with its contents.

I believe the response of the EU in Geneva was appalling.

It was cowardice to the highest degree that we failed to support the US initiative. Had we taken the much stronger position, then we would not be experiencing the arrogance that we see from China.

I hope, the next time this issue comes back to the UN, that Member States will put principle above trading interests.

This is an issue where, in the WTO, China uses trade as a tool of political blackmail, and we should have used the EU/China WTO negotiations for leverage in the same way.

I would like to seek an assurance from you, given what you did say, that in future Member States will take a strong stance in their discussions with China where the abuse of human rights are concerned and will not be blackmailed by any economic threats by China in this regard.

I should like to thank you, Mr Cushnahan, for your personal words of encouragement and for your congratulations following France' s success at Euro 2000 last Sunday.

With regard to your other points, I shall endeavour, during the course of these questions, to express the views of the Council.

I should also like to remind you that the presidency has the mandate to do this on the basis of the positions adopted by the Council.

Minister, I cannot congratulate you on this success, since I must remain completely neutral, as you will appreciate.

Furthermore, I am from a country which suffered an unexpected defeat, like other Members present.

Question No 5 by Ioannis Souladakis (H-0536/00):

Subject: Improvement in the export capacities of the countries of South-Eastern Europe

The Stability Pact for South-Eastern Europe is a political choice made by the European Union to which it has given a very high priority.

Within the context of this policy for south-eastern Europe it is evident that the area' s socio-economic reconstruction will play an extremely important part.

In view of this, what specific action does the Council intend to take, in the form of economic parameters for the implementation of the Stability Pact for South-Eastern Europe, in order to improve the export capacities of the countries in the region as regards the European Union market, and to strengthen their afflicted economies?

I am well aware, Mr President, that we made few friends during Euro 2000.

The European Union supports the idea that the deepening of international trade should, in the long term, replace the dependence on foreign aid and that trade integration should constitute one of the main facets of greater integration in the longer term for the countries of south-eastern Europe in the Euro-Atlantic structures.

The stabilisation and association process is a key feature of European Union policy and, as you will be aware, it is designed to help the countries in question rebuild their economies by restoring and improving their infrastructures as well as redirecting their old war economies and planned economies towards a more market based one.

As a result of the decisions made at the Lisbon European Council, which provided that stabilisation and association agreements with the Balkan countries should be preceded by the non-symmetrical liberalisation of trade, the Commission is set to put forward a specific proposal extending the existing trade preferences through the abolition of tariff ceilings that exist for some industrial products and the improvement of the access of agricultural products to the markets.

The Stability Pact for South-Eastern Europe is generally designed to help the countries of the region attain stability and economic prosperity.

In order to achieve this, a South-East regional group was set up together with a working group on economic reconstruction that also encompasses trade relations.

The importance of liberalising and facilitating trade between the countries of the region, and also between these countries and the European Union, was highlighted, by both donors and recipients, at the regional conference on Pact funding held in Brussels at the end of March this year.

In all areas covered by the Stability Pact, and therefore also in the economic and trade areas, reciprocal commitments between donors and recipients remain the key to the Stability Pact' s success.

The commitment expressed by the countries of the region to implement reforms and generate the right climate for sustainable economic progress lies at the very heart of the Pact.

Thank you for your reply; however, I have the following comments to make: I was debating the Budget 2001 in Parliament before you and the problem again arose of where to find the money to finance the Stability Pact.

In this sense, my question meant exactly that, given that we are dealing with economies which, because of the economic system in place, used to function along different trading, or rather bartering lines. The question which I am basically asking is what can be done to ensure that products from these regions reach the markets of the Member States of the European Union?

In other words, what policies will strengthen production in these regions without the European Union's having to pay out money which, due in part to internal problems, it is having trouble finding anyway.

That is the nub of the problem.

My question is: exactly what steps can the European Union take in order to create these networks, which did not previously exist, so that these people can sell their products?

It is precisely, Mr Souladakis, the aim of the Stability Pact and the Association Agreements, which, as I have reminded you, include provisions in both economic and trade areas.

It is in fact our duty, once again, to agree to non-symmetrical liberalisation to offset the backwardness of these countries. However, I can assure you that both the Council Presidency as well as the European Council Presidency consider the future of this region a priority, which is why the French President has proposed a summit of the western Balkans during our presidency, perhaps in Zagreb.

Subject: Lifting of sanctions against Iraq UN resolution 687, of 1991, indicates that sanctions against Iraq will be lifted if it agrees to renounce the weapons of mass destruction which it is alleged to possess.

Since that time, despite thorough searches by thousands of observers, no such weapons have been found, nor has any capability to manufacture them been discovered, and official reports are wholly reassuring.

However, the embargo against Iraq is still being applied, with dramatically harmful consequences for the Iraqi population. One very typical example is the huge increase in infant mortality, which over the last ten years has been recorded at 1.5 million child deaths due to lack of medicine, food etc.

The 'oil for food' programme cannot constitute an alibi for the crime which is still being committed, since only a small part of the value of what Iraq is allowed to export returns as food and medicines, while the rest is retained for 'compensation' or remains frozen in Western banks, with Iraq unable to use it.

Is the Council looking into lifting the embargo, whose only victims are the people of Iraq, and in particular its small children?

The European Union fully implements all United Nations Security Council resolutions, including those concerning Iraq.

Resolution 1284, adopted on 17 December 1999, is aimed at recommencing UN inspections and, at the same time, improve the so-called "oil for food" programme" , and finally lifting the sanctions against Iraq.

The European Union urges the Iraqi Government to cooperate fully with the UN and its supporting bodies.

The Council notes that since 1998 no checks have been carried out to see whether Iraq is in fact complying with the wholly relevant Security Council resolutions, in particular Resolution 687.

As a result, the embargo imposed on Iraq remains in force.

We are well aware, it is true, of the serious and even worrying humanitarian situation that has arisen as a result of the embargo, particularly for the Iraqi children.

The Iraqi Government is chiefly responsible for this.

However, as the panel of experts presided by Ambassador Amorim noted in April 1999, the Iraqi population would not have suffered such privations had the measures taken in 1991 by the Security Council not had to have been extended.

The international community and the Iraqi Government should do their utmost to ensure that the "oil for food" programme works to the full advantage of the Iraqi people.

This is why the Council welcomes the creation of a United Nations working party that is responsible for making general recommendations on the way in which UN sanctions can be made more effective, for example by better targeting them, and on the ways in which needless human suffering can be avoided.

The Council noted that the United Nations Security Council, in its Resolution 1302, invited the UN Secretary General to appoint independent experts to draw up an in-depth study on the humanitarian situation in Iraq.

I asked the question because there is a certain sensitivity in France to this issue.

I have listened to the President-in-office's formal reply; however, we all know full well that the situation in Iraq is connected with the arbitrary policy imposed by the United States.

Take, for example, the air embargo, which has not been ratified by a single UN Security Council.

We also all know full well that, when Mr Ekeus, the United Nations representative, reported to the United Nations in 1997 after 6900 visits and inspections, he said that there was no reason to suspect that Iraq was harbouring nuclear or chemical weapons.

I should like to ask the French Presidency if, taking account of all this and taking account of the fact that a large slice of Iraq's oil revenues is blocked in a bank, and a French bank at that, in New York, it plans to take any initiatives during the French presidency in order to put an end to this dictatorial regime imposed by the United States at a massive cost to the people and children of Iraq.

You are right to highlight the fact that perhaps France is particularly sensitive to this issue. However, whether or not this is true, it is not renowned for its indifference to the sufferings of the Iraqi people.

You will undoubtedly be aware that my country is a permanent member of the UN Security Council and, I repeat, hopes that all of these resolutions will be observed while at the same time seeking to examine all possible solutions, starting with the rigorous application of the "oil for food" resolution" .

This is the difficult path we must now take.

Mr President, I welcomed the Minister's reply but I would like him to give an assurance to this House that he and the Council will not lose sight in their consideration of this problem of the 604 Kuwaiti citizens who disappeared as a result of the illegal occupation of Kuwait by Iraq and that they will keep pressing the Iraqi authorities for an explanation of the fate of these people.

I should simply like to confirm our intention to examine the matter fully.

Firstly, I think that - although I am new to this role - there are in fact rules governing this particular exercise which require Parliament to translate the questions raised to enable the Council to answer them as precisely as possible.

Secondly, I should simply like to state that no one is sanctioning Mr Saddam Hussein' s regime through these resolutions and I think that the term 'genocide' - used here, if I am not mistaken, in relation to those that have imposed sanctions -cannot be justified.

This is neither France' s nor the Council' s position.

This is not the time to hold a debate on relations between the Council and Parliament with regard to questions, since that would take up time allotted to Question Time.

However, I must say that there are 6 questions which unfortunately, although they arrived correctly in some languages, and owing to a bank holiday in Luxembourg, I believe, did not reach the Council in all languages.

The Council has decided not to answer them.

In any event, this debate can be held in the Conference of Presidents, which deals with these relations and any incidents which may occur.

Question No 7 by Esko Olavi Seppänen (H-0542/00):

Subject: Non-allied status of certain EU Member States

At the Feira European Council discussions are being held on the EU' s defence dimension, and the matter is also up for discussion at the IGC.

Some EU Member States do not belong to the NATO military alliance.

What is the Council' s view of the position of these Member States in any future EU defence cooperation and will those Member States which belong to the alliance respect - as the Portuguese Presidency has proposed - the other Member States' desire to remain outside any alliance?

There is no problem between Parliament and the Commission.

The fact is, we received an explanation of the correct procedure, and it is in fact standard practice that we have the questions translated so as to be able to answer them properly and not have to improvise, since this would impair the quality of the answers.

To come back to the question raised, Article 17 of the Treaty on European Union lays down that Union policy under this article does not impact on the specific nature of the security and defence policy of some Member States, including non-allied Member States.

Similarly, the policy observes the obligations of the North Atlantic Treaty with regard to those Member States who consider that their common defence is provided within the framework of NATO, and it is compatible with the common security and defence policy established within this framework.

After Amsterdam, the European Union undertook a process aimed at enabling it to take all of the measures needed to play a role in the areas of conflict prevention and crisis management, measures that are defined in the Treaty on European Union and known as the Petersburg tasks, without prejudice to the position of the Member States as regards their membership or non-membership of NATO or the WEU.

This was reiterated in the presidency' s report that was approved by the Helsinki European Council.

Mr President, at the meeting at Feira it was decided to increase flexibility.

My interpretation of this is that flexibility will also be introduced in second pillar matters, in a foreign and security policy.

At the same time I have been following the French President' s ideas on how the countries of the European Union should develop at their own pace and on how there should possibly be a hard and solid core of pioneer states.

Do you consider that such a hard core - as the former President of the Commission, Jacques Delors, calls it - could include a country that is militarily non-aligned?

The question posed in this way is extremely complex and since it relates to the IGC overall, I suggest that I give you a more detailed response at a future meeting.

I simply wanted to stress that at Feira we expressed a desire to see the framework encompass non-allied countries and those countries that are not members of NATO and, if it is indeed this type of flexibility to which you refer, it will undoubtedly be implemented.

We shall, besides, have further opportunities to discuss the development of European defence and the intensified cooperation in this field.

Subject: Priorities of the French Presidency as regards the advancement of women What specific measures will the French Presidency be putting forward as its priorities for the advancement of women in Europe?

Mrs Nicole Péry, my colleague and Secretary of State for Women' s Rights, will outline next week the French presidency' s programme in this area to your committee responsible.

My intention here is to simply give a few brief details.

The Council, under the French Presidency intends to deal with several matters relating to sexual equality.

Firstly, the Commission has just sent the Council a communication entitled 'Towards a Community framework strategy for sexual equality' , also a proposal for a Council decision on a support programme for the community strategy on sexual equality, a proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and Council modifying Directive 67/207/EEC on the implementation of the principle of equal treatment for men and women as regards - and this is crucial - access to jobs, training and vocational training and working conditions.

The French presidency, I stress, has already timetabled the presentation of these Commission texts.

As regards the proposal for a decision relating to a programme on the basis of Article 13 of the Treaty and the fact that the programme is due to start on 1 January 2001, the aim of the presidency is to adopt it during the 'employment and social welfare' council on 28 November.

With regard to the proposal for a directive, the French Presidency shall endeavour to make as much progress as possible.

Apart from these legislative texts, the Council, as in previous years, shall also to consider the implementation of the Beijing action plan by the Member States.

What is more, the French Presidency will organise two events in relation to this: a ministerial conference on 27 October in Paris that will focus on three issues - women and decision-making, reconciling family life and professional life and mainstreaming - as well as a symposium on equality in the workplace on 24 November in Paris that will centre on discrimination in recruitment and the difficulties of returning to work.

You therefore have my assurance that the French Presidency will grant the issue of sexual equality particular attention.

Mr President, I am very grateful to the President-in-Office of the Council, Mr Moscovici, for his very promising reply which, furthermore, puts into practice something which Mr Chirac, President of the French Republic, said this morning, when he stated that the French Presidency had ambitious and specific aims.

You have demonstrated this in your reply.

Mr Chirac also told us that one of the most interesting aspects to be dealt with by the French Presidency would be the reconciliation of family life and working life.

In this regard I would like to ask how we will avoid this necessary concept being misused to relegate women further and also what role men will play in the reconciliation of family life and working life.

It is not something I claim to want, especially as the male gender is completely varied, and we are not all the same.

No, I think that it would be best to discuss the matter further with Mrs Péry, and simply say that, from a more philosophical point of view, the idea of reconciling family and professional life is certainly not to disadvantage women or return to a more traditional model, but on the contrary to move towards our common aim of achieving true sexual equality.

We need measures to achieve this and, I do not doubt that the contribution of men to family life forms part of this.

Subject: Council's views on the Pelinka case in Austria On 1 May 1999, Professor Anton Pelinka commented on the Italian television channel RAI on previous statements made by the Freedom Party's Jörg Haider in connection with national socialism.

On 11 May 2000, a court in Vienna (Landesgericht für Strafsachen) found Professor Pelinka guilty of slandering Jörg Haider during the broadcast and ordered him to pay a fine of ATS 60 000.

Mr Haider was represented by his lawyer, Dieter Böhmdorfer, who is now Austria's Justice Minister.

Are Professor Pelinka's remarks not completely within the bounds of acceptability in a democracy?

The question is whether the Austrian court is guilty of serious encroachment on freedom of expression in general and academic freedom in particular, given that Austria is a member of the Council of Europe and of the EU, the founding Treaty of which lays down, in Article 6(2), that the Union shall, as general principles, respect fundamental rights, as guaranteed by the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms.

What view does the Council take of a Member State's Justice Minister having actively pursued a prosecution which blatantly ignores the above Convention and Treaty?

My response to that will be extremely brief.

Of course the Council has been informed of this specific, undoubtedly difficult situation.

However, and you will understand this, it is not within the Council' s remit to comment on legal decisions.

Neither is it able to pass judgement on the way a legal institution is run in one of the Member States.

Mr President, I would thank the French presidency for its succinct answer.

I nonetheless have two follow-up questions, because this is a very serious case of a very dubious character from a democratic point of view.

Fourteen Member States are planning to ask experts from the Council of Europe to investigate certain states of affairs in Austria.

My first question concerns whether the French presidency considers that this request for an investigation should also apply to the Pelinka case, which would be only reasonable.

My second question concerns Articles 6 and 7 of the Treaty, concerning fundamental rights.

I wonder whether the French presidency believes there is cause for examining this case on the basis of Articles 6 and 7 of the Treaty.

(FR) In response to this point, I should simply like to remind those present that a few days ago the Portuguese Presidency, that acted in a very balanced fashion, took measures not on the Council' s behalf but on behalf of the 14, measures that we endorse and that we shall apply both in our assessment of the Austrian situation and to the continued imposition of sanctions.

We shall stick to these measures without adding further ones and of course without taking anything away from them, until we have proof that a significant assessment has been carried out on both the situation and political leanings of the FPÖ, the Austrian Freedom Party.

Mr President, Austria has very strict laws prohibiting fascism, national socialism and the resurgence thereof, and there has been a succession of convictions over the past few years.

Does the President-in-Office of the Council know of any similar, or better, legislation in other States?

Will the Council continue to ignore the fact that the sanctions against Austria decided on by the 14 Heads of Government are in violation of the European Treaties? Will it persist in its refusal to take a stance on the matter, thereby remaining in breach of the Treaties?

Are bilateral decisions not to be dealt with by the Council in future?

I believe I have already answered the questions relating to the maintenance of sanctions and the assessment of the situation.

As regards the other points, I am not in a position to comment in detail on the judicial or legal situation in Austria, but I know that there are other countries which appear to have a far more enviable political situation.

And here I am not talking as President-in-Office of the Council but as a government minister.

The second supplementary question will be put by Mr Ford, and I must remind you that he is the author of the next question, Question No 10, which is not going to be answered as Question No 10, since it is one of the six questions that did not reach the Council in all languages.

Mr President, I should like to express my concern that nobody in the French presidency can read any of the European languages apart from French.

Also on this point, will the presidency confirm that under the Treaty it is the Fourteen - minus the country concerned - which would make a recommendation to suspend Austria from membership, should that be necessary?

I am not arguing that it is necessary, but should it be necessary, could we not expect a view from the presidency over whether this particular case actually causes it some concern?

Is it not right and proper that the same person should not be judge, jury and executioner and that the person making the accusation should not also be the minister of justice at the same time?

Would one not criticise this kind of situation in, let us say, Zimbabwe or some other part of the world, if it arose there?

(inaudible) on the French Presidency' s ability to understand languages other than French.

We are not all uneducated and illiterate.

There are so-called rules of transmission between Parliament and the Council, which have prevented these questions from arriving today.

I sincerely hope that, with or without translation, things will be sorted out for future part-sessions.

With regard to the other points you raised, as you have understood, the French presidency intends to observe the measures that have already been decided on by the Fourteen.

And when I say 'Fourteen' I mean that it is not exactly a Council matter, rather a matter between the 14 Member States themselves.

What is more, I repeat, these measures are of a strictly bilateral nature and do not impact on the fact that Austria is a member of the European Union, with access to all of its institutions and participating in all of its bodies and, throughout our Presidency, will be treated as such. In other words, it will genuinely be treated as a major player within the European Union.

Mr President, I asked the President-in-Office to answer my question whether Article 7 of the Treaties actually asks the Fourteen to take action in respect of a country whose human rights record is called into question.

He seems to imply that this is a matter for the Presidency-in-Office and not for fourteen sets of bilateral relations.

(FR) I think there is some ambiguity surrounding this issue.

No one is saying that Austria has been expelled from the European Union, something I stressed earlier.

At the same time, these measures were adopted by 14 Member States on a political basis, and we are, of course, continuing to act on a political basis while once again fully respecting Austria' s rights as a member of the European Union.

This is one of the questions which will not be answered by the Council, since it did not reach the Council on time in all languages.

Parliament will consider this issue, but today we are not going to discuss it further, if the Members agree.

Question No 11 by Maj Britt Theorin (H-0554/00):

The Commission, and particularly the Commissioner for humanitarian aid, played an important role in the setting-up of the new, permanent International Criminal Court (ICC) in June 1998.

The adoption of the Rome Statute - on which the ICC is founded - was an important step in breaking the tendency towards the systematic use of rape as a strategy of war.

The Statute is the first international accord to stipulate that rape, sexual slavery and forced pregnancy may be treated as crimes against humanity and war crimes.

However, to become a reality, the Rome Statute must be ratified by 60 States.

Although all the EU Member States have signed the Statute, only Italy, unfortunately, has ratified it.

What initiatives does the Council intend to take to ensure that the other Member States also ratify the Statute?

(FR) In order to obtain a precise answer to this question, Mrs Theorin should refer to oral question H-0217/00 raised by Mr Cushnahan during the part-session in March, in which the Council stated that, since these Statutes were adopted in Rome on 17 July 1998, it strongly urged Member States to ratify them as they lay the foundations for the International Criminal Court.

Let us not forget that such ratification, as a legal principle, is, nonetheless, something that relates to the exclusive competence of the sovereign Member States.

Mr President, it is good news that France and Belgium have just recently ratified the treaty concerning the International Criminal Court, but I am nonetheless concerned about developments.

It is now two years since the Treaty arising out of the Rome Conference was signed, and only a fifth of the States required have ratified the creation of a permanent International Criminal Court.

At this rate, it is doubtful whether we shall meet our December deadline.

I certainly think the EU ought to be leading the way in creating an international legal system and, when the national legal systems do not function, the international community must be ready to take action against the worst offenders.

That applies especially to attacks on women and girls and to the deficiencies we know existed in devising and implementing the war crimes tribunals in connection with Rwanda and Yugoslavia in the 1990s. These clearly show that present systems are inadequate for combating crimes such as forced pregnancy, sexual slavery and systematic rape.

If the ICC is to become a reality and to operate effectively, broad international support is required.

I must nonetheless ask the Council if it is planning to take special initiatives to encourage ratification, also by non-EU States. Russia and the United States are important in this connection.

Once again, the Council is of the opinion that the successful conclusion of the conference on the creation of an International Criminal Court would be a significant historical achievement in terms of making the world a safer and more just place.

How can we even consider adopting a harder line at the same time, given that we cannot encroach on the sovereignty of States as regards the ratification of Treaties?

I should also like to point out that France, for example, has also ratified this Treaty, which it strongly supports and a few months ago I accompanied the French President on a visit to The Hague during which we paid a visit to the International Criminal Court for the former Yugoslavia.

This demonstrates to what extent we are committed to this matter, however our only weapon is our ability to urge them to cooperate.

Subject: Role of the diamond trade in African wars It is a known fact that the violence in both Sierra Leone and the Great Lakes region is linked to the monopolies on local mineral deposits and the struggles to gain control of those monopolies.

Some Member States, for example the United Kingdom, are already planning to impose an embargo on Sierra Leonean diamonds because there is ample evidence that the trade in precious stones has been and is still being used to finance the RUF guerrillas.

Is the Council considering the possibility of influencing the trade in diamonds from Sierra Leone and the Great Lakes region in a way that might prove conducive to peace in those areas?

If so, could it say what steps it is taking or will take in the immediate future to achieve that end?

The Council has voiced its concerns on several occasions in relation to the illegal diamond trade that is fuelling conflicts in several countries in Africa, for example in Angola, the Democratic Republic of Congo and Sierra Leone.

On 13 June, the Council warned the government of Liberia that it was not acting responsibly with regard to the situation in Sierra Leone, particularly in relation to the illegal trade in diamonds. The European Union will take this into account in its policy, especially within the framework of the Lomé Convention.

Let me specify, however, that the Council has not yet discussed the initiatives put by the United Kingdom to the United Nations Security Council, nor has it established contact with the largest diamond importers with a view to preventing the illegal trade in diamonds.

Mr President-in-Office of the Council, I truly regret your reply.

I believe that the problem relating to the trafficking in diamonds, which has cost, and is costing, many lives, deserves much more decisive and firm attention from the Council.

I clearly cannot blame you for this, since you have just taken over the Presidency, but I would ask you to adopt much more energetic and forceful decisions.

The European Union is committed to promoting peace and stability, not only in Europe, but throughout the world.

If diamonds are not controlled it is clear that peace and stability in Africa cannot be promoted.

In the case of Sierra Leone, Great Britain had supported the embargo, and France as well, to a certain extent.

The Council could promote a generalised embargo of all diamonds originating in Africa and, above all, the control of certificates.

We know these measures would be difficult to implement but, in any event, any advance in this respect would save human lives and contribute to the pacification of truly dramatic conflicts in Africa.

Yes, I was simply outlining the stage the Council' s work has reached, which does not mean to say that we are not giving the matter our fullest attention and will not keep you regularly informed.

I was merely giving you a progress report.

Mr President-in-Office of the Council, Question No 13 is one of six questions which the Council will not reply to today because of procedural problems.

As the author is not present, Question No 14 lapses.

Question No 15 by Mr Medina Ortega will not be replied to because its subject appears in the agenda of the present part-session.

Subject: Violations of Cypriot airspace by Turkish fighter-planes Cyprus, a country which is due to join the EU within the next few years, is continuously subjected to Turkish aggression.

Apart from the fact that the Turkish army has occupied 37% of Cypriot territory for 26 consecutive years, Turkey - a candidate for EU membership - disputes the island's status as an independent state on an almost daily basis.

The latest incidents have been the subject of complaints to UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan on mass violations of Cypriot airspace and the Nicosia F.I.R. by a total of 78 Turkish fighter-planes on 27 and 30 April, and on 1, 4, 5, 8, 9, 10, 12, 17, 18, 19 and 26 May 2000.

The complaints were lodged through the most official channel by means of a letter from the Permanent Representative of Cyprus to the United Nations, Ambassador Zackheos, to Mr Annan on 5 June.

What is the Council's official position on violations of the national sovereignty of an independent Member State of the UN and a candidate for EU membership, and to what extent are the tactics pursued by Turkey consistent with conduct befitting a modern European State?

Mr Marinos has drawn the Council' s attention to the violations of Cypriot airspace by Turkish fighter planes.

The Council values the principle of sovereignty highly, and in this case can only reiterate its commitment to Resolution 353 of 20 July 1974 of the United Nations Security Council as well as Resolution 3212 of the United Nations General Assembly of 1 November 1974 which requested all States to respect the sovereignty of the Republic of Cyprus.

The Council of course expects all applicant countries to observe European values and establish good neighbourly relations with their neighbours.

With regard to Cyprus, the process for resolving the Cypriot problem was launched under the auspices of the United Nations.

The Council, which supports the efforts of the United Nations Secretary General, expects Turkey, and other countries, to contribute to the success of these negotiations in order to achieve a just and lasting resolution to the Cypriot question.

I had understood the question perfectly.

I simply wished to reiterate my previous answer while stressing that we could not claim that Turkey was being provoked in any way to adopt an aggressive position.

Minister, I understand your unwillingness to give a clear, spontaneous reaction to Turkey's intolerable conduct in Cyprus.

Your predecessors were equally unwilling to condemn Turkey's conduct in Cyprus outright and, I fear, your successors will take the same approach, now that the American-, but not just the American-inspired formula of two sets of rules for and two attitudes towards Turkey has been adopted, together with the convenient method of taking refuge in pretexts such as the supposedly clear prospect of settling the Cyprus question, which has lasted 26 years now, and the supposedly concomitant need to appease the puppet of Ankara, Mr Denktash.

Nonetheless, allow me to risk another question, in the hope this time of receiving a satisfactory answer.

Is the French Presidency ready and willing to stop acting like Pontius Pilate and to make it unconditionally clear to Turkey, on behalf of the European Union, that, first: Cyprus will become a full member of the European Union, irrespective of whether or not the Cyprus problem is solved first, given that no such solution will be possible due to Turkey's intransigence and, secondly: that Turkey will forever remain a candidate and only a candidate country if it continues to violate the fundamental principles of international law and the European ideal?

Subject: Milosevic Over the last few days, a number of media have carried reports that one Member State of the European Union is currently acting as a mediator in an effort to find a 'way out' from the serious situation in Serbia.

Those media allege that, together with other members of the international community, that Member State is working on a scenario whereby Mr Milosevic and his family would be granted exile and protection, i.e. immunity from prosecution by the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, in exchange for his giving up power.

Does not the Council feel that such a scenario, if it ever became reality, would constitute a complete U­turn in the policy pursued hitherto by the European Union against persons indicted by the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia?

Does it not also feel that a U-turn of this nature would have serious consequences for the credibility of the future International Criminal Court?

The indiscreet remarks to which Mr Dupuis refers, that were published by some sections of the international press and concerned confidential negotiations between some governments with the aim of guaranteeing President Milosevic and his family exile and protection, have been officially denied by all of the governments concerned.

The European Union' s policy that aims to guarantee full and unconditional support to the International Criminal Court for crimes committed in the former Yugoslavia, and all initiatives undertaken to apprehend all persons accused of these crimes and subject them to international justice, remains - I assure you -absolutely and wholly unchanged.

) Minister, I am completely satisfied with your answer and I note your voice is failing you somewhat owing to the length of this session.

I should like to thank you for your positive start and hope that the rest of the presidency continues well.

We also thank the Minister for being present, and we naturally hope that his cold will clear up.

These summer colds need a lot of attention.

Since the time allotted to Questions to the Council has elapsed. Questions Nos 18, 21 and 24 will be replied to in writing.

That concludes Questions to the Council.

(The sitting was suspended at 7.45 p.m. and resumed at 9.00 p.m.).

Draft supplementary and amending budgets (SAB) for 2000

The next item is the joint debate on the following two reports:

(A5-0183/2000) by Mr Bourlanges on behalf of the Committee on Budgets on draft supplementary and amending budget 1/2000 to the budget of the European Communities for the financial year 2000;

(A5-0192/2000) by Mr Virrankoski on behalf of the Committee on Budgets on draft supplementary and amending budget 2/2000 to the budget of the European Communities for the financial year 2000.

As Mr Bourlanges is not yet here, I should like to give Mr Virrankoski the floor for five minutes.

Mr President, draft supplementary and amending budget no. 2/2000 contains appropriations for the Council and for Parliament.

The Council' s budget is EUR 6.635 million.

This is going towards the needs of a common foreign and security and defence policy.

EUR 5.877 million are estimated to be required for renting, renovating and furnishing a new building.

This building will be for the needs of the staff required to implement the policy.

EU military staff will be posted there, for example, including military experts who have been transferred from Member States.

They may be around 45 at first, but that number may later grow to 60 or even 90.

Their pay will amount to EUR 758 000 by the end of the year.

Under the old gentleman' s agreement, neither institution - neither the Council nor Parliament - has become involved in the other' s draft budget.

The draft supplementary and amending budget for the European Parliament contains an appropriation of EUR 15 million for an additional prepayment for office space in Brussels.

This will reduce annual interest by EUR 2.2 million over a ten-year period.

This will leave a margin in the financial perspectives of EUR 69.1 million.

The Committee on Budgets transferred EUR 38 million of unused funds this year by means of a C6/2000 to fund this office space, the Spinelli building.

As the President has also been able to transfer funds for this purpose, altogether at this stage we can use around EUR 58 million for accelerated payments, which will lessen annual payments over the ten-year period by around EUR 8 to 9 million for Parliament, which is a great relief.

It is only reasonable that the European Parliament should pay for its office space ahead of time.

In that way interest payments are saved and, at the same time, we have a little room for manoeuvre in the budget for the years to come.

We shall need this, as, with eastward enlargement, Parliament' s other expenses will increase.

Parliament' s share of Category 5 expenses, or administrative expenses, in supplementary and amending budget no. 2/2000 will now rise to 20.41%, which is just over the 20% ceiling that Parliament itself set.

Originally, when the budget was being drafted, the share of administrative expenses was to remain below 20%.

As it is very likely that a considerable portion of the appropriations set aside for members' regulations, for example, (which amount to EUR 60 million), will remain unspent, and as more than half the year has now gone by, this ceiling may be reviewed at the end of the year.

On the other hand we must realise that Parliament is saving money, as the investment it is making is a most prudent one.

The Council' s budget is interesting, as there are appropriations in it for the first time for a common security and defence policy.

Structures are being created for the Council for the defence dimension to be tied more tightly to the work of the EU, in accordance with the conclusions of the Helsinki Summit.

This will be an extremely difficult issue for the small, non-aligned countries, such as Finland, for example.

The scars left behind in Kosovo, after the crisis management operation, are frightening.

How justified is humanitarian military action, and what are its limits?

A big problem will be future budget technology.

Article 28 of the Treaty is unclear, particularly regarding a common security, defence and military policy.

Administrative expenditure is part of the EU budget, but the Council has discretionary powers with regard to operational expenses.

What then is to be the practice in future, and how much of this expenditure will we try to place under Category 4. External Action - which is already now overburdened?

In future talks, the classification of expenditure must be made clearer and executed more effectively, to comply with Parliament' s wishes.

Before I give Mr Bourlanges the floor for five minutes, I should like to point out that we have an extremely long agenda today and I should therefore like to ask you to keep to the speaking time where possible, otherwise we shall be here until midnight.

Mr President, I shall endeavour to act on your good advice.

The supplementary and amending budget presented here should not pose any major problems for the simple reason that, if adopted - and it is good to see that Parliament has an opportunity to introduce several elements and budgetary choices that suit it and are to its liking, generally speaking, it is a draft that the Council will consider positive as well.

In fact, as far as this draft budget is concerned, the Council is the outright winner and legitimately so; not by scoring a victory against us, rather it is a winner all round.

This is because this budget is essentially designed to enable the Council to recover the surplus balances from last year, which amount to EUR 3.2 billion.

It includes a lower contribution in terms of the British rebate and a greater yield in own resources, for example customs duties, all of which is deducted from the costs it has to bear.

The draft presented here can therefore be considered positively by both the Council and Parliament.

This is firstly because during the trialogue, we all agreed that the budget presented should not be limited to merely returning the balances to the Member States, but should also include expenditure and constitute a genuine supplementary and amending budget.

For Parliament this represents a limited victory but a significant one nonetheless.

In the second place, we have made several decisions that can be viewed in a positive light.

First, we have introduced a special contribution for orphan drugs of up to EUR 1 million.

Thanks to the legal basis that now exists we are able to fund these orphan drugs.

This is considered a priority by the committee responsible, the Committee on Budgets and Parliament itself.

Second - and this is the second major contribution to the issue - we have introduced extra resources, which total some EUR 11 million. Five million are to go to the High Representative in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and six million to the United Nations interim mission in Kosovo to fund the interim civil administrations.

Once again, the legal bases exist to make these possible.

We have the resources, the needs are there, Kosovo and Bosnia and Herzegovina are top priorities and we have chosen to finance them, but the question is how.

This is to be achieved using commitment appropriations from the ECIP appropriations that no longer serve a purpose and, though they exist as appropriations, the absence of legal basis means that they cannot be used.

It is therefore expenditure that has been secured by a sacrifice that barely costs us anything.

The third significant element relates to the financing of the special aid for Montenegro.

You will be aware that we were all against this aid being financed with resources from other foreign programmes, in particular the MEDA programme.

We therefore decided to fund it using the margin which totals 21 million in this heading.

Budgetary history works in our favour in this case and by using almost this entire margin, this initiative can be financed without any reduction or transfer from other appropriations, which is highly satisfactory.

Now - and I shall end on this point - the main question that remains to be answered is whether or not the Council will support us from a procedural point of view.

We have had a first reading in the Council, this is our first reading, and we should very much like to conclude matters on the basis of this first reading.

In other words, we hope that the Council' s second reading that takes place on 20 July will take up our first reading, if not we shall have to proceed to a second reading.

I do not believe that it would be in the Council' s interest - and it is a pity that they are not present this evening - to do this.

What is more, I should like to stress another important point in that if we proceed to a second reading, in order to adhere to the strict timetables set, we should have to attend a session in August in order to vote on this SAB at second reading, which is obviously out of the question.

It has always been the rule in Parliament and the other institutions that August is excluded from the timetables set.

I am sure that the Council will adhere to that rule as it is in their interests, our interests and both of our interests to agree on both the procedure to adopt as well as the substance of the budget.

Mr President, Commissioner, fellow members, it may only be July, but today, the European Union and the European Parliament come to the Member States bearing gifts in the form of a supplementary budget refunding EUR 3.2 billion to their original owners.

In short, we are not handing out gifts; we are returning the money to its original owners, i.e. the Member States and, at the end of the day, the taxpayers.

This shows that we are handling funds properly and the rapporteur, my friend Jean-Louis Bourlanges, has just set the facts of the matter out clearly for us.

I should like to extend my warmest thanks to both him and Mr Virrankoski for the supplementary budget, which applies mainly to Parliament and the Council.

We are spending funds economically, that is our main job. We are handling funds properly, and that too is our main job.

This was a topic which we were able to focus on this morning.

Allow me to make one comment to the Council.

I hope now the building is finally ready that Mr Solana will at last be able to move in with his work and his top secret documents.

We really do have more important things to worry about than how to hide papers from unwanted visitors.

That was why I voted passionately in favour of this transfer of funds, so that these technical problems can be solved once and for all and nothing more can stand in the way of a successful European security and defence policy.

As far as Parliament is concerned, we have used our supplementary budget to reduce interest payments still further.

This gives us room for manoeuvre within the margin which we set for ourselves in category 5 and ensures that we can use the money reasonably and sustainably for parliamentary work and not for interest payments as part of our building policy, which is why the PPE will, of course, be voting in favour of both the Bourlanges and Virrankoski reports.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I have nothing much to add in principle to what has already been said.

We too shall, of course, be voting in favour of the two reports.

What I have to say refers to supplementary and amending budget 1 which, as Mr Ferber has just said, brings Christmas in July for the Council.

The Council has the enviable task of being able to claw back and budget EUR 3.2 billion.

If only we could attract the same intensive and intense attention and discussion when we discuss the fact that we are looking for 200 million in order to balance the budget next year and finance a task which has a huge effect on Europe, i.e. Kosovo or the Balkans as a whole.

The figure under discussion at present is 3.2 billion, i.e. sixteen times that amount, and it will rightly be refunded, on that I have no doubt.

The figure of 200 million will then probably be discussed elsewhere.

We had this problem last year and we shall no doubt face a similar problem again this year.

In terms of order of size, it may perhaps be a little more, but the principle is the same and it is a problem we have to solve.

My request to the Council is: bear this in mind, including for the forthcoming negotiations.

It would be wonderful of course if we did not have to give back all the money which we are now refunding, if there were an agreement between the Council and Parliament whereby we could retain some of the money for contingencies.

That would, of course, enable us to change the whole modus operandi between us in the future.

I admit it is a highly unusual proposal, but we should consider the possibility of a reserve for contingencies.

I think that would help to defuse individual budget debates.

I should like to address another two parts of the supplementary budget.

The first is that, thanks to the excellent proposal by our rapporteur Mr Bourlanges, we have indeed managed to provide 20 million for Montenegro, where we have agreed to urgent procedure.

However, we must find this 20 million by squeezing the margin dry. We cannot use the 3.2 billion; instead we must squeeze the margin dry.

We do not need to be told, as the English say, to put our money where our mouth is, i.e. where it is needed; on the contrary, we are giving the money back and then looking around for spare change in order to perform our duties.

I should like to ask the Council to be a little more circumspect in its announcements and promises in the future unless, at the same time, it intends to tell us what we should cross out elsewhere.

I can only ask the Council in the present procedure - relating to supplementary budget 1 - not to cause any more problems by withholding its approval.

It really would be most welcome for the forthcoming budgetary procedure if the Council could be accommodating here and vote with us.

That would be a good sign and could shape the forthcoming budget debates.

My request to the Council is: please proceed as I suggest; we shall be more than happy to acknowledge such a procedure.

Mr President, the rapporteur has already explained the SAB is asking to approve two separate sums of money.

I hope that these sums have been arrived at after taking good account of the principles of budgetary prudence and value for money.

The political decision to approve the building for Mr Solana and the 45 military personnel had already been taken by the fifteen Member States at Helsinki.

I would like to raise three issues about this.

Firstly, it is not clear why the military personnel in the building should be counted as administrative expenditure.

They would more appropriately come under the heading of operational expenditure.

Secondly, I understand there is a gentlemen's agreement according to which the European Parliament and the Council agreed not to interfere with each other's budget.

I believe this has been pushed to its limit.

The Council's interpretation of the gentlemen's agreement is certainly imaginative.

The agreement applies to buildings and Council staff but not necessarily to seconded military personnel, whose salary comes from their own Member State.

However their overheads would be paid for by the EU in the future with no real monitoring or accountability role by any institution.

Thirdly, I am not satisfied with the use of the SAB as an instrument for this because these extra needs were foreseen prior to the conclusion of the budgetary process last year and should have been incorporated in this year's budget.

In accordance with the spirit of the gentlemen's agreement, I will not comment on the need for 45 military personnel in the building.

That will surely be as safe as Fort Knox.

The point I wish to raise here is that Council must apply the same sort of budgetary rigour to its administrative expenditure as it expects of other institutions.

And I would like some reassurance in the future that this expenditure will be spent in the most efficient and economic way possible.

On Parliament's request for the extra 15 million for the additional advance payment for the new building in Brussels, although it can be identified as a prudent step which will allow considerable savings in the future, I am concerned about the messages that this may convey.

I believe it is crucial for Parliament to introduce activity-based budgeting as a matter of utmost urgency.

I had in fact forgotten to mention the fourth amendment, which, as it does not refer to expenditure, may appear less relevant, but it would be wrong to assume this.

I simply wanted to say that one of Parliament' s amendments included the creation, in B5-671N, of a line for financing a 'Rapid Reaction Facility' which is designed - pursuant to the provisions of the Interinstitutional Agreement on budgetary discipline - to make it possible, thanks to a token entry, to allocate sufficient resources when the regulation is finally adopted.

The Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy considers this a priority and I regret not mentioning it earlier.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, here we are, at the beginning of the second half of the year 2000, debating the first two proposed amendments to the current budget.

The first proposed amending budget relates to the Commission's budget.

The second relates to the Council's and Parliament's budget, in both cases on the question of building policy.

While the extra 15 million granted by Parliament is to be used to pay off the buildings early, thereby saving interest in the future, the extra Council expenditure will give rise to further expenditure in the future because other buildings will be rented in Brussels to house sectors such as the security policy.

As the Commissioner responsible for budgets, I naturally take a more kindly view of expenditure which saves money in the future - that is meant as a little dig at the Council, which is not yet here - although the Council's concerns are also well founded.

If new tasks are to be adopted, then they need to be given staffing and administrative support.

I only hope that the Council also grants the Commission the same courtesy and does not use one sauce for the goose and one for the gander.

Supplementary and amending budget 1 contains important amendments on the income side - as has been stressed - and on the expenditure side of the Budget 2000. On the income side, the refund of the surplus EUR 3.2 billion from 1999, as already mentioned.

A number of other important corrections have also been made, meaning that contributions for the year 2000 can now be finalised.

On the expenditure side, the following amendments have been made: provision has been made in the budget for the planned Repatriation Fund for non-military intervention in crisis areas, as already mentioned by the rapporteur.

The funding for the UNMIK high representative in Kosovo and Bosnia has been amended and EUR 11 million will now be provided.

For Montenegro, additional aid of EUR 20 million is to be provided.

I should like to thank the rapporteurs and to tell the rapporteur, Mr Bourlanges, that the Commission has accepted all Parliament's proposed amendments, even where, for example in the case of Montenegro, the remaining margin is extremely tight, but that means we must be economical and that is what we intend to be.

The Commission will do its best to ensure that the Council does not take this to a second reading, thereby postponing the resolution until September.

Perhaps the reduction in payments will be incentive enough for the Council to follow Parliament's example in coming to a rapid decision, for which I should like once again to thank the House.

You belong to the progressive school in the Commission, which understands that, in evening sittings, the popularity of the speaker rises in direct proportion to the brevity of his or her intervention.

The vote will take place on Thursday at 12 noon.

The next item is the report (A5-0180/2000) by Mr Mombaur on behalf of the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy on the Commission's second report to the on the state of liberalisation of the energy markets Council [COM(1990) 198 - COM(1999) 164 - COM(1999) 612 - COM(2000) 297 - C5-0163/2000 - 2000/2097(COS)].

Mr President, the gas and electricity market is, without doubt, essential both to Europe's competitiveness and to environmental protection.

We have drafted a report in response to four Commission documents, the basic aim of which is to make one overall market out of fifteen individual markets.

As rapporteur for the committee, I should like to draw the House's attention to a number of points, Mr President, but perhaps you will allow me to stop for a moment because Madam Vice-president has just joined us.

I repeat, the basic aim of our report is to respond to four Commission documents and to make one overall gas and electricity market out of fifteen individual markets.

The committee has identified a number of points here, which I should like to list.

First, the Union citizens' right to freedom of establishment and freedom to provide services has so far only been partially implemented.

We advise that this implementation be accelerated.

Secondly, we welcome the fact that suppliers are forming new structures and we call on the Commission in its capacity as the competition authority, in collaboration with the national mergers and monopolies commissions, to ensure that new monopolies do not emerge, that new suppliers have free access to the grid, that exchanges are set up and that consumers can change their supplier.

Thirdly, we are concerned about security of supply and consider that great care should be taken to ensure that the Member States which so wish can impose so-called public-service obligations on the competitors involved.

The Treaty contains rules on transparency and clarity in this respect but it also allows the Member States to make their own decision here.

We want to ensure that this remains the case.

Most, although not all Member States have introduced regulators.

We note that, in the countries in which regulators have been introduced, not only large consumers, but also medium-sized and small consumers can take better part in the market and the conditions for using the grid are clearer.

Perhaps we need to reconsider if the negotiated network access model is the right approach, because it makes life easy for large consumers but difficult for medium-sized consumers and may be an instrument which hampers the European market as a whole.

Fifthly, the grids are the central market place for the markets.

We therefore need free access, and that means that tariffs must give the market the right signal of non-discriminatory access for everyone and - and this is the purpose of the so-called Florence process - good cross-border tariffs must be set which allow cross-border trade.

A model has been worked out here whereby the costs of cross-border trade are paid into funds.

The money is paid in by the national grid operators and paid out to those providing through lines.

Commissioner, Madam Vice-president, I have two comments to make on this.

First, we feel that the costs calculated by the grid operators appear to have been plucked out of thin air.

We need to examine these costings closely in order to ensure that they are not completely out of line.

Secondly, the costs included in the tariffs must be sure to give the market the right incentive, i.e. they must cover all losses and encourage investment.

That is an important point in this process.

Sixthly: not all cross-border services have the necessary capacity.

This needs to be calculated and, if necessary, rectified or allocated in accordance with the markets, perhaps by auction.

Then there are two more points which I should like to address.

We hope to discuss with the Commission in committee exactly how imports of gas and electricity from the Central and Eastern European countries are to be dealt with, because we do not want to damage our own gas and electricity market in Europe by accepting different safety standards or the wrong competition terms.

Finally, in the case of electricity, transmission system operators have formed an association and it was with the help of this association that results were achieved in Florence.

We call on the Commission to use its influence and to take its own action to form a similar association for gas transmission system operators so that results similar to those achieved in Florence can be achieved in Madrid in the parallel process for the gas sector.

Energy, and electrical energy in particular, is of enormous importance to economic activity and social well-being, with a volume of business of some EUR 150 billion per year.

Since the first directive on its liberalisation was adopted in 1996, and the second in 1998, there has been a significant fall in prices, especially in the countries in which those directives have been most strictly applied.

I agree with the Commission, and with the rapporteur, on the need for liberalisation to be speeded up, so that the Community can fully benefit from a dynamic and competitive market.

Nevertheless, despite the fact that the current regulations lay down the essential principles on the conditions, methods and pace of liberalisation, there are certain extremely important aspects which must be dealt with by means of additional measures and specific solutions.

I am talking about the management of congestion, the cross-boundary aspects and the existing bottlenecks in the European transport networks, which hinder the balanced distribution of the benefits of these measures, which may facilitate the creation of a single market at Community level.

On the other hand, there is still the practice of discriminatory prices for transfer between the Member States and the monopolies which own the networks, which hinders the genuine liberalisation of the sector.

I believe that these practices, as well as the possible substitution of the well-known national monopolies by a European oligopoly, should be combated relentlessly by the services which come under the responsibility of the Commission.

Although this issue is of concern to us and deserves much consideration, I would like to end by supporting the balanced report of the rapporteur and highlighting the need to realise the expectations of our citizens as soon as possible.

Mr President, in his report Mr Mombaur has certainly given a comprehensive coverage of the implications of the liberalization of these markets.

Energy, of course, is not just any good or service.

It is very basic and very essential and has to be treated differently from normal goods.

The two directives were very carefully calculated to ensure that there would not be huge and sudden job losses - approximately 250,000 jobs have been lost in this sector, with more to come - and secondly to allow those Member States which had invested heavily in, for example, nuclear energy to do some strategic planning and not leave them with too much in the way of stranded costs.

For that reason they were not full speed ahead directives.

Nevertheless they should have been implemented on time by every Member State and they were not.

Those which delayed were wrong, especially those which at the same time took advantage of the opening of markets elsewhere and we have evidence that this also applies to countries outside the European Union.

I have said that the job losses were very considerable.

There has also been a great deal of upheaval and restructuring and some evidence of the formation of new monopolies, something which must be combated.

There has been a diminution in the amount of research and development and that is a shame.

There is a lack of harmonization to date and Mr Mombaur is quite right to call for harmonization.

I am fairly sceptical about allowing the regulators to do that through the Florence work.

The question of public service obligations is mentioned several times in the report.

The Socialist Group has put forward an amendment asking for a framework directive ensuring that in sectors like energy services of general interest are protected.

I hope that will be supported.

Although there are difficulties with the two directives and liberalization, it is part of creating Europe and lower prices do benefit people.

However there are environmental implications which we have not taken very seriously.

The Lisbon Council asked the Commission to look at the possible need for an acceleration.

I do not agree, however, with preaching to Member States and telling them what they should be doing.

It is up to them to decide.

I am very anxious that renewable energy is supported in a liberalised market.

That is not easy to do and it is something the Parliament holds dear.

I am very concerned about the threat to combined heat and power in the gas directive.

That needs to be rectified very quickly.

Mr President, Commissioner, I would first of all like to thank the rapporteur for the great care he has taken over this report.

Two major factors can be identified with regard to the liberalisation process of the energy market.

First of all, the liberalisation process does not proceed at the same pace in all the Member States and secondly, there is also a difference in timing within the respective Member States.

Moreover, it is also worth emphasising that the way energy markets are opened up depends greatly on the geographic location of the Member State in question.

For the reasons set out above, it would be preferable to adopt a pragmatic rather than a theoretical approach.

The pragmatic approach is also the way forward if we want to achieve Member-State-specific liberalisation, for, in our opinion, we should not speed up the directive' s implementation but rather carry it out gradually.

Against this background, it is important for the amendment tabled by our group to be approved within the Commission. This aims to force Member States to set up independent regulatory bodies that will be authorised to encourage full competition.

The same amendment also aims to promote the interests of the consumers within the liberalised energy market by guaranteeing universal service provision.

Finally, I would like to emphasise that our proposal on laying down a detailed schedule, in the course of which clearly defined goals would need to be accomplished, is important if we are eventually to achieve gradual, yet full, liberalisation of the energy market.

Acceptance of this proposal within the plenary will put a stop to unfair competition which is currently affecting the electricity market and which is caused by liberalisation being applied in different ways within the Member States.

Mr President, monopolies are not acceptable, whether state or otherwise, and we must be careful with the single market not to create new private monopolies in the energy sector.

I would also like to emphasise that the concept of public service and of the public good must go hand-in-hand with liberalization.

I am referring to social and environmental concerns which this Parliament has always supported but which are not yet sufficiently articulated in the energy sector with reference to the single market.

It is particularly regrettable that liberalization has gone hand-in-hand with a negative impact on energy saving.

This is something that we all pay a great deal of lip service to but we are in practice regressing, we are going backwards on energy-saving.

We must meet our Kyoto commitments: we have international treaties and obligations under them and it is time that we took this more seriously.

I welcome proposals for network access for renewable energies.

Subsidies for traditional forms of energies have been intense and are partly responsible for limited progress on renewables.

It would be very regrettable if Japan, for example, were to surpass us in the new technologies which we have developed and researched over many years.

This is currently something that we should be concerned about.

If we support network access for renewables in Europe, we should not find ourselves in this position.

Liberalization should apply to all energy sectors, particularly the nuclear sector where there are huge subsidies from some states.

Yet the Commission is not tackling this head on.

I have discussed this with Commissioner Monti.

He is a powerful Commissioner and even he is unwilling to tackle some of the Member States head on in this regard.

But it is a level playing field, fair is fair, and the nuclear sectors cannot be subsidised.

Finally on the Florence process, we must involve the Parliament and we must have some democratic involvement in this process.

We cannot just let it remain outside Parliamentary control although it has been useful in some respects.

Mr President, this report again demonstrates that liberalisation, the free market and competition are currently seen as the universal panacea to nearly every economic and other problem.

Yes, I am aware of the few positive developments in European energy policy.

Without doubt, electricity prices have fallen.

However, the fact that the prices of some other forms of energy have spiralled is passed over in modest silence.

Such facts do not fit in with liberalisation mania.

On balance, I feel that a number of very serious problems and misdirected developments in EU energy policy have not been addressed.

First, I would like a discussion on the current, completely non-liberal practice already referred to of massively subsidising nuclear and fossil-fuel energy in their many and varied forms.

Secondly, the EU directive on the internal electricity market must be supplemented by an EU-wide supply directive which promotes an ecological and decentralised energy economy.

Thirdly, a radical rethink of the EU's promotion policy is also needed so as to promote energy savings from renewable sources of energy and regionalised energy policies, rather than the construction of high-voltage lines for a centralised energy economy.

Fourthly, I should like to warn against subverting local energy operations by liberalising right across the EU, as we are doing at present.

Economic aspects and the democratic strength and power of local energy authorities to act, socially and otherwise, are at stake here and must not be sacrificed to liberalisation at any price.

Mr President, I would like to convey my congratulations to the rapporteur for this report.

It is a very balanced piece of work covering quite a wide range of views.

We should point to progress made so far in liberalising the electricity and the gas markets, in particular opening up electricity to more than 60% of the market so far, while also remembering that we need to keep up the pressure for more progress.

It is hard to over-estimate the importance of this process to the competitiveness of our European economies in the widest sense.

I know that in the short term it may be difficult to prove that but I am quite sure that in the long term this is a vital part of making our economies competitive in the wider world.

I also believe that it is very important for us to distinguish between the processes of market efficiency that liberalization implies and other policy objectives that we may wish to achieve, such as the question of universal supply, such as the aims to reduce CO2 and it is very important to keep those two distinct and separate.

I have to say that I share the regret of some colleagues that some countries have been rather backward in implementing these measures and it is ironic that at least one of those countries is that which seeks to accelerate the pace of integration in Europe.

St Augustine 'make me more liberalised but not quite yet'.

I would like to recognise that the fears of the pessimists that liberalization would lead to cuts in security of supply have been confounded.

Private sector provision has delivered the goods.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, Mr Mombaur' s report deals with the energy markets and, as everyone has understood, advocates speeding up the liberalisation of these markets.

At this hour in the day and stage in the debate, I think it preferable and far more useful to get straight to the point with what I have to say.

Personally, when I think in terms of 'energy' I think of security of supply in the long term, the guarantee of public service missions and the contribution to sustainable and environmentally friendly development.

If I can, in addition, think in terms of competitiveness, then I certainly take the opportunity to do so, though, I have to admit, it is not my highest priority.

That is why ladies and gentlemen, I do not agree with the rapporteur' s conclusions, or the vision and proposals put forward by Commissioner Bolkestein in 'Frontier-Free Europe' .

Those who are not in favour of accelerating the liberalisation of public utilities are not old fashioned.

Those who defend public service do not use fear as an argument to defend their values, and those who are in favour of a universal service are not nostalgic, nervous nationalists, but Europeans.

Mr Mombaur, unlike you, I do not have blind and absolute confidence in market mechanisms.

I do not favour price reduction over security.

I defend employment first and foremost and what is more, I never lose sight of the fact that public services constitute a unifying element and an element of the European social model that is so dear to your friend Mr Jacques Chirac. They are of course, also a prerequisite for balanced regional planning whose failure or inexistence would cost far more than the savings you hope to achieve.

I would therefore have liked your report to have taken account of the Treaty provisions relating to general interest services and to have included proposals for measures designed to guarantee citizens' access to public services in energy.

This is because, and this is something I should like to stress, public service in energy is a factor in social cohesion, the fight against exclusion, balanced regional development, respect for the environment, security and lastly a prerequisite for national and European independence.

Rapporteur, I cannot deny that you have worked hard on this and even congratulate you on your efforts, but I cannot subscribe to the ideology that underpins your proposals.

I hope that the amendments tabled by Mr Harlem Desir and other Members that also share my concerns will be adopted because I personally am not in a position to vote in favour of your report as it stands.

I would also like to join in congratulating the rapporteur on an excellent job well done and make two points which have been mentioned by others before.

Firstly, the value of strong regulatory authorities.

It is quite clear from the experience in the fifteen still separate markets that strong regulatory bodies help market access for smaller players, protect the interests of consumers and force the pace of large monopoly-providers which might otherwise feel free to take a more leisurely pace.

Secondly, the value of a timetable.

It was a pity that the Lisbon conclusions did not call for a timetable.

Experience in other areas such as telecom shows that Member States respond better to this incentive and I hope that the Commission will elaborate a specific timetable for liberalization in the months to come.

Mr President, the report on the Commission' s second report to the Council and the European Parliament on progress in liberalising energy markets only takes account of two aspects, namely competition and the deepening of the internal energy market.

In order to justify this strategy of the full liberalisation of the electricity and gas markets, the report sings the praises of the supposed positive effects of competition, namely, reduced production costs, increased job opportunities and even goes as far as to praise its positive macroeconomic effects on the job market.

By what mechanism does he hope this will be achieved, or rather by what mysterious means?

In fact, the liberalisation that has been carried out to date or is in progress has not generated employment and, in some public utilities, personnel levels have even dropped as a result.

According to the trade unions in the ETUC, 300 000 jobs have already been lost and a further 200 000 are threatened.

Everywhere you look employees rights are under threat.

I take issue with another assertion made in the report concerning the reduction in energy prices.

Who will benefit from this and how exactly?

It is commonly known that tariff reductions all too often only benefit large industrial users.

As far as ordinary users are concerned, gas and electricity have become goods that one can either afford or not.

Will users in the not too distant future be asked to pay for their electricity in advance, as is the case in Great Britain, and be forced to go without when their card runs out?

Access to it must therefore be considered a fundamental right.

In our view, only genuine public and democratic regulation would make it possible to rationalise both the production and use of energy while ensuring respect for the environment and basic equalisation.

This would constitute the first step towards a European public service that met the needs of today' s users and employees.

However, such concerns seem far removed from this report, which is why I cannot vote in favour of it as it stands.

Mr President, I should like to start by thanking the rapporteur, Peter Mombaur, and congratulating him on his skilled reporting. And having heard the contributions made today by the honourable members, we really can say that the liberalisation of the energy markets has progressed faster and more efficiently than we expected in the last parliamentary term.

Mr Caudron, it is no longer possible to reverse this and that is how it should be.

Secondly, the energy liberalisation sceptics have been impressively routed.

The prices of gas and electricity have sunk as the result of competition, Mrs Vachetta, including to consumers.

You insist on portraying the large undertakings as the winners here, but you are completely wrong, that is rubbish.

Security of supply to consumers and to the economy has been maintained and the competitiveness of jobs has improved considerably, not deteriorated.

It has improved thanks to international competition.

We still have a whole series of problems to solve.

Too little headway has been made liberalising the markets in individual Member States but we assume that the French presidency will make further progress here.

Secondly, liberalisation must be controlled by the competition authorities and we have a European institution that can and does do that; otherwise private monopolies will replace state monopolies.

Mr Mombaur pointed that out just now.

Thirdly, we need the strict division between energy generation and grid management.

Even the problem of charges and access conditions are, in my view, better solved by a regulatory authority than in voluntary agreements between major associations.

Fourthly, regulated grid access with set prices, following the telecommunications example, is the best way of ensuring that small and medium-sized companies and smaller works departments receive equal treatment.

Both mergers and state aid must be controlled and approved in the future.

I think that this is right in principle, but I think that his deadline of five years is too soon and I think that we need to extend the deadline to ten years, so that European industry has time to develop fully and invest with good prospects in this important future market.

Mr President, it has emerged in the course of this discussion that, for some people, liberalisation is a goal in itself.

I do not think that it, in fact, is.

There must be some purpose to liberalisation, be it lower prices, security of supplies, increased competitiveness or sustainable technological development.

Proceeding from that point of view and inspired, in fact, by the EU directives, we in Denmark have begun a complete liberalisation of the electricity sector.

This entails major upheavals which are causing concern among employees.

When you talk with them about liberalisation, they say, 'We are happy to have liberalisation, but it should be the same for everyone in Europe.'

That is just the problem with this issue.

We have obtained liberalisation in 15 different markets and15 different countries, but we have not in that way obtained complete liberalisation.

It may perhaps be concluded that what we have obtained is liberalisation for liberalisation' s sake.

Employees in the sector shake their heads, and ordinary consumers do not obtain the intended benefits of liberalisation.

It is therefore right to continue with the liberalisation that is under way and implement complete liberalisation.

Of course we should have liberalisation, but it should be on equal terms.

At the same time, it is important to remember that liberalisation ought not to be carried out in isolation.

In future work on liberalising the energy market, we shall make sure that energy policy as a whole is involved.

There is a wide range of considerations to be taken into account.

I am thinking here of consumers, the environment, competitiveness, renewable energy sources and the employees.

There are a good many more agendas we need to engage with, and not only that of complete liberalisation.

Mr President, I would like to thank my colleague, Mr Mombaur, for an excellent report.

The liberalisation of the energy markets is the only real way to safeguard consumers' rights and the credible viability of the Internal Market.

The Commission must take care that the energy market is opened up in a genuine sense and in a spirit of fair play.

Various apparent barriers to competition, such as the bottlenecks created by the power grid operators, must be straightened out without delay.

In addition, the largest European "energy players" must fall into line.

For example, France, whose energy sector is among the most progressive, stubbornly protects its own markets.

What does such a competitive country have to fear in conditions of free competition?

The liberalisation of energy markets also means that the Commission will have to approach various forms of energy on an equal footing.

I cannot help wondering about the statements made by the energy Commissioner, Mrs de Palacio, which suggested that free-flowing water would not be on the list of renewable energy sources.

The Commission must reconsider its position.

Hydroelectric power in the Nordic countries is an environmentally friendly and natural energy source that can often be produced at a competitive price, as is the case at present, thanks to a good water supply.

Hydroelectric energy can currently compete at a price that would even rival imported energy from Eastern Europe and Russia, so there is no call to label future imports of electric power from the east to the Nordic countries, at least, as dumping.

Protectionism among the big energy players in Central Europe is the main reason why cheap hydroelectric power is only getting to the Central European markets with difficulty.

Certification systems will guarantee that consumer choice is in direct relation to the pricing of electricity.

Mr President, I would like to start by congratulating the rapporteur on an excellent report.

The liberalisation of energy markets is an essential factor in the development of the economy.

The objective of improving competition and lowering prices for all consumer groups, including the end consumer, must be pursued assiduously.

The opening up of the market will lead to reorganisation on a European scale with common rules for all the countries.

I hope that the Commission will submit comprehensive proposals to overcome the existing barriers to intraCommunity trade and ad hoc measures to deal with the Member States which do not apply the directives.

We need to speed up the process of liberalisation in the energy and gas sectors by harmonising the Member States' energy policies.

To support the liberalisation process it will be necessary to introduce a benchmarking process, as we have done in other sectors, with the publishing of a Commission half-yearly report on the final price of European Union gas and electricity.

This will allow us to assess the impact of liberalising the energy markets on the consumer directly.

Guidelines will also have to be drawn up for harmonising the price observation criteria and processing the data gathered so as to ensure that maximum care is taken in comparing the situations of the different Member States.

I would support the rapporteur in stressing that competition does not prevent Member States from imposing public service obligations in the general interest on operators.

Moreover, I would remind you that liberalisation does not just mean privatisation, where a company continues, in practice, to be managed in the same way as before: liberalisation must mean opening up, interchange and competitiveness.

I do not consider that liberalisation will have negative implications for employment, for the lower cost of energy will allow companies more room for development and create a greater number of jobs than are lost with the end of the monopolies.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, Mr Mombaur' s report on the state of liberalisation of the energy, electricity and gas markets has the merit of summarising the various Commission communications on the issue.

It also highlights some of the key facts in this matter, two of which I shall mention here.

First, the Treaties provide for the creation of an internal market in the energy sector, which must be accomplished.

Second, the achievement of this aim undoubtedly involves opening up the markets to competition, the process of liberalisation and division into separate activities relating to energy transmission, production and distribution.

As the French Presidency gets underway, it must be noted - and as a French MEP this is not something I am terribly proud of - that France has taken a long time to transpose several European directives into its national law.

In fact, it appears that France comes bottom of the class as far as this matter is concerned.

The European directive on electricity was therefore adopted rather late by my country and only in its most basic form.

More generally speaking, I, like the rapporteur, deplore the fact that there are other countries that wish to implement the directive only in its most basic form.

And yet, as has already been mentioned -and I too should like to reiterate the point - full liberalisation, as carried out by other States in the area of electricity, has produced considerable benefits for the user: need we be reminded of the 25-33% price reduction in the United Kingdom or the almost 35% drop in Germany?

This is why I believe that we should support the Commission in its undertakings and, as Mr Mombaur' s report suggests, set a specific binding timetable for carrying out the full liberalisation of the energy markets in the applicant countries and of course, first and foremost in the Member States.

The ambition shown by the latest presidency of the Union for the advancement of Europe cannot simply stop at the defence of acquired or past situations.

The completion of the internal market cannot be restricted to the European Union alone, which is why it cannot be put off indefinitely.

Mr President, I would firstly like to congratulate Mr Mombaur on his report, which I believe broadly coincides with the Commission' s position.

Secondly, I would like to thank all the speakers, although I do not agree with everything that has been said.

In any event, I would like to point out that I agree with Mr Mombaur when he says that the liberalisation of the electrical sector has led to a drop in prices, improvements for customers, for homes and also for large industry, which means job creation, increased competitivity of the European electrical industry, development and work, although it is true that some jobs have been lost in the electrical industry.

However, the benefits have outweighed the problems encountered.

It should also be pointed out that the Lisbon and Feira Summits have reiterated the need to move ahead with liberalisations.

As regards what some have said, it is true that there is no timetable.

This does not mean that there is not a strong will to move forward.

In any event, the progress made so far - which is very considerable - still seems to me to be insufficient.

We must not create fifteen separate liberalised markets, but one single European liberalised market.

To this end, there are still issues to be dealt with, such as the level of openness of the market, the separation of the operators of transmission networks from the production systems, the guarantee of non-discriminatory access in the application of prices.

In this context, I would like to thank Mr Mombaur for his resolution' s support for the importance of the separation of producers and operators of transmission networks.

Furthermore, the efforts of the Florence Forum are invaluable and we must continue along that route.

If they turn out to be insufficient, they will be supplemented with Commission initiatives.

In that respect, there is a will to seek an establishment of tariffs which will lead to an increase in exchanges and clear access to the network.

I must also point out that the Florence Forum - with regard to electricity - must be supplemented by the Madrid Forum on gas.

Both of these reflect an original institutional approach, since representatives of Parliament participate in them.

There is a physical aspect, the capacity for interconnection, which must also be developed and which currently lead to limitations in the development of this single market, both in the electrical sector and in the gas sector.

If we are to continue to make progress with liberalisation, we cannot forget one key element: the public service role of electricity - and gas as well, although on a different level.

This means that the supply must be guaranteed - as some of you have said - and there must be an adequate service for all citizens.

This aspect will be included in the initiatives which I propose to present to the Council and Parliament at the end of this year, so that they may be ready in the Spring, for the European Council, in order to provide more impetus for liberalisation in the areas I have mentioned.

I also wish to say that the aspects relating to safety standards must also be developed soon and I am going to propose to Parliament and the Council that we hold a debate, not on the nuclear sector, nor on the coal or renewable energy sector, but on the guarantees of the European Union' s energy supply as a whole, when we will be able to consider the different sources of energy and the problems relating to each of them, because nothing is free, everything has its price, its pros and cons.

We need to hold a reasoned debate on the possibilities available to us, in terms of sources and the guarantees of supply, in the light of the Kyoto commitments.

I consider water to be a form of renewable energy, of course.

Hydro-electricity is a form of renewable energy.

The problem is that the hydro-electrical industry as a whole is not taken into account when it comes to subsidies, which are another issue.

We believe that we have to support renewable energy sources as much as possible.

This is an extremely important European technology, with industrial possibilities beyond our European borders, which we must continue to support.

The Directive excludes hydroelectricity from the consideration of subsidies, which means that it is not sustainable.

We must continue to include it within the broad consideration of renewable energy resources.

Mr President, I do not have time to expand further.

I would like to thank Mr Mombaur once again for his magnificent report and point out that we are going to present proposals in order to continue the progress in the field of liberalisation. We are going to deal with the social aspects of the electricity sector and its public service element.

The assessment is frankly positive and we must continue to make progress in accordance with what the Council has told us, at both the Lisbon and the Feira Summits.

The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.

The next item is the joint debate on the following two reports:

(A5-0173/2000) Recommendation for second reading by Mr Jarzembowski, on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism, on the Council common position for adopting a European Parliament and Council directive amending Directive 91/440/EEC on the development of the Community's railways [5386/1/2000 - C5-0178/2000 - 1998/0265(COD)];

(A5-0171/2000) Recommendation for second reading by Mr Swoboda on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism on:

I. the Council common position for adopting a European Parliament and Council directive amending Directive 95/18/EC on the licensing of railway undertakings [5387/1/2000 - C5-0176/2000 - 1998/0266(COD)];

II. the Council common position for adopting a European Parliament and Council directive relating to the allocation of railway infrastructure capacity, the levying of charges for the use of the railway infrastructure and safety certification [5388/1/2000 - C5-0177/2000 - 1998/0267(COD)].

Before I set the signal for the railwaymen to green and because we have another new team here, I should like to make a brief comment.

We still have a long debate ahead of us.

I beg you to keep to the speaking times.

As the two chief railwaymen starting the debate have unlimited speaking time, I leave it to their discretion to keep their speeches short.

Mr President, Madam Vice-President, ladies and gentlemen, the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism proposes that plenary at last gradually but properly liberalise the railway market, with liberalisation to be completed by the year 2010.

Only then will we achieve our common goal of shifting more freight from the roads on to the railways and, hence, of sustainable mobility within the European Union.

First I must thank the Commission, especially the Vice-President, Mrs Palacio, and the Finnish Presidency, without whom there would have been no common positions in the Council in December 1999.

We are most grateful for that.

But Parliament will defend the view in the codecision procedure that the positions taken do not go far enough in order to safeguard the long-term future of the railways.

The Council wants to move one small step at a time.

We take the view that it is high time, eight years after the completion of the single market, to set signals and regulate conclusively so that the liberalisation of the railway sector can be completed by 2010.

This also fits in with what was said at the Lisbon Summit, where the Heads of State and Government pressed for further liberalisation of the transport sector.

So what are our most important proposed amendments?

First, we agree with the Council that, if the railway networks are to be used efficiently, only cross-border freight traffic need be liberalised for a special trans-European rail freight network.

But we take the view that five years is long enough to show railways and their employees that they have nothing to fear from the liberalisation of the networks.

We feel that railway undertakings should have access to the entire network of the fifteen Member States in five years' time, for both international and national freight traffic, and by 2010 for international and national passenger traffic.

This gradual liberalisation plan would give us a real common network in the European Union by 2010.

In order to ensure that railway undertakings in all Member States also have real access to local networks in other Member States, we feel that there must be a strict, compulsory division between the management of individual networks and the provision of transport services by individual national railway undertakings.

Experience over the past 40 years shows that, if infrastructure and operations are not separated, the national railway undertaking always reserves the best lines for itself, thereby denying other railway undertakings effective, non-discriminatory access.

We take the view that, if there is to be even greater use of the networks, legal entities other than railway undertakings, such as shippers and forwarding agents, should have the right to apply for and be granted licences to use lines throughout the Community.

Liberalising the right to apply to use lines in all fifteen Member States by 2005 will do two things: first, it will take account of the role of shippers and forwarding agents, who need no encouragement to use the railways and, secondly, it will represent a further step towards the completion of the single market in the railway sector in that the railways' exclusive right to use the infrastructure will be somewhat mitigated.

Another factor is the question of track charges.

We take the view that track charges should be increased in the medium and long term in order to move towards the objective of covering costs.

Only if the user pays, i.e. the railway undertakings also bear the cost of operating and maintaining the network, will it be possible to fund network operation and maintenance.

Finally, the Committee on Transport voted by a large majority to abolish the derogations for Ireland, Greece, Luxembourg and Great Britain with respect to Northern Ireland.

We feel that, first, legislation should be the same in all parts of the Union and, secondly, even in geographically remote areas, which we of course all value, the principles of accuracy and clarity of costs and open access to the network should apply.

Allow me to close by stressing once again that we can use our vote in Parliament tomorrow to give a signal.

If we adopt the recommendation by the Committee on Transport by a large majority, we will have a real chance of reaching a compromise with the Council during the conciliation procedure which is acceptable to both the Council and Parliament, which goes beyond the common positions and which enables a real move to be made towards liberalising the railway sector, because we all want to strengthen the railways.

We want to shift more freight from the roads to the railways, which is why we need a clear compromise with the Council.

And we shall only get it if we adopt a clear stance here in Parliament.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, one could be forgiven for thinking that the three reports under discussion today are in fact technical reports.

But oh what emotions I witnessed when I reported on them in my group today, which is a good thing because a hugely important question is in fact at stake here: the question of how to ensure that the European railways gain in weight again in the future, not in the material sense, but as far as their importance is concerned, because what many people forget when they are busy opposing reforms is that, with the state the railways have got into, they are carrying less and less.

Trains are still chugging round Europe, but there is less and less freight in their wagons and that is a state of affairs which we cannot tolerate.

That is why I, why we all think, that a European railway sector needs to be developed and the Council resolution, the Council consensus, is really a minimum consensus; it does not satisfy us, even if we perhaps differ in our views on many aspects, such as how much further than the Council we should go.

Of course, we have a lot of lost ground to make up, because in the past we have only had national railways.

All today's private-sector undertakings operate transnationally; only the railways seem not to have heard of this.

So we need to liberalise and open up the markets and of course everyone has differing ideas as to how this should be done.

Some think that the market is the invisible hand, the almost divine principle which should guide and control everything, while others think we should be very circumspect in liberalising the market and should only liberalise it where absolutely necessary.

I think that our position, and my position, is that there is a middle way which will allow us to move forward, but it must be clearly defined; we must be clear as to how we are going to bring about the liberalisation of the market, whereby the railways must, of course, be given a chance to adapt to the new conditions one step at a time.

For us, competition is a way of increasing services, i.e. we need to get more traffic on to the railways, especially freight traffic, which is the real sore point, if we are to prevent railway services from shrinking yet further.

So it is a gradual process, but a clearer and faster process than that planned by the Council.

First, the overwhelming majority of us takes the view that there should be a competition authority, a regulator as it were, in every country.

That would give all railway undertakings, all interested parties, shipping agents, whoever, one authority in each country to which they can take recourse if clarity and transparency of competition are violated.

It also means that there can be no derogations.

We are building up a European railway, not one system for one country and a different system for another, which is why these derogations have to go.

That does not mean that everything will be prescribed down to the last detail, it just means that the freedom which we are granting needs to be granted to all countries equally, not more for some and less for others.

Secondly, we have differing views on the compulsory separation of infrastructures.

We think that it must also be possible to trade fairly with integrated undertakings, provided of course that the balance sheet and certain basic conditions are kept separate.

Our, or my proposal is that the Commission should present a report in a few years' time and report to Parliament on whether or not the principles of free, transparent competition have been contradicted and then we can take another decision.

We take the view that liberalisation should apply first and foremost to freight traffic, both transnational and, in the end, national freight traffic.

As far as passenger traffic is concerned, we feel that it is important and that it suffices, at least for the time being, to state clearly that cross-border passenger traffic will also need to be liberalised.

As to whether passenger traffic between Stuttgart and Munich should be liberalised: this is a matter which, in my view, should be decided by the German government or the regional government in Bavaria and not necessarily at European level.

We feel that the individual Member States should be given room to manoeuvre and take decisions here.

The pricing system is an important issue.

How much should be charged for the capacity allocated?

There are two schools of thought here.

The first feels that only marginal costs should be charged, i.e. the costs incurred in running one more train. The second school feels that the complete costs of providing the route, tracks etc. should be covered.

We feel that charging marginal costs make sense in the short term, in order to ensure that there is competition and that the railways can start running trains again. But in the long term, we will need some sort of complete cost-covering method, similar to the principle applied to the roads.

Otherwise we shall never manage to get more freight back on to the railways because this is precisely the problem faced by certain railways, including the German railways, to quote just one example: when the complete cost-covering method is used in the present situation, many companies refuse to use the railways' services because they are simply too expensive.

Which is why we need a gradual transition and similar conditions for both roads and railways.

I should like to mention one last point. One criticism heard time and again is: has the whole idea of public-sector services gone to the dogs?

Is everything to be run on market principles, on private-sector principles?

We have therefore reinstated an original clause on public-sector services, and I am grateful for the support it has received because, unfortunately, the European Commission has not yet submitted any general proposals as to how public-sector services are to be dealt with.

It will still be possible for a country to say that public-sector services must take priority at certain times and this priority can therefore be stipulated.

I am sure that tomorrow's vote will set a conciliation procedure in motion.

That does not present any particular problem.

We, the two rapporteurs, and all the groups in the House are willing to reach a compromise.

But the Council must also show willing.

We have shown willing and, if the Council shows willing, we will be able to reach a compromise.

I should like to close by thanking all those who worked with me, both in my group and in other groups here in Parliament, for all the effort which they invested in this, and of course the Commission, and I hope that tomorrow two or three very good reports will come out of this.

Mr President, Madam Vice-President of the Commission, I should like to start by congratulating the two rapporteurs, Mr Jarzembowski, who has taken over from Mr Pavlos Sarlis, our former fellow Member of the European Parliament who acted as rapporteur for the first reading, and Mr Swoboda, for their reports.

Allow me to say that they both explained the technical aspects of their reports extremely well.

As Chairman of the Committee on Transport, I should like to highlight two conclusions which I think we need to draw from this debate.

The first conclusion concerns the liberalisation of the railways.

This is something we have been hearing about for years, just as we have heard a great deal about the single market in the European Union for years.

The time has come for action rather than words, on both counts.

We need to accept that there will be no complete single market unless transport is fully liberalised and I think that liberalising the railways will be a decisive step in this direction and will make a decisive contribution towards the revival of the declining means of transport which we call the railways.

The second message concerns the Council.

The Council needs to take serious account of Parliament's views.

Of course, we reached a compromise in Helsinki with Mrs de Palacio's help.

This compromise is welcome but it is not enough; we need to go further and account needs to be taken of Parliament's position if we are to do so.

The Council is wrong to believe that the discussion ended in Helsinki last December with the compromise at Council level.

Parliament is here, it has its views, it supports them clearly and will, we believe, support them during tomorrow's vote which, I think, will confirm what was decided at the committee meeting during which the reports were adopted by a large majority.

Mr President, for the railways the status quo is really not an option.

They either have to change or die.

Railways in Europe are in terminal decline, not least in the rail freight sector.

New freight goes by road in Europe, not by rail.

That must change, and I believe it will.

That is why I broadly support the Council position which represents a small but important step towards railway liberalisation.

The alternative to this modest step is no step at all.

That is why tonight, regretfully I cannot agree with the tactics suggested by Mr Jarzembowski because it is a recipe for going nowhere at all, very quickly.

We have to take into account national differences and indeed, social and employment concerns.

Broadly, the Council position has struck the right balance on the charging, licensing, access and separation issues.

They have struck a right balance between both extremes and I would advocate - to use Mr Swoboda's term - that "third way" should be applied to the railways in Europe.

Labour MEPs have two particular concerns which I know are shared by many other Members: one is the issue of derogations.

We believe that Greece, Ireland and Northern Ireland should have a limited derogation of five years because of their unique geographical and geopolitical circumstances.

Secondly, we hope that the deletion of Article 12, led by the Liberals in committee, which could deprive citizens and consumers of network benefits and deprive disabled people of access, can be reinserted into the text.

Those basic safeguards must be restored.

The prize for us tonight is that for the first time in history we can achieve liberalisation of the international freight network.

Let us not throw it away.

Mr President, I believe that the rapporteurs have done sterling work and the fruits of their labour, which we submitted under their guidance to the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism, are a coherent whole with a clearly defined objective.

Mr Swoboda referred to this a moment ago: a vigorous railway sector within an internal market, which can be effective for the entire Union.

The objective also sends a clear message to the Council, namely that Parliament wants to go further than the Commission.

I do not really share Mr Watts' view.

In my opinion, we need to go further than the Council stated in its common position.

We must now set the scene for full liberalisation in the medium term, and the step we are now taking is the first step in this process.

This step is also the step currently proposed by the Council.

We must also take the next steps, namely implement full liberalisation with regard to the transport of goods by 2005 and take the same step for the transport of passengers nationally and internationally in the longer term, this time by 2010, a deadline which is ten years away.

There are a number of points which are vital in this context, and I hope that a sufficient number of MEPs will be able to support those opinions tomorrow.

First of all, it is vital that infrastructure and the provision of services be divided.

After all, no one can be on both sides of the fence at the same time.

Secondly, who can apply for a licence?

Not only railway undertakings, others too should be able to do this.

I cannot see why, Mr Swoboda, this should be postponed until 2010.

In my opinion, we should be able to bring this date forward to 2005.

I should now like to comment on Article 12, which, I believe, is redundant, and a European licence should be subject to European requirements.

That is not to say that consumers, railway workers' social rights or safety are deemed immaterial.

In fact, safety should come first.

European requirements should apply because a European railway system requires regulations at European level rather than additional regulations at national level, because the latter would enable Member States to carry out certain activities which they no longer have to do within a European market.

If we pursue this line of attack, railway undertakings will need to put their customers and passengers first, rather than act out of self-interest.

I would like to add a brief, technical comment.

Amendment No 23 has been declared inadmissible by the services.

I would dispute this on the basis of Rule 80, paragraph 2 (b), and Rule 80, paragraph 3, of our Rules of Procedure.

I would invite the services to reconsider their view, because my amendment is also related to Amendment No 24 regarding Article 12, which was declared admissible.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I have to admit that within my group there are two arguments being disputed in relation to the Community railways.

Though we unanimously agree to finally and genuinely develop rail transport and, though we unanimously agree to make every effort to facilitate the transfer from road to rail, some think that that this will be achieved most speedily via liberalisation whereas others, including myself, believe that the maximum number of guarantees should be created before liberalisation goes ahead, particularly with regard to passenger transport.

In my view, the present state of the railways in the various Member States does not make it viable to open them up to competition.

They are all in need of considerable modernisation in order to offer identical conditions of competition.

The reason for this is that in order to achieve genuine and equitable competition, the right conditions need to be created, they are not simply acquired and excesses must be avoided.

Companies, particularly public companies, need to be granted enough time to modernise their networks before opening them up to competition.

With regard to the guarantees, be they in relation to the harmonisation of working conditions or vital safety regulations, they are also something that cannot simply be acquired.

The disaster in Great Britain is still fresh in our minds and continues to warrant examination of rail safety requirements.

The compromise reached on 10 December by the Transport Council marked a step in the right direction.

Let us therefore go ahead and set up the rail transport network.

It is not a matter of going too far, too fast in terms of passenger transport, what we firstly need to achieve is a rail network that offers the public the chance to get around without causing pollution.

Mr President, rail transport is very important in terms of citizens' mobility, the development of trade within Europe and in terms of the environment and regional planning.

The European Parliament has already paved the way for the liberalisation of international freight transport at its first reading, by granting authorised applicants track access rights.

This rail package was the subject of a Council compromise in December.

The Council suggests that the choice of authorised applicants should be left to Member States' discretion, that the freight rail networks be opened up using a specific network called the "Trans-European Rail Freight Network" and, lastly, that the division into separate entities only take place progressively.

I note, without any satisfaction, that the Council' s position also takes account of the various national situations and grants each State the right to determine their own choices and for example, to pursue cooperation commitments.

However, we are faced with an ultraliberal proposition at this second reading.

The amendments tabled sanction the overall fragmentation of the rail system, which would mark the end of subsidiarity for the authorised applicants in 5 years' time and mean that the separation of entities would not be achieved progressively.

It would also mean the complete opening up of international and national freight transport and, by 2010, of passenger transport.

Just a few moments ago we were speaking about electricity and on Thursday we shall address the issue of the single European sky.

Throughout the public sector the same refrain is heard: liberalise, it' s magic!

In my view, rail transport would be left with an enormous bill.

Rail companies would be forced into the role of service provider, which would create unfair competition.

While the service providers benefit from the largest part of the commercial margin and are free to choose the most profitable sectors, the rail companies on the other hand are left to bear the high equipment and personnel costs.

In opposition to the argument advanced regarding the increase in traffic, this system might cause the isolation and disastrous creaming off of the more profitable sectors.

This same dogma is aimed solely at gaining profits through liberalisation, and users and employees do not get a say.

No proper preliminary study was undertaken and what is more, I think that we should take time to study the impact of the decisions taken by the Council.

It would also be useful to compare - in relation to the freight paths - the private and the public sector.

If the proposals from this second reading are adopted, they would be considered as a real provocation by all involved in the sector.

I can neither endorse them, nor the amendments tabled by the Socialist Group that suggest a need for further opening up on the path to liberalisation.

Mr President, Commissioner, the Council' s common positions within the framework of the railway package are not so much unexpected as they are disappointing in part.

If these plans go ahead as they are, then it looks as if the next couple of years will see little in the way of improvements within the Union' s railway industry.

I would therefore like to make some observations with regard to the railway sector' s critical state.

First of all, the speed at which the EU-wide railway sector is making headway is far too slow, both in terms of transport of people and goods.

This is why it is necessary for measures to apply to the two sectors and the entire Union.

History has taught us that excessive interference by governments has hampered the necessary flexibility.

The continued protection of certain segments of the market - both geographically and sectorally - is not an option either, because this would not break the downward trend.

In addition, some improvements are needed within the sector itself as well.

A number of railway undertakings are still fostering close links with their national governments, due to historic factors.

A division of tasks is necessary in order to prevent the unfair treatment of different economic operators.

It is therefore important to keep the management of the infrastructure and the execution of transport services strictly separate, and this division should not just exist on paper.

Finally, this sector would also benefit from transparency and decisiveness.

We should avoid building complex structures around tasks emanating from regulations within the sector.

The fewer bodies involved, the better.

In my view, the European Monitoring System, therefore, adds little in the way of value and, if anything, threatens to obscure the view.

Mr President, let there be no doubt about it: I endorse most comments made by the rapporteurs and would, as such, like to thank them for the sound work they have carried out.

Mr President, I understand the ideal contained in this report to complete the internal market in the railway sector, thereby allowing freight transport by rail to compete successfully with freight transportation by road.

This is necessary for the long-term survival of the European railway sector and all Member States would be in agreement with this goal.

It is our task to reach agreement on how best to achieve this, bearing in mind the difficulties involved for some Member States.

I speak for my own country of Ireland.

Both the Republic and the North of Ireland seek to continue the derogation agreed in December 1999, because of geographic and geopolitical reasons.

It is a small country isolated from the European mainland.

It cannot be accessed by rail operators elsewhere in the European Union.

I have seen at first hand the continual bombings of the north-south railway lines over the past 30 years due to the Troubles.

Only now is there a chance for them to develop and prosper.

Implementation at this time of this rail liberalisation package will involve the setting up of a complex administrative structure without enjoying the subsequent benefits that other Member States would.

I am sure that the Irish government has agreed to the broad principle of the separation of infrastructure and operation and has pledged to pursue the restructuring of Irish railways to achieve this goal.

I ask that the present derogation be maintained to allow time to implement these changes remembering that, should an EU-rail operator wish to enter the Irish rail market, the derogation would immediately cease.

Finally, it is my personal hope that while I support this derogation, I hope that it would in no way hinder the much-needed upgrading and extension of the Irish rail system.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, the European transport situation can be summed up using several pertinent figures.

Between 1990 and 1997 the volume of transport of goods increased by 21% whilst over the same period the proportion of freight transported by rail dropped by 7%.

During the same period, passenger transport increased by 15% and rail transport by only 3%.

In terms of both freight and passenger transport European integration has been a considerable factor of mobility, but the roads have been the major beneficiaries of this particularly, but not exclusively, due to the fact that they have been frontier free since the beginning of the 1990s.

European railways therefore need to open up urgently and without fear.

Their future lies largely in their own hands, however, it is also our job to give them every opportunity to achieve their aims.

Railway workers must rise to the challenge of opening up international networks to trains from all countries in the European Union.

The decision taken by the fifteen Ministers for Transport in December 1999 to set plans in motion for the creation of a Trans-European Freight Network that represents 94% of the international freight transport came as a direct response to this challenge.

It is entirely logical to adapt national rail legislation to this new system that lays down rules governing access, pricing policy and standard and consistent management practices within the European Union.

The Swoboda report contains commendable proposals regarding the need to adapt legislation to the various national situations.

On the other hand, it is wholly unacceptable and, what is more, contradicts Parliament' s first reading, for us to take advantage of this second reading - as the Jarzembowski report suggests - to announce measures to open up all networks to competition and others designed for the widespread privatisation of such networks at national and local level, as that stems from a dogma, an untested belief in the superiority of a market model that has clearly demonstrated its limitations in the United Kingdom.

Several moments ago, I stated that the future of rail transport also depended on us, and I should also like to point out the fact that the dogmatic approach that we appear to have adopted in this matter threatens its very success.

Everyone here is aware that rail integration in Europe cannot be reduced to a theological debate on the comparative merits of controlled liberalisation and uncontrolled privatisation.

Railways, which only receive 25% of the investment allocated to transport infrastructure in Europe, as opposed to the 65% allocated to roads, are in need of substantial investment in order to enhance interoperability, reduce bottlenecks, extend networks and integrated transport systems, etc. The United Kingdom has demonstrated to what extent privatisation can represent a step backwards.

This is why we believe that our work should not threaten the delicate balance of the Council' s common position.

Mr President, the proportion of freight transported by rail within the EU has almost halved over the last thirty years.

It is vital, if we are to have a truly sustainable transport policy that this process is reversed.

I congratulate Mr Swoboda and Mr Jarzembowski on their excellent reports which, if adopted, will make a major contribution to railway development.

I share some of Mr Watts' concern, however, about Amendment No 1 in relation to the licensing of railway undertakings and the proposed deletion of the replacement Article 12.

In any liberalisation process it is very important to ensure that certain standards are maintained, for example those relating to the safety of both workers and consumers.

At the same time we need to prevent artificial barriers being put in the way of the opening up of markets.

Fulfilling both of these objectives requires a delicate balance to be struck.

I doubt both whether Amendment No 1 serves its intended legal purpose and whether it could have the effects that Mr Watts fears.

I believe it could send out the wrong signals.

Instead I seek support for Amendments Nos 23 and 24 which, taken together, should have the effect of securing the second of the two objectives without detracting from the first.

- (PT) Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I could conceivably agree to the Europeanisation of railway transport that has been put forward in the directives we are now considering and, consequently, the liberalisation of the rail sector.

I could also give my support to the legal separation of the management of railway infrastructures from the provision of transport services.

In order to do so, however, I would have to see guarantees on certain fundamental issues, which are the criteria for the quality and efficiency of the enormously important political and economic measure that should result from these directives.

We are all aware that many European countries were not able to take part in the industrial revolution of the 19th Century at the right time, precisely because they lacked adequate rail connections.

Some of them are still waiting today for their railways to be modernised and, more specifically, for access to the European High Speed Network.

The liberalisation of this sector must under no circumstances be an obstacle to this access.

Rail networks must therefore continue to provide a guaranteed public service in all Europe' s regions, particularly the more remote ones.

Furthermore, liberalisation must not lead to necessary lines being closed, to unemployment or to safety standards and the quality of service falling.

Recent events have given us grounds to think that these are possible consequences, which must be prevented at all costs.

We therefore harbour grave reservations about supporting these directives.

Mr President, the rapporteur who drafted a report on the development of the Community' s railways has adopted the guiding principle that for the time being, the railway industry has largely lost the competitive battle to road transport and aviation but that despite this, it is preferable to hold on to the railway industry and strengthen it.

But this is about the only issue on which I see eye to eye with him.

I believe Mr Jarzembowski is quite mistaken.

What he wants to achieve requires a complete change of tack and what he proposes will lead to further regression.

His proposals are in line with views held at the end of the twentieth century.

In all areas, we are witnessing a neo-liberal attack on public services, Community undertakings and employers' organisations.

This attack is mainly aimed at postal services, rail and the energy sector, companies which have the potential to demonstrate that we can organise our economy in a more democratic, environmentally-friendly and less profit-oriented manner.

Unfortunately, these companies have for years been neglected by their owners, the democratically elected community which belongs to us all, and have been treated as private companies.

The rapporteur considers the rail industry as an irritating state monopoly with difficult and demanding trade unions in tow.

He wants to break this monopoly as quickly and radically as possible.

Instead of focusing his attention on stepping up cooperation between the existing railway companies and enhancing the democratic say over these companies, so that benefits of the rail industry can be better enjoyed on a European scale and liabilities can be eliminated more effectively, he puts all his hope in competition and liberalisation.

In his opinion, the form of organisation by means of which road transport and aviation have largely triumphed over rail, should also be applied to rail itself.

We have now gained some experience in liberalisation thanks to the English and Dutch models.

The English variant carved up the national railway industry into regional companies, some of which ended up in the hands of large foreign concerns.

In other regions, they remained a monopoly.

That country now invests less in innovation than any other country.

Trains are shorter and overloaded, and the safety of railways has declined.

According to the Dutch version, competitors can obtain licences for lines on which they want to compete with the existing railway company. This company was established in 1939 and is an amalgamation of old private railway companies which operated inefficiently.

Following a propaganda war between a newcomer and the existing company, operating different rates and using different trains, this newcomer was first taken over by a large French water company and subsequently ceased all activity.

It is evident that it is only profitable to operate lines over which you have complete control. This reality renders the proposals made by Jarzembowski unviable.

Mr President, ten years ago, Mr Cornelissen found himself in exactly the same debate.

If I were to read out his text, nobody would bat an eyelid.

The train is at a standstill, and to stand still is to regress.

Who in their right mind would take a train that moved backwards?

Thanks to the internal market and e-commerce, the flows of traffic and commodities within the European Union have increased by 70% over the past ten years.

To accommodate this increase, we need all the types of transport we can think of, ranging from internal waterways, air, roads and trains, all of which should be just in time and clean.

So far, trains have not contributed in any way.

In percentage terms, the train has lost a considerable share in the transport market and it is difficult to detect any movement within European rail.

At the same time, the train has proved the European Union right, namely that more competition keeps you on your toes and on the ball.

Due to a lack of competition as a result of excessive protectionist behaviour on the part of the Member States, the train has been relegated to the second division in this century too.

But from now on, the railways need to take down the barriers that are obstructing the cross-border transport of goods, by using each other' s infrastructure.

They need to make their equipment considerably more hard-wearing because they are hopelessly lagging behind road transport in this respect.

In the next phase, the following points will be particularly important, in my opinion.

Honest, non-discriminatory access should be granted to the infrastructure.

Transport companies should be separated from the management of the infrastructure.

It is vital for these components not to be controlled by one and the same body.

Safety takes absolute priority and cannot be monitored by the transport companies themselves.

A second key element is the opening up of the railway infrastructure or, in other words, a liberalisation of the market, which is different from privatisation.

This is vital if we want to breathe new life into the transport of goods. In this way, new operators are attracted who bring with them new insights and a new management culture.

Liberalisation, as mentioned in the common position, is a good start but is not enough.

Only when railway networks open up once and for all will railway undertakings and their employees have a chance.

Liberalisation should, however, work both ways.

Nobody should have to tolerate competitors on their infrastructure that refuse or are unable to grant the same access at home.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, without doubt, the European railways need reviving and that is precisely what the legislative package under discussion is attempting to do.

The congestion on the roads, the threat from which to transport and environmental safety increases daily, is so bad that we must now strengthen the railways.

The common positions approved here by the Council obviously promote the required revival by dealing fairly and transparently with all railway undertakings, by defining a logical framework for distributing infrastructure capacity and user charges, by separating railway infrastructure management from the provision of transport services and by discussing how, to what extent and at what speed this separation should apply.

Of course we are on the right track and of course we understand the problems facing certain Member States in directly, or almost directly adopting all the new measures proposed.

First, the huge disparities between the networks in the various countries and, more importantly, the geographical situations of certain Member States or regions make it very hard for them to change the system quickly and, secondly, forcing the change, as it were, on these Member States would not result in any significant benefit either to the countries in question or the Community as a whole.

We believe that a dogmatic, absolutist approach is risky and is unfair because, as we know full well, it does not apply in all sectors.

Sometimes, the apparently contradictory, oxymoronic Ancient Greek proverb "more haste, less speed" is more efficient.

Finally, I must in all honesty congratulate our two rapporteurs on their sterling work and ask for their understanding where special, objectively-identified circumstances exist.

In this particular case, this applies to my country, Greece, which has shown that it is making quantum leaps, but only where they are really needed.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, our trans-European routes, our roads and motorways, are being clogged up daily by millions of lorries, buses and cars, which leads to wasted time, wasteful energy consumption and significant environmental damage, amongst other things.

For all of these reasons the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance always defends the railway as an alternative means of transport - currently underexploited - which wastes fewer resources, and is cleaner and more respectful of the natural environment.

Therefore, when amending and implementing the Community legislation on the liberalisation of the railway sector, we wish to argue not only that the railway should not be penalised in relation to other means of transport, but that there should actually be positive discrimination in its favour, so that we can counteract the delay we have caused in terms of investing in it.

With regard to the taxes on the use of the infrastructures, which in the end will be paid by the users, we suggest that, in the short to medium term, these only reflect the marginal costs generated by the rail traffic itself and not those involving the recuperation of investment and maintenance, which should be covered by state budgets, as in the case of roads and motorways.

That is the only way we will manage to make the railway a competitive means of transport which is used on a grand scale.

Mr President, Commissioner, fellow members, when you receive a lot of letters from people you do not know, it may be for one of two reasons.

Either you are very famous or your correspondents feel very strongly about the matter on which they write.

Members of the European Parliament are not very famous.

It must therefore be the matter at issue which has triggered the correspondence.

We have all received a lot of letters, documents and requests for interviews over the last few days, nearly all from representatives of national railways and nearly all warning us, unisono against the compulsory separation of management and infrastructure called for in the proposals by the rapporteur Georg Jarzembowski.

Mr Swoboda has also addressed this issue, although his argument was that we need to liberalise, but only one step at a time.

Georg Jarzembowski submits that our systems in the past, with quasi-monopolistic national carriers, have not allowed optimum use to be made of the system.

Our present railway system is a far cry from what we desperately need in Europe, namely an efficient system which is also an acceptable system.

Every example in related sectors confirms the argument.

One step at a time gets you nowhere.

Telecommunications traffic has demonstrated that, the electricity sector and numerous other sectors besides have demonstrated that.

And we expect the same to happen with the railways.

The main purpose of the railways is to serve their users and hence to serve a more efficient, improved European transport system.

That is what we want, that is what we need and that is what we shall vote for.

Mr President, Commissioner, honourable Members, the overall objective of the railway package under discussion here today is fast liberalisation of the European railways.

As you know, we in the PPE are calling for this in all areas needed to complete the single market, wherever healthy competition can replace hand-me-down monopolies.

Only comprehensive liberalisation will allow the necessary progress to be made so that the railway, as a carrier, has the qualitative and quantitative capacity to provide services and integrate with other carriers.

The Commission texts on developing railway undertakings, on licensing railway undertakings and on allocating railway infrastructure capacity are a step in the right direction in this respect.

My fellow member, Georg Jarzembowski, has earned my unstinting support for his efforts to bring about a self-contained railway package and would like to thank him for his work and his excellent report.

What is important to me in all this is that, when management and infrastructure are separated, investments in the infrastructure are examined closely and duly compensated.

Liberalisation will only be accepted if it results in real advantages and consumers need not fear for their safety.

From this point of view, we must be sure to keep a firm hold on strict conditions when licensing railway undertakings.

As far as the allocation of railway infrastructure capacity is concerned, we must ensure that there is non-discriminatory access.

I do not deny that flexible regulations governing access to the grid have caused a number of problems in the energy sector.

But I still think it is the best market economy approach and that also applies to the railways.

We should not just talk about a common Europe, we should have the courage of our convictions and do something about it.

Mr President, and those fellow Members who are still awake, I would like to thank Mr Jarzembowski and Mr Swoboda for their lucid reports, with reference to which we can at last try to revive the railways by opening them up to competition.

It is fashionable these days to talk about the railways; it is politically correct.

It often feels as if Parliament is a chamber where there is just one permitted truth.

We all dash along in the same direction, like a flock of sheep, trying to convince one another that the railways will solve Europe' s transport problems.

It is hard for us politicians to admit the facts.

I have nothing at all against the railways; on the contrary, I greatly enjoy sitting in the buffet car, having a beer and admiring the landscape as it flits past.

To be able to make reasonable decisions we have to identify the real importance of the railways for the economy and examine just how big a part the various modes of transport play.

By far the biggest is road transport.

The share of rail transport, measured in tons per kilometre, has fallen to below 15%, but even this way of measuring the figures gives too rosy a picture of the situation.

From the economic point of view, transporting fifty computers a thousand kilometres is quite a different matter from transporting a hundred tons of grit ten kilometres, although the tonnage per kilometre is the same in both cases.

It is also quite a different matter to transport raw textiles weighing tons as compared to an enormous load of silk neckties - I had one for myself, by the way.

For this reason, any comparison must be made on the basis of the value of the consignments, and, if it is calculated this way, the share the railways have is just - surprise, surprise - 3%.

I am not mathematically gifted, but I see a dramatic difference in favour of road transport, whose share is more than 95%.

It is like comparing a fly with an ox, but it is not any wonder, because it is impossible to ignore the ease of transport, flexibility and door-to-door delivery service we associate with transportation by road.

At present the real role of the railways in Europe' s economy is, unfortunately, marginal, although they receive a good deal of assistance from the taxpayer.

But it is just because of this that we have to do all we can to revive rail transportation and support its gradual opening up to competition.

We expect a constructive contribution from France when we set the clocks of European railway stations to the new millennium.

Mr President, before going into the details of the various issues relating to the package of railway infrastructures, I would like to offer my heartfelt congratulations to the two rapporteurs, Mr Swoboda and Mr Jarzembowski, on the magnificent work they have done.

I am delighted that Parliament is standing firmly by its convictions in this area, especially with regard to the full realisation of a railway transport market.

Because what we are talking about, ladies and gentlemen, is not simply achieving fifteen juxtaposed national railway systems, but carrying out integration by means of a joint shared network throughout the length and breadth of Europe which will specifically allow the railway to function better.

As has already been pointed out by the two rapporteurs - and also Mr Rack when he referred to the number of letters that he had received from different voters - although this involves some very technical issues, at the end of the day it is to a large extent a political issue.

In this respect, it inspires passionate sentiments, as has been pointed out and as we have just heard a moment ago.

I would like to say that what is clear to most of us is that things cannot continue as they are: with closed public systems, which are national, confined within national borders, which are leading to a situation where the railway, day after day, is losing its share of the market in goods transport and in the transportation of persons as well, with the exception of a very specific form of transport, that is, high speed trains and suburban trains.

In this respect, we must make a change, we must propose solutions which will improve the quality of the service, because that is the important thing for consumers and users.

We believe that, if our first aim is to create a situation where a train can reasonably travel from Hamburg to Lisbon, the first thing we have to do is to see to it that that train can belong to a German company, a French company, a Spanish company, a Portuguese company etc. These may be public or private, nobody is questioning that, but it is obvious that, if we integrate the network, this automatically leads to an opening up of our market.

So let us forget dogma, examples of which I have heard here tonight.

Ladies and gentlemen, I wish to tell the two rapporteurs that I like their amendments very much.

However, having said this, I will not be able to accept many of them, although I would have loved to have done so.

I am going to tell you why, because I am one of those people who believe that the perfect is the enemy of the good, and that it is better to make progress than to reach an impasse.

To accept the amendments of both Mr Jarzembowski and Mr Swoboda, the vast majority of which correspond much more to the Commission' s initial proposal and to my own opinions on the whole, would mean disregarding a compromise which was reached with great difficulty in the Council, as you know, after long arguments, after long periods of impasse and stalemate on this issue, which kept us talking into the early hours of the morning.

I would therefore like to say that there is a margin, because Parliament is not being ignored - Parliament must participate in the creation of these directives - but there exists a fundamental compromise with the Council which I, of course, cannot disregard and you must understand this.

That would be counterproductive in terms of what both you and I want to see, which is the promotion of improvements in the railways.

I would like to say that next year I am prepared to present an additional step, a different initiative, which may be accepted or rejected, both by the Council or by Parliament, when the time comes, and modified in its various fields, and which will also deal with certain aspects, at least with regard to the transportation of persons or, possibly, the transport of goods internally within the different countries, but which will be separate from the current package, on which we have reached a fundamental compromise - I insist - with the Council.

Before thanking the two rapporteurs on their work once again, which I know has been very complex - I fully appreciate this - but which I believe has been very important, and before commenting on all the amendments one by one, I would ask the rapporteurs and Parliament as a whole for a degree of flexibility, so that in the end we may achieve a conciliation - since I fear that we will have to go to conciliation, the way things are going - which will allow us to move forward with this package which has a key role to play in the future of the railway.

Turning specifically to each of the reports, after these general comments, and perhaps in order to clarify and not to prolong this debate any further, I would like to refer to amendments relating to the Directive amending Directive 91/440/EEC, whose rapporteur is Mr Jarzembowski. We could accept Amendments Nos 3, 6, 8, 9, 11, 13, 14, 17, 20, 21 and 24.

On the other hand, I must reject - although I insist that I agree fully with many of them, but cannot accept them - Amendments Nos 1, 2, 4, 5, 7, 10, 12, 15, 16, 18, 19, 22, 23, 25, 26 and 27.

Amendments Nos 6, 8, 9 and 11, which propose the separation of the operators of infrastructures from the providers of services, clarify the text enormously.

I also consider it important to remove Article 6(4), which I believe could be a source of misunderstandings and, therefore, I particularly support Amendment No 8 and the corresponding corrections to the wording.

As for the directives which are the subject of Mr Swoboda' s report, with regard to Directive 95/18/EC, we cannot accept Amendment No 1, since Article 12 serves as a reminder that, as well as European legislation, there are national rules which must be respected - there is an element of national regulation which in no way disappears as a result of this regulation - and, nevertheless, we do accept Amendment No 24.

With regard to Directive 95/19/EC, there are key questions such as, for example - and Mr Swoboda and Mr Ortuondo have mentioned this - the issue of the establishment of tariffs on marginal costs or on total costs, in one case seeing it as a transitional period, in another, as a key element.

I would like to say that, although I would perhaps have preferred other proposals, the Commission accepts Amendments Nos 4, 6, 8, 12, 13, 15, 16, 19 and 20; but we cannot accept Amendments Nos 1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 9, 10, 11, 14, 17, 21, 22 and 23.

Mr President, I would once again like to thank the two rapporteurs for their work and ask for flexibility, from them and from Parliament, so that in the end we may achieve a result, which must also be supplemented by the other directive, which involves the interoperability of the systems themselves, which would be a great step forward.

There are perhaps some who want more, and others who want a little less, but I am sure that reality will prove us right.

The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, fellow members, this report deals with a very complex issue.

One of the proposed amendments relates to considerations which, basically, deal prosaically with a matter of general concern to the House - if the large majority in the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market is anything to go by -, namely the fact that the public seeking legal advice in the European Union is still not being provided with comprehensive legal texts as and when they are needed; and not just the public seeking legal advice, the specialist public or trained legal practitioners.

One proposed amendment therefore calls in particular for the Commission to promptly provide suitably worded texts reflecting the latest developments in the legal world.

What we are talking about here is, as it were, a ceterum censeo, which needs to be the subject of debate here in the House for all directives.

Secondly, it is an issue which needs to be taken out of brackets, as it were.

A derogation for Italian pharmacists has been extended although, contrary to the common position, the Committee on Legal Affairs proposes that a cut-off date be attached to the derogation.

Anyone who began studying before October 1990 will be protected under this directive but must expect to complete their studies within a reasonable period of time.

In addition to these general rules, we have also proposed amendments to the directives which apply to doctors.

Doctors are a sensitive issue, human health is a very sensitive issue.

If I have a car accident, I can quantify and repair the damage.

I know of no-one from my law practice who, having received compensation for physical injury, would not gladly give the money back in return for restored health, which is why this issue requires special attention.

The Committee on Legal Affairs therefore sets great store by the following conclusion: first, that specialists should also keep up with general practice while training as specialists.

Differential diagnostics continue to change, which is why specialist training must also include general practice.

Secondly: we are calling, by a large majority, for specialist training to be increased from at least two to at least three years in order to take account of a broad trend within the European Union.

It is time for improvements here.

Thirdly: the Committee on Legal Affairs is calling for greater focus on continuing training.

We know and admit that this subject was not quite so urgent at first reading but there are now problems here for procedural reasons.

An exception is made when Parliament is re-elected between the first and second readings.

That applies here, which is why the Committee on Legal Affairs has introduced the concept of continuing training as one of the mainstays of this House and as one of the mainstays of the European Union.

We believe that lifelong learning is not just the stuff of soap-box speeches; it should be standard and patients should be able to expect their doctors to complete further training, which is why Amendments Nos 1 to 11 are broadly supported by the committee and will surely be broadly supported by the House tomorrow.

I should like to address one more point.

Two other amendments have been proposed concerning Irish architects.

The PPE-DE group - my group - intends to withdraw its amendment here.

I would recommend that the House also reject the amendment along these lines proposed by the UEN.

This is a national problem and must be solved at national level; it cannot, in any case, be solved at European level.

If we introduce regulations here then others who are even less entitled to do so will surely table similar requests.

The single market is one of the great achievements of the European Community.

To have turned the distinct and fragmented markets of the Member States into a single European market is an extraordinary and revolutionary change.

While it is true that the process has not yet been completed, it has been set on an irrevocable course.

The mechanics needed to achieve this change are very extensive, as can be seen from even the most cursory examination of Lord Cockfield's 1992 programme, one of the most revolutionary, yet on the face of it unexciting programmes of the post-war world.

Within that framework there is clearly a choice of instruments for putting the single market in place which can be described as the choice between harmonization and mutual recognition.

Of these, harmonization is more seductive for the gung-ho politician who wants to be seen doing something, one of the scourges of the contemporary world.

In my view systems of mutual recognition are more attractive.

They are after all more subtle and sophisticated.

The insensitive imposition of harmonization has caused untold political damage to the European political enterprise and had the single market been based more on mutual recognition and less on harmonization Europe's political condition would be much less febrile than it is today.

One of the great difficulties in establishing a network of mutual recognition is the complexity of the procedures required to put it into place and to ensure the ongoing compatibility and appropriateness of the mutual recognition network.

This requires ongoing monitoring and we very much welcome the revision of the series of directives which are the subject of this debate this evening.

As the rapporteur, Mr Wieland, has pointed out in his excellent report, this directive is primarily about procedures as they relate to the recognition of diplomas.

Finally, if I might conclude on a parochial note, as a United Kingdom MEP, we especially welcome the extension of the minimum length for specific training in general medical practice for doctors from two to three years.

Secondly, we welcome the stipulation that Member States are to examine the qualifications already recognised in one Member State which have been obtained in a third country.

Finally, and more generally, I would like to reiterate the rapporteur's general conclusion that this is all far too difficult and complicated for anyone other than an expert or a lawyer and every effort must be made to simplify the law and make it more user-friendly so that the single market is understood by all our citizens.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, anyone who takes Europe seriously wants to provide a good future for young people in the European Union.

This includes, most importantly, ensuring that young people can develop their skills and talent in any place of their choice in any country in the Union, irrespective of where they are from and where they trained.

Anyone who has learned something at one end of the Union should be able to pursue his or her career in a country in the middle or at the other end of the Union.

The European Parliament takes this aspect of the future of young people very seriously, which is why we keep pressing to have equivalent qualifications recognised in all Member States.

We want to ensure that there are no bureaucratic hurdles to hamper citizens' rights of freedom of movement and freedom of establishment.

But we also want to guarantee high training standards; high standards guarantee progress and are in the interests of all our citizens.

Thanks to the excellent work by the rapporteur, Mr Wieland, the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market has had no trouble highlighting a few important points in the directive before us today.

I hope that plenary shares its views and will vote in favour by a large majority.

The Group of the Party of European Socialists will, in all events, be voting in favour of all, I repeat all the amendments proposed by the Committee on Legal Affairs.

It is most important both to me personally and to my group that the need for lifelong learning has been highlighted, thereby ensuring that doctors, who are the focus of this directive, have a high standard of future-orientated professional qualifications.

The need for professional qualifications acquired in individual Member States to be seen as equivalent also cut clear across the political divide.

That is as important for patients and, in the final analysis, for all citizens, as it is for the medical profession itself.

For this reason alone, it is important for the Council to follow the European Parliament's lead and not to take refuge in the conciliation procedure, which may allow it to gain time, but not recognition.

Mr President, my task is also on behalf of my group, to welcome Amendments Nos 1 to 11 and the spirit in which they were moved by my friend, Mr Wieland.

These are important points although they are not controversial among us.

We welcome in particular the extension of training for general practitioners to three years, together with the amendment originally moved by Mrs Gebhardt for lifelong learning for general practitioners.

The medical associations have been pressing us upon this point and I fully agree with them.

It is also important as a purely linguistic matter to make sure that gleichwertig is translated as "equivalent" and its equivalent words in other European languages.

I conclude by taking up the point that nothing is more important than that the laws of the European Union should be understandable to its citizens.

Without that our Community and our Union lack the clarity of purpose which will make them not merely acceptable to, but embraced by, the citizens.

Therefore all projects of consolidation of law that tend to making the law more readily understood by the citizen and its purposes more lucid to her or him are projects to which we should give our greatest support.

I am very happy to support this report.

I once again congratulate my friend, Mr Wieland, on the spirit in which he moved it.

Mr President, after years of confusion, it is time to clarify the system for recognising professional qualifications and diplomas, precisely in order to provide the European citizens with clear, transparent, and, most importantly, universally accessible laws.

This is clearly a somewhat difficult undertaking for, apart from anything else, there are 14 directives in existence on the subject and each one has been amended several times.

Moreover, the failures and delays of the Member States in complying with European legislation have all too often been justified by its complexity or by the difficulty of gaining access to information at European level.

As the rapporteur points out, even lawyers have trouble.

However, at the end of the day, the only people to pay the price for this situation are the citizens, especially young people who may well have invested time and energy in the certainty of obtaining results and official recognition and feel betrayed by the institutions.

And the situation is all the more serious if we consider the unemployment levels in Europe.

I belong to the Committee on Culture, Youth, Education, the Media and Sport which, once again, has not been asked to speak on an issue which not only involves legal questions, but should also be subject to consensus in other respects.

The complexity which exists in Europe in relation to the recognition of qualifications gives rise to documents such as this, which, despite the efforts of Parliament and the Commission itself, is a real 'collage' .

This document is a 'collage' in the sense that, although it tries to remedy situations which are unjust, those people with most power, such as the doctors' 'lobby' , which has been very active, have managed to resolve their situation.

Many other people, however, have travelled, have acquired academic qualifications, have trained professionally and have still not had their qualifications recognised and therefore have no rights.

I believe, and in this respect I am sorry to disagree with Mr Wieland, despite the fact that he has done such good work, that this is a very simple problem when looked at from the point of view of Roman law and its notion of the right of individuals.

All individuals have the right for their studies to be recognised.

These days we are always talking about mobility. We give grants so that people may have mobility, but then we do not recognise what has been studied with those grants.

We talk of the Europe of research and a Europe of knowledge and then we do not recognise, out of pure fear or pure vested interests, anything that people do outside of their own countries.

Therefore, I wish now to ask that we question this directive, so that the recognition of the medical qualifications may be extended to many other qualifications, because it seems to me to be truly unjust that this is not the case, and that a country is unable to pass on what it knows to another country.

The result is that a lot of knowledge is confined to certain areas, in certain universities and in certain companies.

If recognition were to be extended, Europe could enjoy the full right to the transfer of knowledge and that would be a real innovation.

Therefore, as representative of the Culture Committee in this case, I ask that this recognition be extended and that the road be opened to greater recognition of equivalence.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I generally welcome any measure or any directive to improve the mutual recognition of professional or academic qualifications.

Every member who, like me, lives in a border region, knows the problems encountered by citizens who work or wish to establish in a nearby Member State.

The EU Treaty clearly regulates the freedom of movement and the freedom to establish of people in the EU.

But the devil is in the detail.

We now realise that in fact every job description needs to be regulated.

But people no longer understand this.

The difficulties are clear from the number of current directives alone - there are "only" fourteen on today's subject.

We must reduce and harmonise the huge administrative costs, including within the Member States, which is why the Commission proposal to simplify the procedure is most welcome.

Individual job descriptions, training courses and pre-requisites vary enormously within the EU.

We need to start by finding similarities in training and curricula.

In the long run, uniform training courses and uniform curricula would be a great help and we must work towards that.

Until then, the Member States must consider very carefully how and where additional demands and improvements are needed and what sort of subsequent examination then needs to be demanded.

The deadline provided for by the Commission - which says that a decision on recognition must be made within three months - is an excellent move.

Procedures for recognising diplomas acquired in third countries must also be simplified.

We must cut the red tape within the EU, so that our citizens are able to put their skills to good use in every Member State.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, this evening I should simply like to welcome the initiative aimed at simplifying and clarifying the directives relating to the recognition of diplomas and professional qualifications.

I would therefore like to congratulate the rapporteur, Mr Weiland, and point out that I agree with what Evelyne Gebhardt said before me.

As an MEP from a border region I am frequently questioned by students that have come up against a system that was implemented in 1989 and 1992, and I am not exaggerating when I say that urgent changes are needed as current mechanisms are far from transparent.

Too many students come up against brick walls in their attempt to have their qualifications validated by the authorities in the various Member States.

All too often they are unjustly denied recognition, which places them in an intolerable position.

As far as principles are concerned, this is a violation of the right to the freedom of movement and, from a more human point of view, it creates an often devastating situation for students who have sought to better their qualifications but then cannot find a relevant job at the end of it.

The cost of the validation process also warrants discussion.

I am personally therefore very pleased to see that measures are finally being taken to apply the principles of free movement in practical terms.

More specifically, the proposal for a directive contains some interesting provisions with regard to clarification.

It provides that the host Member State must take account of all of the experience a person has gained since completing the qualification and can no longer demand countervailing measures.

We clearly could have taken things a stage further, as will undoubtedly be inevitable for other jobs, and I hope that progress can be achieved with the assistance of a Council that is far less cautious in future.

We shall no doubt discuss this issue again, but I hope that this evening' s debate will be welcomed as a step forward in the issue.

Mr President, may I start by thanking the members of your House for the interest they have shown in the proposal and for the work carried out by the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market and Mr Wieland, in particular?

A number of amendments proposed by Parliament aim to further improve the text of the Council' s common position by illuminating certain points that could otherwise be open to different interpretations.

This is the case for Amendments Nos 4, 5, 6 and 11, amendments which the Commission welcomes.

Moreover, the Commission has taken note of the requests made in Amendments Nos 1 and 2 to codify the directive on "recognition of professional qualifications" and to re-examine the problem of recognition of formal qualifications acquired in third countries.

In principle, the Commission does not object to these requests, but I would remind you once again that these requests do not belong in the preamble to the directive, especially since they are completely unrelated to the content of the directive.

Their approval would contravene the rules governing technical legislation and the interinstitutional agreement that exists in this context.

Regarding medical training, which forms the subject of Amendments Nos 3 and 7 to 10, the Commission shares Parliament' s view that on the one hand, this is a matter of great importance which requires further attention but on the other hand, these amendments only contain a few isolated proposals which require a more general analysis before they can be examined and approved.

Community legislation cannot be altered without a truly global analysis of the role of the GP, the role of the specialist doctor and the respective significance of basic training, specialist training and continuing training.

This is why the Commission believes that it is far too early to adopt Amendments Nos 3 and 7 to 10.

Moreover, it is said that these amendments will considerably delay the final adoption of the proposal, which would not just be terribly unfortunate, it would also be out of all proportion to the many benefits which we stand to gain from this draft directive.

Amendments Nos 12 and 13 are, in fact, not new.

They contain the amendment already adopted at first reading, which was intended to regulate the situation of certain architects from Ireland.

The Council and Commission have already explained why this amendment cannot be adopted, namely because this issue is a purely internal affair.

I thank you for the opportunity you have given me to expand on this matter.

Commissioner, allow me to thank you for being both brief and to the point.

The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.

(The sitting was closed at 11.40 p.m.)

Approval of the Minutes of the previous sitting

The Minutes of yesterday' s sitting have been distributed.

(EL) Mr President, I see from the Minutes that the question and answer exchange during question time with Minister Moscovici has been wrongly recorded.

The Minutes state, on page 14, in the Greek version at least: "Question 16 by Mr Ìarinos: Violations of Cypriot airspace by Turkish fighter-planes.

Mr Moscovici replied to the question and to Mr Marino's supplementary question and Mr Zacharakis then intervened" .

I should like to point out that in the morning the President of the French Republic, Mr Chirac, gave the impression, by appearing here in person and from what he said in his speech, that under the French presidency there would be closer, more systematic cooperation between the European Parliament and the presidency; however, in the afternoon, the first minister of the presidency to appear and work with us, the former MEP Mr Moscovici, did exactly the opposite.

Apart from the fact that he was curt with us, he gave I think almost all my fellow members more or less one-word replies or claimed that he had replied, although he did indeed reply to the written question which I had submitted.

But when I then submitted a second question as a result of yesterday morning's debate on the incursion of the Turkish occupying army into another part of Cyprus, instead of replying on the issue which I had put to him, he said "I have already replied" .

Mr Zacharakis then intervened with two questions and Mr Moscovici barely bothered to stand up and did not bother to reply.

I should like to ask, first, if a minister or commissioner questioned here is able not only to refuse to reply but to do so in a completely disdainful manner and if we are supposed to take "I have already replied" as an answer, when they have not done so.

The same happened to other fellow members who, if they are present here, can confirm this.

I should like a reply on this and I should like the Minutes to be corrected.

Mr Marinos, we have taken note of your view here and it will also be included in the Minutes.

It is true that it would be opportune to review the Question Time procedures from time to time.

I too should like to request that the Minutes be corrected because, as they stand, they are not an accurate record of what happened during the sitting.

I should like the Minutes to record that I submitted two specific questions to Mr Moscovici and that he did not reply.

Of course, following on from what Mr Ìarinos said and over and above the disdainful manner adopted by Mr Moscovici, who failed to honour traditional French courtesy, even though Parliament is sitting on French territory, what I note and conclude from his silence, and it would be a good idea to bring this to the attention of the Greek Government, is that the French Government secretly intends to oppose the accession of Cyprus to the European Union and to promote the accession of Turkey, even if it does violate human rights and the basic principles of international law.

Mr Zacharakis, we will not be holding the political debate on this issue here.

Mr Moscovici took the floor yesterday and we will check whether this was included correctly in the Minutes.

Mr President, I wish to raise once again the point I raised on Monday and again yesterday with regard to Mr Helmer's comments in this House.

Can I say that I am surprised that on two occasions now I have asked Mr Helmer to comment on the item about the Queen of the United Kingdom supporting the euro, and so far he has failed to do.

Can I say to this House that I understand this must be the first time that Mr Helmer has been speechless.

Mr President, according to our information, Mrs Stauner withdrew the explanatory statement in the relevant committee yesterday, but despite that, it has been distributed today.

I would just like to ask you, Mr President, to establish if this statement was withdrawn by the rapporteur or not.

If it was, then it should not be distributed as an official document.

I shall enquire at the services into the exact course of events.

The fact of the matter is that yesterday evening, in accordance with the Rules of Procedure, I withdrew this explanatory statement.

I asked the secretariat of the Committee on Budgetary Control to draft a letter to that effect.

Because we were sitting in the evening, that was no longer possible.

I assume that if I go to my office now, I will find the letter there and can sign it so that we can proceed accordingly.

Mr President, I wanted to bring up an issue which should be of great concern to this Parliament, and in particular to Members of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and the Committee on Budgetary Control.

A serious abuse of European law and the Statute of the European Investment Bank is taking place in my own country.

Member States are not authorised under EC law to propose or nominate their own nationals directly to the Board of Governors for the position of Vice-President of the EIB, and to do so is a clear violation of the Statute of the European Investment Bank.

The task of making the nominations and appointment is reserved exclusively to a Board of Directors of the Bank, which is a quite separate body.

The situation in Ireland is quite contrary to this principle.

The Irish government have, in contravention of the law, nominated a person who not only has no experience of economic or financial affairs, but is furthermore a disgraced supreme court judge who was forced to resign before he was impeached by the Irish parliament.

This issue is now before the courts in Ireland.

This is an extremely important matter for this Parliament, which is concerned because the European Union provides Guarantee Funds to the EIB.

Parliament must take notice of this, because if we allow Member States to contravene the law in this way it has serious implications for the European Union as a whole.

I would ask the President if he could instruct the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and the Committee on Budgetary Control to look into this issue, because it should be dealt with very quickly.

It could set a very bad precedent for the future for other Member States and for nominations to this body.

Mrs McKenna, I agree that it would be beneficial if you, should you so wish, instructed the relevant Committee.

Mr President, I would like to put a question to Parliament.

Yesterday, further hundreds of acres of forest were destroyed by fire in Italy, endangering the outskirts of Rome and the lives of European citizens as well. A similar incident occurred a few days ago in France, on the Italian border.

These acts of arson, which endanger and destroy hundreds upon hundreds of acres of European forest, occur frequently during the summer in the Mediterranean European countries, with harmful repercussions for the economy and the tourist industry.

It is vital that Parliament intervenes, but a decisive intervention on the part of the Commission and the Council is also essential when we consider that the possibility of setting up a European civil protection service was even discussed at the Feira Council.

These fires represent a considerable hazard, damaging the forest stand and the environment throughout the European Union, but, most importantly, the economic effect on our endeavours to boost employment in the tourism industry in all the countries of the Mediterranean area will be extremely serious.

Mr Tajani, these are indeed recurring themes unfortunately, and are a constant concern within Parliament. They are very sad happenings indeed.

The next item is the report by Mr Radwan (A5-0169/2000), on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, on the 1999 Annual Report of the European Central Bank [C5-0195/2000 - 2000/2118(COS)].

Mr President, one and a half years have passed since the euro came into existence and the ECB took over the responsibility for the conduct of monetary policy.

During this period the euro system, that is the 11 national central banks and the ECB, had to prove its ability to implement the conceptual framework that had been thoroughly prepared during the previous years.

It has also had to prove its ability to achieve the goals conferred upon it by the Treaty establishing the European Community.

Looking back, these challenges have been met from both a policy and an operational point of view.

Therefore I have great pleasure today in presenting the Second Annual Report of the ECB.

It gives an account of the activities of the euro system during 1999 and at the beginning of this year.

I consider today's presentation to be an important demonstration of the ECB's accountability vis-à-vis the European Parliament, supplementing the exchanges of views held in your Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, in which I participate on a quarterly basis.

In addition to this regular dialogue, other members of the Executive Board of the ECB have attended committee meetings on several occasions in order to present a report drawn up under the responsibility of the ECB and to participate in exchanges of views on various issues.

In view of the large range of topics included in the Annual Report it will clearly be impossible to address all of them at our meeting today.

Therefore I shall concentrate on some of the most pertinent issues, which have also been raised in the resolution drafted by your Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs.

Reviewing the first year of the existence of the single currency, I should like to start by reporting that the primary objective of the ECB, that is the maintenance of price stability, has been achieved.

Indeed, with consumer prices in the euro area increasing by just 1.1% in 1999, inflation has reached one of the lowest levels in the past 50 years.

In line with its mandate, the ECB remains vigilant regarding risks to price stability, as evidenced by its monetary policy decisions in order to nip inflationary pressures in the bud before they materialise rather than to react once price stability is already in jeopardy.

The euro system will continue to pursue this forward-looking strategy in order to maintain an environment of stable prices, which is also conducive to sustained economic growth and job creation in the euro area.

I share the analysis of your motion for a resolution that governments should take advantage of the favourable economic environment in order to step up the efforts directed towards consolidating budgets and reducing public debt and go beyond the objectives laid down in the stability programmes.

At the same time, structural reforms in the labour product and capital markets should be pursued vigorously.

The comprehensive implementation of this policy agenda will contribute to subduing inflationary pressures and thereby support the ECB in accomplishing its tasks.

In your motion for a resolution, you also briefly address the potential implications of a 'new economy' .

I should therefore like to comment on the possible emergence of a new economy in the euro area.

Let me start by noting that there are various definitions of the new economy.

In my view, the most useful definition is that which characterises the new economy as a phenomenon which increases the growth rate of productivity over an extended period of time.

There is some evidence, although this is not uncontroversial, that a new economy is emerging in the United States.

By contrast, it is difficult as yet to find clear evidence of a new economy in the euro area.

Of course, there is a need to monitor developments further, with the emphasis on identifying new economic trends and potential structural breaks in traditional economic relationships as early as possible.

In any case it is important to stress that for the euro area the achievement of more flexible markets is a prerequisite if the potential gains from new technologies are to be realised in the form of substantially higher productivity growth.

We recognise that a crucial feature of the potential emergence of a new economy is increased uncertainty, particularly as regards the evolution of the production potential and the reliability of indicators which are derived from it, such as estimates of the output gap.

In this respect, the euro systems monetary policy framework is well equipped to cope with such uncertainties.

It provides the flexibility necessary to address changes in the economic structure with the aim of maintaining price stability over the medium term.

By relying on two pillars, the ECB strategy explicitly acknowledges uncertainty regarding the structure of the economy and the transmission of monetary policy within the economy.

In the context of this discussion, some observers have urged the ECB to keep interest rates low in view of the new economy.

In response, let me emphasise the following point: the new economy is primarily a supply side story.

An inappropriately lax monetary policy would not create better conditions for the emergence of a new economy.

On the contrary, by jeopardising the maintenance of price stability, such a policy could seriously endanger the current ability of the ECB.

It would thereby undermine confidence, raise risk premia in interest rates and damage the prospects for economic growth and job creation.

It is for precisely this reason that the ECB will, in line with its mandate, continue to preserve price stability in the euro area.

This ensures that monetary policy makes its full contribution to overall economic welfare while also providing an environment in which the new economy, should one emerge, will be able to flourish.

I should now like to turn to another issue, which has been frequently discussed within the framework of our regular dialogue, namely the issue of transparency.

I have already referred to the regular dialogue between European Parliament and the ECB, the transcripts of which are published on the websites of our institutions.

Moreover, at the press conferences held after the first meeting of the governing council every month, I present the ECB's assessment of the economic environment underpinning our monetary policy decisions.

You will also be aware of the broad variety of ECB publications, in particular our monthly bulletin, and numerous press releases issued and speeches made by members of the executive board of the ECB.

These are also as a rule made available to the public via the ECB's website.

This wide range of communication tools, in which the arguments both for and against a decision are presented, is in substance similar to summary minutes.

It should also be borne in mind that through regular press conferences and the rapid publication of the transcripts of the questions and answers on the ECB website detailed information about the governing council's reasoning is made available very shortly after the meetings.

We therefore avoid the delays that are inherent in the publication of all forms of official minutes.

We always take our decisions from a euro area-wide perspective.

This is fundamental to the conduct of a truly single monetary policy.

The publication of ECB reports on the economic developments of individual euro area Member States, as is suggested in your motion for a resolution, has to be considered against this background.

We clearly do not want to blur the ECB's focus on the euro area as a whole.

The resolution also calls for the publication of macroeconomic forecasts by the ECB.

Let me reassure you that preparations for publication continue in earnest.

I still envisage that publication of forecasts will commence towards the end of 2000, in line with the statement I made last September at the European Parliament's plenary session on the previous ECB annual report.

I should like, however, to sound a note of caution.

Forecasts are only one input into the decisions of the governing council.

Forecast publication by the ECB should not be viewed as a panacea which will meet all the communication challenges faced by the ECB as a new institution in a testing multilingual and multinational environment.

For example they are surrounded by considerable uncertainty and they may quickly become outdated if the external environment changes.

We are aware of these shortcomings.

Therefore, as is made clear in the ECB's monetary policy strategy, monetary policy decisions cannot be made only on the basis of a central inflation forecast.

It is the comprehensive analysis of the monetary and macroeconomic situation and the economic disturbances affecting the euro area economy which is the relevant input to forward-looking policy decisions.

The ECB's approach to communication has always placed a premium on honesty.

To continue in this vein it is my view that we must publish forecasts in a manner which accurately reflects their limited role in policy decisions and their inherent uncertainties.

Any other approach would not be transparent and would therefore be potentially misleading.

I now turn to a related issue, namely the publication of the ECB's economic and econometric models.

I should make it clear that the ECB does not rely on a single econometric model but uses an extensive set of models.

The results obtained from the models are critically evaluated, using expert judgement.

Policy-makers use analysis undertaken using models developed by the ECB staff, in some cases with input from staff of national central banks, as one input among others into their policy assessments and decisions.

The ECB has established a working paper series where technical economic research, produced inter alia under the responsibility of ECB staff, can be reviewed and assessed by the public and external professional experts.

The respective authors are responsible for the content of these papers. Therefore they do not necessarily reflect the view of the ECB or of the Eurosystem.

Through this and other channels there is a professional dialogue and exchange of views between ECB staff and many outside experts, which is of mutual benefit.

Several econometric models have already been published in the working paper series of the ECB.

For example, an econometric study of the demand for M3 in the euro area, conducted by ECB staff, was published in September 1999.

Other models will be published in the near future.

An area-wide model used at the ECB, which models the aggregate behaviour of the euro area economy, will be published in this working paper series by ECB staff, probably at the end of this year or early next year.

I should now like to turn to the contribution of the ESCB, the European System of Central Banks, to the maintenance of financial stability and to prudential supervision.

In this regard I should like to mention the Banking Supervision Committee which is promoting cooperation between the ECB, the national central banks and the supervisory authorities of the 15 Member States.

The main focus of activity of the Banking Supervision Committee is the analysis of structural developments and the monitoring of potential vulnerabilities in the banking sector.

The Banking Supervision Committee also provides the forum for the exchange of relevant information between the euro system and the supervisory authorities.

Finally, this committee may also act as a forum for supervisory cooperation not related to the tasks of the Eurosystem.

The need for multilateral cooperation amongst banking supervisors has increased since the establishment of Economic and Monetary Union, for two reasons.

Firstly, EMU has introduced an unprecedented geographical separation between the area of jurisdiction of monetary policy and that of prudential supervision.

Secondly, the introduction of the euro itself has fostered further integration of the banking and financial sector.

Against this background I perceive the Banking Supervision Committee as the main forum in which multilateral cooperation amongst banking supervisors can be enhanced.

Regarding the issue of cross-border retail payments, which has been raised by the European Parliament on various occasions, I recall that in September 1999 the ECB published a report entitled Improving Retail Cross-border Payment Systems - the Eurosystem's View.

The report called on the banking sector to provide substantially improved services by 2002.

Since the publication of that report the banking sector has subscribed to the Eurosystem's objectives in principle.

It has begun to cooperate closely with the Eurosystem in order to identify the practical impediments to the achievement of these objectives and in order to investigate and, where possible, agree on effective solutions.

I fully share the European Parliament's concern that very little progress has been visible to customers.

However, there are strong indications that banks are making considerable efforts to prepare the ground for a more efficient handling of cross-border credit transfers.

In particular, progress is under way in the areas of standardisation and simplification of the balance of payments reporting requirements.

The ECB will prepare a further progress report by this autumn in which it will update its assessment.

The Eurosystem would prefer to maintain its present stance of cooperation but will if necessary step up the pressure on the banking sector.

However, it would be unrealistic to expect the service level for cross-border payments to reach that of domestic payments in all respects by 2002.

I emphasise again that the introduction of the euro has indeed been a milestone in the ongoing process of European integration.

The ECB, as the guardian of the single currency, will continue to pursue its stability-oriented monetary policy in order to fulfil its mandate and to deliver the policy results that European citizens rightly expect.

Mr President, Mr Duisenberg, ladies and gentlemen, the 1999 report before us from the ECB is both the first ECB report for a full year and also the first report since the introduction of the euro.

As has already been mentioned, the stage we are now at is that the euro has already been introduced, but the public will only have the bank notes in their hands on 1 January 2002.

Mr Karas will be dealing with that point in detail later on.

However, it is important for us to win the confidence of the public by the time the euro notes are introduced.

The increase in consumer prices over the last year of just over 1%, that is well within the ECB target of 2%, provides a good foundation for this.

Mr Duisenberg, I would like to sincerely congratulate both the ECB and you personally on that.

Because of your stability-oriented policy, the countries in the euro area can boast a historically low level of price inflation.

If the policies of the ECB are to be successful, it must be politically independent.

This does not mean that there is no accountability, but rather that a high level of information and transparency is required.

I would like to sound a positive note by mentioning the European Central Bank' s regular reports to Parliament' s Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, as well as the information published on the Internet, which you have already been referred to.

But a young institution like the ECB has to win the confidence not only of the financial markets but also of the public.

I therefore very much welcomed the fact that you addressed the public direct in May, and I think that should happen more regularly.

The public is being flooded with information about the euro and I think that the information is not always eye-catching and informative.

We need to counter that trend here today.

The policy needs to be presented so it can be easily understood, and that would help to win people over to the euro.

At the same time, a low inflation rate is a policy for the economically disadvantaged in our society.

That is why it is important for the ECB to tailor its decisions to primary objectives.

For example, as I see it, we cannot accept an inflation rate of over 3.3% simply because it makes it easier to achieve secondary objectives such as economic growth and employment policy.

Those who are disadvantaged suffer particularly from creeping inflation, which I therefore regard as being socially unacceptable.

The areas of economic growth and employment are primarily a matter for the Member States.

This is exactly the reason for part of the weak external value of the euro.

We need to make greater progress with reforms such as flexible labour markets, restructuring social security systems and liberalising financial markets if we are also to make the euro area more attractive as a financial centre and as a centre for investment.

Mere declarations that we want to become number one in the world economy, like the one made at the Lisbon Summit, are not enough.

The Member States have got to take action themselves here.

That is why the objective of debt reduction and balanced budgets needs to be achieved as quickly as possible.

But it is also important for the European Central Bank not to completely forget about the external value of the euro.

On the one hand there is a risk of higher prices, of importing inflation, which is at present being aggravated by higher oil prices of course.

On the other hand, and this brings me back to the subject of 'information and the citizen' , many people see the external value of the euro as an indicator of how stable it is.

With this in mind we must make sure that this factor alone, external value, does not weaken confidence in the euro.

I accordingly welcome the most recent correction in interest rates, that is the increase by 50 base points, as a step towards a medium-term monetary policy with a view to creating confidence and calm both in the financial markets and amongst the public.

Another sign in the eyes of the public that the euro is a good thing would be a marked reduction in charges for cross-border payment transactions, which you have already mentioned.

In this case I believe it is important for the banks to set their sights far higher and make more rapid progress.

For banks simply to refer to the standardisation of systems is not enough here.

The introduction of the euro did not come overnight and it was not a surprise.

I myself come from the world of information and communications technology.

I know that if you put a subject right at the top of your agenda and really put some pressure on, you can get something done more quickly.

I therefore call on you to get the European Central Bank to add to this pressure, so that our banks make greater efforts in this field.

Lastly, I would like to talk about the imminent eastward enlargement of the European Union.

First, I would like to make it clear that I am not talking about a treaty amendment, as was now and again suggested during the debate.

What I have in mind is to examine the process ahead of us.

No one is disputing that there is a three-stage process, from EU membership, to participation in the exchange-rate mechanism, and finally to full membership.

However, a minimum level of economic convergence is needed to achieve this, and also to create a level playing field for the applicant countries and the present EU Member States.

It is important not only to observe the criteria, but also to allow some leeway with regard to this compliance with the criteria.

We cannot allow decisions that we have made in the past to keep tying our hands when it comes to the present and future process, over a period of five to ten years.

We must maintain this process - this scope for interpretation.

In conclusion, I would like to thank all my colleagues and the committee secretariat very sincerely for their support with this report.

Mr President, I would like to congratulate Mr Duisenberg on a successful year in running euro monetary policy.

Clearly what matters is internal price stability, and the external value of the euro is of much less significance.

Indeed that was one of the reasons for creating the euro in the first place: it was precisely to protect the European economy from the volatility of the foreign exchanges to which Mr Goebbels has just referred.

I am particularly pleased, too, that Mr Duisenberg has reiterated his promise to publish forecasts and econometric models, and I entirely understand his caveats.

I hope that when he publishes the macroeconometric model he will do so in a form which makes it available and easily usable by outside researchers, perhaps on CD-ROM.

However, in connection with Parliament's view of last year I would urge Mr Duisenberg to reconsider a formal framework for the publication of summary minutes.

As he said, much of the debate which happens within the Council is filtering out in the form of discussion within the monthly bulletin, but this is not the same as a regular report with a formal framework in which it is discussed.

That would help anchor expectations within the market, as well as fulfilling the important accountability mandate of the ECB.

It is also clearly crucial the ECB should look only at the euro zone as a whole in terms of its inflation and price stability objective.

It is essential to point out that different growth trends exist within the different national components of the euro zone economy, and that this implies different sustainable wage growth rates over time.

That is why it is important that there should be an overall discussion of what potential sustainable growth rates of wages are in each of the component parts of the euro zone economy, and why this will actually help deliver low inflation combined with low unemployment.

Those are the main points I would like to make.

I would also very much like to back Mr Goebbels' remarks about the importance of enlargement, namely that we should not have two standards - one for us and one for them.

I very much hope that we will continue to apply the criteria of the Treaty, no more and no less.

Mr President, the European Central Bank report under discussion covers 1999, its first year in operation following the start of the third stage of EMU and, for this very reason, the European Parliament's criticism of the European Central Bank's annual report should be even stricter and even more demanding.

The European Parliament is the only institution in the Community which is entitled to exercise any, albeit ex-post, control over the European Central Bank and its policy.

From this point of view, the report by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs does not meet the expectations of the citizens of Europe, in that it fully supports the policy of the European System of Central Banks and, on several counts, is going beyond that policy by calling for even greater liberalisation.

The claim that the international standing of the euro and its weakness against the dollar are due to delays in making the necessary structural changes at the expense of the job, goods and services markets and to delays in advancing on the public sector of the economy, dismantling employment relations and abolishing the labour, social and insurance rights of workers has caused a public outrage.

In its quest for much-vaunted monetary stability, which I consider to be its only duty, the policy of the European Central Bank has been highly contradictory; in pursuing a single objective, i.e. to control inflationary pressures, it has swung like a pendulum from one extreme to the other, with successive reductions and increases in the interest rate which, in the final analysis, have had acutely negative repercussions on growth in productivity and employment.

The workers paying the price for this seriously negative neo-liberal policy have no confidence in it, nor do they share the European Central Bank's ambition or the support given to its policy by the European Parliament, the other institutions of the European Union and the governments of the Member States.

The much-vaunted new economy will certainly not serve the interests of the workers.

In this sense, we oppose both the policy of the Bank and the support given to it by the European Parliament.

Mr President, President of the European Central Bank, Commissioner Solbes, on behalf of the Italian Radicals of the Technical Group of Independent Members, I believe that the objective which the European Central Bank set itself - which is the objective enshrined in the Treaty and in the best economic doctrine, that is to curb inflation - has in actual fact been achieved.

This can only be reason to applaud the activity of the Central Bank itself as well.

However, we cannot allow this result to distract us from the many storm clouds gathering overhead.

The first issue is public finances: improvement in the relationship between public deficit and GDP, which, in the space of a few years, has fallen to below 2% in the euro area, disguises the fact that, in many countries, in many instances, this result is due purely to favourable interest rates and to the fact that taxation has risen instead of fallen.

The long-term structural reductions in public spending are of secondary importance and, moreover, the national budgets of many countries remain at around 50%, which is too high a level to control without risk of adding to the deficit in the event of crises or shocks.

In particular, the question of the hidden debt must be raised urgently - and in this regard the Central Bank could and should make a far greater contribution than it does at the moment. This debt arises from the public pension systems in many countries, particularly but not exclusively in Italy.

The demagogic generosity of these systems has a very high cost which someone is going to have to pay very soon, and its effects will soon make themselves felt on the stability of the euro.

There is the problem of transparency in European Central Bank decisions: something has been done about it but not enough, in my opinion, and on this matter I refer to the words of Mr Huhne, with whom I am in complete agreement.

President Duisenberg stated - and I agree with him - that the problem of the new economy, the late arrival of the new economy in Europe and of the productivity of labour in Europe is not, cannot and must not be treated as an interest rates issue.

It is a question of structural reforms and must be dealt with as such.

There is a problem of privatisation and liberalisation in many sectors.

There are countries such as France - large countries therefore - which have put the brakes on with regard to the liberalisation and privatisation chiefly - but not exclusively - of the telecommunications sector.

There is the problem of the flexibility of the labour market.

Mandel, one of the forces behind the euro, when speaking of Europe a few months ago, said that the governments are making the market too rigid.

Hiring and firing must be liberalised, for the simple reason that controlling dismissals only serves to limit the possibility of hiring new staff.

Instead of expecting Central Bank policy or taxation policy to resolve some of the problems of the European economy, European policy should resolve the issues it is able to, such as the issue of restructuring and flexibility in the economy and in the labour market, immediately.

I will end by thanking Mr Radwan for this excellent report and say that I agree with the greater part of its content.

Mr President, Mr Duisenberg, Mr Solbes, I share the satisfaction Mr Radwan expressed in his report regarding the importance of the objective of maintaining price stability, which the Central Bank achieved by bringing the rate of inflation in the euro area down to minimal levels.

Furthermore, I share the rapporteur' s satisfaction in noting that the ECB has stood by its commitment to publish information regularly on the financial variables in its possession, the economic forecasts and the econometric models used as the theoretical basis for the monetary policy it has implemented.

It is important that the principle of transparency is affirmed and it is a good thing that the ECB has set communication standards which could be an excellent point of reference for the activity of the central banks of the individual countries.

However, let us guard against interpreting the principle expressed in Article 105 of the Treaty too freely, for Article 108 reads: "When exercising the powers and carrying out the tasks and duties conferred upon them by this Treaty and the Statute of the ESCB, neither the ECB, nor a national central bank, nor any member of their decision-making bodies shall seek or take instructions from Community institutions or bodies, ... or from any other body."

The monetary policy is certainly a lever which is capable of determining a country' s economic performance, for better or for worse, but it is for this very reason that we must not give the ECB responsibilities which cannot fall within its remit, either under the Treaty or in the light of the basic rules of economic policy.

The poor development of the macroeconomic variables in some of the countries of the euro area has been linked, very superficially but incorrectly, to the creation of the single currency: imbalances and unfavourable trends in some countries cannot be blamed upon the euro and still less upon the Central Bank' s monetary policy, but they can be attributed to the absence of an unambiguous economic policy in Euroland and the lack of structural reforms at the level of the individual national systems.

Mr President, Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, first of all, I should like to thank Mr Radwan for a splendid report.

Pages 60 and 61 of the ECB' s annual report contain a discussion of the situation in Denmark in 1999.

It is pointed out that, in 1999, the Danish krone was stable and marginally stronger than the central rate in ERM 2.

This situation has, unfortunately, changed because there has been pressure on the Danish krone in recent months.

Speculation against the Danish krone is occurring primarily because Danish opinion polls suggest that there may be a 'no' vote in the forthcoming referendum on 28 September.

If there is, in fact, a 'no' vote in this referendum - and I very much disagree with my French colleague who has just spoken and who, if I understood him correctly, is hoping for just such a vote - then speculation against the krone may be expected to increase, in which case Denmark will have need of that ECB support in defence of the krone which is provided for in the ERM 2 agreement.

I would therefore ask you, Mr Duisenberg, to clarify what the limits will be for the Danish ERM 2 agreement and to answer the following questions.

Firstly, what conditions must Denmark fulfil before the ECB will intervene in support of the krone?

Secondly, how much in the way of foreign reserves will the ECB, in practice, spend on buying up kroner in order to support and defend the Danish currency?

Thirdly, for how long a period will the ECB be prepared to support the krone?

And fourthly and finally, can you tell us whether the ERM 2 agreement is to be in force for an unlimited period of time?

Mr President, Mr Duisenberg, ladies and gentlemen, I think that the Radwan report is particularly important, because it cannot be read in isolation from the next item about the euro information campaign.

I am glad that 11 of my 12 amendments were accepted in committee.

I had three principal aims in mind with those amendments.

Firstly, to enhance and underscore the independence of the European Central Bank.

To my mind, this independence also implies freedom from instructions, and this is justified because the ECB has a clear remit, which is to maintain price stability.

My second aim is to call on the ECB, through this House, to continue to pursue its stability policy so as to ward off the increasing risk of inflation.

My third aim is to give a signal to all the applicant countries that membership of EMU is conditional not on political concessions, but on meeting the convergence criteria.

So this report is also important as regards the information campaign, as I have already said, because the media' s overemphasis on the euro' s external value, which has a psychological impact on public confidence in the single currency, needs to be countered to a greater extent by the demonstrable success of economic and monetary union, to which everyone must give greater prominence.

We must not allow information on the technical changeover to be overshadowed by information about the political objectives and the successes achieved so far.

By way of conclusion, I would therefore like to say that the euro, as this report demonstrates, is a project for growth and employment, for a successful single market and for enhancing Europe' s identity.

The euro is a project for price stability and lower inflation rates, for increasing competitiveness and improving public finances, so that we finally put a stop to the process of selling out our future for budget policy reasons.

Mr President, the first annual report by the European Central Bank gives us a chance to thank the executive board of the European Central Bank for its hard work and to congratulate it on its successful administration in connection with the introduction of the euro.

These people worked extremely hard to attain our common objectives and we should acknowledge that, even if we disagree with them on certain crucial points of the monetary policy which they have applied over the year in question.

The points on which we disagree, and which the rapporteur has glossed over or failed to mention in his report, do not, in my book, include the criticism which has been voiced on account of the fall in the exchange rate of the euro.

The rapporteur quite rightly reminds us here that the fluctuations in the euro's predecessor currencies were far greater than those recorded so far for the euro, so there has been no deterioration there.

The rapporteur ascribes the fall in the exchange rate to a lack of dynamism within the European economy and he is probably right.

However, his comment raises the question of the extent to which the monetary policy applied for a year or more is the right policy for restoring the dynamism which we all agree the economy needs.

Unlike the rapporteur, who fully endorses the arguments of the Central Bank, many of us believe that its monetary policy has been dogmatic, excessively conservative and prone to inflationary risks.

We could even forgive it all that, because conservatism and perhaps even a little dogmatism go with the job of central banking.

But the Central Bank has no right to publicly present the fight against inflation, which is its obligation under the Treaty, when it itself is free to define inflation as it pleases.

The Bank cannot tell us, 'We have put an end to inflation and inflation is what we say it is, what we judge it to be, and we judge it in a subjective and arbitrary manner, in isolation from the rest of the economy and, more importantly, in isolation from support for employment, which is also the obligation of the European Central Bank' .

This attitude towards economic policy verges on the dangerous, especially nowadays.

Economic recovery in Europe has mopped up all our spare productive potential and needs new investments if it is to continue.

Is the recent increase in interest rates on the pretext of the risk of inflation the most suitable policy for encouraging investment?

Can the inflation target of 0% to 2% be reconciled with the need to extend the investment economy or should the twelve countries in the euro zone be considering a political revision of the inflation target, in which case the Bank will be able to pursue a target independently, but the target will be set by and will be the political responsibility of the European governments?

Mr President, when it adopted the Radwan report, the majority of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs missed a rare and valuable opportunity to draw attention to reasons for the weakness of the euro that cannot be laid at the door of the European Central Bank.

The sheer nonsense that we have heard here demonstrates how important the ECB' s independence is.

The argument that the euro' s weakness is also a consequence of Euroland' s enormous bureaucracy, which - in the words of acknowledged experts - has a Socialist tendency and limits individuals' freedoms, was rejected by a majority of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs for clearly ideological reasons.

The same fate was suffered by other amendments to the effect that the euro area is totally overloaded with heavy taxes, thus penalising entrepreneurialism.

Rigid structures, the slow pace of liberalisation in important sectors of the economy and differences between inflation rates in individual euro Member States, which are already a cause for concern, are the reason why the improvement in public finances in many Member States is not the result of a sustained reduction in public expenditure and structural reforms, but rather a consequence of low interest rates and a heavier tax burden, which represent a threat to the Stability Pact.

I would like to have seen all these points included in the report.

It would also have been a good thing for this Parliament if it had had the courage to recognise in this particular report that the present weakness in the single European currency is chiefly due to a lack of economic flexibility.

Nevertheless, I am glad that at least some reservations have been voiced about certain decisions taken recently in the euro countries, for example on working hours, which instead of making the labour market flexible have made it rigid, and are also contributing to the euro' s weakness.

I do not mind saying this, even if Mr Brie, the chief ideologist of Germany' s old communists, whose party wrecked a whole state and who would do better to keep quiet here, does not like it.

This is an unequivocal signal to voters in the euro area to give the all too numerous Red-Green governments their marching orders, if they...

(The President cut the speaker off)

Mr President, having listened to Mrs Berès and Mrs Bordes I am more worried than ever that the fine talk at Lisbon is actually being realised.

There does not seem to be any understanding among the communists and socialists of the concern Mrs Lulling and the EPP Group have regarding how European competitiveness and dynamism can be realised.

I wish that France and the French Members of Parliament were as active, for example, in the implementation of the action programme relating to financial services, as they are in promoting the Social Agenda.

President Chirac yesterday emphasised with eloquence the importance of finding the right balance between these two objectives, and I wish you would listen to your President.

Mr Duisenberg, I remember last year' s discussion on the 1998 annual report very clearly.

Then I pointed out Parliament' s wish to see a strong and independent European Central Bank in the future, one that was well established and had gained the confidence of the market.

The report we are now dealing with also shows that progress was clearly made in this direction last year.

It is to be welcomed that the ECB is committed to regularly releasing its economic forecasts and details of its econometric models of the Euroland economy.

There has to be more transparency, however.

Mr Duisenberg, the fact that there are many econometric models does not prevent their all being published and made known to Parliament also.

It is important that these models, on which we try to decide money policy in a new economy, with all the circumstances of a new economy, are published openly in order for economists and politicians to discuss them.

I agree with Mrs Riis-Jørgensen that the ECB should explain its policy of intervention.

This morning on the CNN news channel they presented some results of research regarding various intervention policies by the ECB, and the ECB came across as a good intervention-focused bank.

Could you comment on that later on in your reply?

Mr President, the Radwan report has addressed honestly many of the issues which relate to the functioning of the Central Bank, ranging from prudential banking supervision and the cost of international money transfers on the one hand, to convergence requirements for applicant countries and the role of this Parliament in providing the framework for the accountability of the ECB on the other.

I welcome the calls for greater transparency which I consider is the bank's best defence against calls to amend the Treaty to reduce its operational independence, and Mr Duisenberg has undertaken to publish the econometric models, for which he should be congratulated.

I would also urge publishing the minutes and the voting patterns of the Governing Council, as winning the trust and the confidence of the markets is vital, especially for such a young institution.

The report welcomes the fact the ECB does not interpret its responsibility for stability policy one-sidedly, but that, in addition to inflation, it also monitors deflationary tendencies.

We all value economic and price stability, and the new paradigm in the United States gives us hope that such stability, including a balanced budget over the economic cycle, is consistent with growth and the steady reduction in unemployment.

The report, however, does not examine the markets' lack of confidence in the euro and the huge capital outflows from Europe over the past year.

I believe this is due to the lack of faith in the core Euroland countries' ability to govern and deliver fundamental structural reforms under their current governments, which Otmar Issing, the bank's chief economist, has referred to as the serious structural rigidities in Europe's labour markets and pensions systems.

Lastly, as a British member, I do not think it is fair that candidate countries should be subject to any stricter application of the Maastricht convergence criteria for joining EMU than the existing members and, as an out-country member, I urge the Commission to consider the flexible European model that we British Conservatives have adopted, allowing these countries to opt out of EMU in future if they so wish after joining.

Mr President, Mr President of the European Central Bank, good work!

I believe that you have achieved the main objective of the European Central Bank: to maintain price stability.

I will go further. If necessary, if you believe it appropriate to raise interest rates, if the objective is price stability, if the inflation objective is in jeopardy, do not be nervous, raise interest rates.

However, I would like to add something. It is not in this area that the European Central Bank deserves most credit, but rather it is in the debate on the external value of the euro that the European Central Bank has remained steadfast, has endured and resisted attacks and pressure from different fronts.

The real reason for the external value of our currency is not, from any point of view, the policy of the European Central Bank. It is the attitude and resistance of certain governments - such as, for example, the one which has been mentioned here several times over the last 35 hours -, which are ideologically allergic to the economic reforms needed for the European Union to follow the path marked out at the Lisbon Summit.

I would also like to congratulate you on the change of method of adjudication, since the new variable rate system allows more direct control of the monetary aggregate as a result of greater knowledge of the market' s demand curve and, furthermore, allows for certain signals to be sent to the markets on monetary policy.

For all of these reasons, Mr President of the European Central Bank, I would like to congratulate you and show you my support.

Mr President, in many ways it has been a rather grim year for the euro.

I take a rather more pessimistic view than the previous speaker.

We have seen the external value of the euro plummet.

The interesting issue is to look at why that fall has happened.

There are many reasons which have been explored today, but a big reason is that the markets do not believe in a currency without a country.

They do not believe in a currency which is not backed by a political institution or a government.

This is a very good illustration of the inherent link between economic and monetary union and political union.

The one follows almost inevitably from the other.

That is one of the many reasons why the United Kingdom should stay out of the euro.

But what is vital is that the people across Europe have a debate about the future, a debate about political union.

Too often in the past they have been told that changes in Europe are technical.

Particularly the idea that a move to the euro was merely an economic choice is, quite frankly, a lie.

Every time Mr Blair and Mr Brown say that it is a matter of economics whether the UK joins or not, they are deceiving the British public or they are deeply deluded about the future of Europe.

It is only right that in Denmark we are seeing a debate on political union at the moment, as the Danes decide whether to join the euro or not.

That is the decision that they are making and that is the decision that is faced by the United Kingdom.

I trust that both of those countries will say no to political union and consequently no to economic union as well.

It is about time that the European Union stopped intervening and spending taxpayers' money on one side of this type of political debate.

It is unacceptable, in my view, for taxpayers' money - for public funds - to be spent promoting the euro in the 'out' countries, because they are engaged in a very important political process.

To use government funding on one side of the debate would be an interference in this democratic process.

I trust that we will vote in accordance with that in the Karas report at noon today.

Mr President, the introduction of a single currency in Europe was never going to be a simple task, but with 11 countries within the Union covering a population of 300 million, I fully support the single currency.

There has been much debate in recent months about the strength or otherwise of the currency and I would like to pose a very simple question to the detractors of EMU.

If the single currency is not working, why are so many countries seeking to join the new structure?

I welcome the decision to allow Greece full participation within the single currency.

In the Scandinavian countries support for the single currency is rising.

Of course we are waiting anxiously for the decision of the Danish people.

In the longer term, Eastern and Central European countries seeking to join the European Union will want to participate in the single European currency system.

1 January 2002, which is not far away, is the key date for the circulation of euro notes and coins within the territories of all the EMU participating countries.

Business and retailers must gear up their preparation for this date to ensure that the changeover goes smoothly.

From an Irish perspective, I believe that our cash changeover plan is moving very well.

Fortunately we can draw on our experience of a change of currency in 1972, when we broke with sterling.

We want to ensure that the mistakes that were made then are not made again.

I have had so many congratulations and compliments that I would simply say I thank the European Parliament for the way in which they have received our annual report and I can see the debate here expresses great support for continuation of the policies that we have pursued so far.

There are a few points I would like to comment on.

The question raised by Mrs Randzio-Plath, Mr Katiforis and Mr Goebbels all boils down to whether the ECB has too high a growth rate, which has the effect of increasing interest rates.

Mrs Berès has asked a very precise question, about which I would like to say the following.

I do not understand the pessimism which permeates this aspect of the debate.

In the past twenty-five years the average growth rate for real GDP in the euro area has been between 2 and 2.5% per year.

This year and next year growth in the euro area will be in excess, even considerably in excess, of 3% per year and we expect inflation to be close to 2%.

Due to the volatility of oil prices it might even be more than 2% in some months but the average will be 2%.

There will be upside risks, but what we do about this depends on how the situation develops.

In reply to Mrs Randzio-Plath's question if the ECB is against growth rates of over 3%, my unequivocal answer is that we are certainly not against growth rates of 3%, which we expect now.

We would be against increased inflation, but that is not yet on the cards although, as I say, the risks will be upside.

We are now entering the best period that Europe has had in a long time, in decades, I might say.

Unemployment will fall over the next two years.

Not by very much, admittedly - there is nothing monetary policy can do to accelerate the process - but unemployment is coming down very gradually and will continue to do so.

If, as well all expect and hope, Greece joins EMU on 1 January next year, only Denmark will be a member of the ERM.

The question was asked what will the ECB do if that creates problems for Denmark?

The ECB will do everything in its power to keep Denmark in the ERM and there is no date scheduled for the exchange rate mechanism ending so it will be for an indefinite period.

So far Denmark has been remarkably successful as a member of the ERM with smaller exchange rate margins than were permitted within the ERM, and I expect it to remain that way, although I would hope that Denmark will decide to join EMU.

But I can assure Mrs Riis-Jørgensen that the cooperation between the European Central Bank and the Danish National Bank is exemplary.

I have already alluded in my introduction to the question of transparency and the summary minutes asked for in the motion for a resolution.

The introduction to the monthly press conference refers to the debate in the governing council that has just taken place.

The statement is carefully prepared by the whole governing council; it is not a spur of the moment statement.

A week later the entire statement is produced again in a more final form.

The editorial in the monthly bulletin gives all the information that could be found in summary minutes of the meeting.

The vote will take place at 11.30 a.m.

The next item is the report (A5-0170/2000) by Mr Karas, on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, on the Commission communication on communications strategy in the last phases of the completion of EMU.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, 500 days from now euro banknotes and coins will come into circulation.

This will be the final stage of the first currency changeover on this scale in the history of our continent.

EMU citizens, every citizen of the Member States of the European Union and of the applicant countries and beyond will be indirectly or directly affected.

Every single consumer, including both our own citizens and tourists visiting Europe, and the whole world economy will have to learn to recognise the new money, to become familiar with prices and values in euros and to handle the new money.

Both large and small companies will have to adapt and change over their accounts and computer systems to the new currency, which will involve substantial preparatory work.

We have talked a lot about the advantages of the euro and of economic and monetary union.

But there still remains a very great deal to be done.

According to opinion polls, not enough companies or private individuals are using the euro, and awareness of it is still too low.

30% of companies do not yet see any need to make preparations well in advance and in some cases even think that they do not need to complete the changeover until 2002.

Most members of the public do not have a euro account and rarely carry out financial transactions in euros.

There is an enormous need for information and awareness-raising measures going beyond merely technical information on the changeover.

The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs has not simply commented on the Commission report - we welcome the priorities and measures put forward in it.

We have attempted to put the report in concrete terms, to strengthen in it, and, where we thought it was necessary, to supplement it.

Considering that around EUR 80 million will be spent on this information campaign in the three years 1999-2002, plus a further EUR 80 million from the ECB, it is absolutely vital for us to have the closest possible coordination between all the institutions, associations and states affected, for us to identify priorities and to encourage agreement on key messages, for us to monitor the process, and in that case I would suggest using the European Parliament and European Commission interinstitutional working group. It is also important for us to implement the political guidelines, also in the context of contracts with Member States, and for us to demonstrate a high degree of professionalism in doing all this.

I would like to use my last one and a half minutes to say something about priorities.

Over half of all SMEs do not yet have an action plan for the changeover.

SMEs need to tackle their technical changeover as quickly as possible, and in doing so also to give some thought to the strategic consequences of a market notable for price transparency and increased competition.

So SMEs are the priority for autumn 2000.

Secondly, there is the public at large, which includes all the target groups and more besides.

The public needs to be made to feel secure about this.

In this area, public administration needs to act as a role model, just as NGOs and foundations need to be involved in the information campaign and act as intermediaries.

Thirdly, we have schools, schoolchildren and other young people.

We have a very specific proposal, which is not only to change over all school books as soon as possible, but also to organise painting, drawing, essay-writing and public speaking competitions on the subject of 'Changing to the euro' , which is a defining topic for Europe' s identity.

The third area is this: the banks have run world savings week throughout Europe, and in this context we should also introduce 'euro savings days' , to encourage more people to open a euro savings account before the changeover stage.

We need to increase the involvement of elected representatives, by which I mean not just Members of the European Parliament, but also all representatives elected by the public from municipal level to European level.

In addition to the need to have sufficient staff in the Commission' s directorates-general to cope with the change, coordination is also a key area if we are to send a clear message to the public through a wide-ranging communications strategy with adequate financial resources and an appropriate time frame.

We are therefore proposing that the campaign should be extended to 2002.

In that case, the success story of the euro will not come to an end at that point, but, with the support of the public, it will go on to greater things.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, we all know that the European public' s need for information is still very great, although monetary union is already in place and euro banknotes and coins will come into circulation before too very long.

There are less than 75 weeks to go in fact.

The Committee on Budgets, in common with all Members of this House, is very much in agreement with the objectives described in the Commission communication on the communication strategy covering the final stages of the completion of EMU.

We also believe that there should be incentives and support for companies, especially SMEs, to enable them to carry out the work needed to change over to the euro.

Furthermore, enhanced preparation is just as desirable and important for all our citizens and for all consumers.

We all need to change over to the euro in our daily lives.

It was not of course for the Committee on Budgets to assess the content of the Commission communication in detail: we limited ourselves to budgetary aspects.

We wish to point out once again that in the interinstitutional agreement it was stipulated that information policy is an autonomous action which does not require a separate legal basis.

For the reason mentioned, this particularly needs to be brought to the attention of the Council again.

However, I would particularly like to remind you that the Prince programme was initiated by Parliament through budgetary intervention in 1996 with the clear aim of financing information campaigns on priority issues for the EU.

This was to take place at interinstitutional level, as at that time we were convinced, as we are now, that this would ensure that the available funding would be spent as effectively as possible.

We therefore wish to stress once again that the decision on the breakdown of appropriations and the guidelines for implementation, including joint actions, is taken on the basis of the opinion given by the interinstitutional working group.

This working group was specifically referred to in the budgetary remarks, and that is how it should stay - and that comment is particularly for the ears of the Commission!

For that reason we wish to reinsert the relevant remark on budget headings B3-300 and B3-306, which the Commission evidently 'forgot' to include in its preliminary draft budget for 2001.

I would like to thank the rapporteur and the committee responsible for including our remarks on this in the conclusions.

Mr President, information on the euro is for the public and is meant to satisfy their need for information in particular.

The information must come in cooperation with the Member States, but what, in my opinion, is of most importance is that NGOs are kept fully aware of what is happening.

We have to reach grassroots level as swiftly as we can, in a language that is perfectly clear.

The so-called two-stage information strategy, where peer groups keep each other' s members informed, has turned out to be the best of all options, and this should be put to good use too in dealing with this information issue.

I fear those information campaigns that are led by the Commission.

They are often sweet as candy and very beautifully contrived.

The fact that this information campaign is being made with the support of NGOs and via them will hopefully prevent a repeat of that.

The arrival of the euro will also entail a lot of practical questions for consumers. Above all we have to take care that prices do not trail upwards when the currencies are finally changed over.

In this the consumer organisations have a very big and important job, and women' s organisations must also be taken into account, as women need information on this.

It is absolutely essential that cross-border giros and payment transactions are in accordance with the principles of the Internal Market.

I am glad that the President of the European Central Bank, Mr Duisenberg, also paid attention to this and promised that the ECB would produce a report on the subject.

I genuinely hope that these practical matters, which are a thorny subject for consumers, are attended to before the euro comes into proper circulation.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I would first like to congratulate Mr Karas on his excellent report, but at the same time to say that we are not at present satisfied with the European Commission' s information policy.

We wish to remind the House that the euro information programme is also, as defined in the budget, a joint European Commission and European Parliament programme.

During the last parliamentary term there was a committee led by Mr Anastassopoulos which laid down the essential features of information policy in this area.

It was very successful at that point.

We also managed at that time to secure a full and key role for Members of the European Parliament in this information campaign, via the political foundations.

This has not happened during this new parliamentary term.

This body, which consisted of the Commissioner responsible and the relevant committee chairs, has not yet been convened.

Some of the procedures dating from the last parliamentary term have still not been discharged to this day.

We therefore have to ask in the clearest possible terms what should happen next.

For this reason, my first request is that a meeting of this body should be called as quickly as possible. That is my first point.

The second point that I would briefly like to touch upon relates to an observation regarding the substance of the information campaign.

If you compare prices in the Eleven, that is in Euroland, with prices in other countries which have remained outside the Eleven, including the United Kingdom but also Switzerland and Norway, where this is particularly apparent, you will see that price levels in Euroland, even in the 'rich' countries, are generally speaking lower than in the other countries.

This means that the European single currency is already leading to greater competition in this area, and that in turn this competition is leading to the public getting goods and services on more favourable terms.

A study should be carried out on this, something which is also called for in the Karas report.

Mr President, on behalf of my Group I would like to congratulate the rapporteur and to say that we support the report, just as we welcome the positive tone of the Commission' s communication.

It is high time that we had a more efficient communications strategy and that cooperation between the Commission, the European Parliament and the Member States was improved in this new parliamentary term.

The European public not only feels inadequately prepared for the euro, it also genuinely is inadequately prepared for it, both objectively and subjectively speaking.

The fact is that the long transitional period has not led to more intensive and careful preparations being made for the introduction of the euro, quite the contrary - it has led to more disinformation and also to preparations being postponed, in some people' s minds even to June 2002.

Unfortunately, this seems to apply not only to the public, but also to business.

Although 80% of businesses say that they are preparing for the euro and its introduction, objectively speaking at most 25% are making concrete preparations.

A sign of this is of course that only 1% of banknotes within the European Union have been converted to date.

If we do not tackle this now, fears that we will end up with the dreaded 'big bang' , which none of the governments wanted, will be totally justified.

The governments themselves really must do some advance work, however, and demonstrate greater commitment.

I believe that you cannot shift all the responsibility to the European institutions.

After all, it is the EU Member States that have a duty to provide political information and education according to the principle of subsidiarity.

We really must call on the Member States of the European Union to invest money, time and human resources in ensuring that the euro is a success.

It is a matter of regret that up to now public administrations have not led the way as they should have done.

I think it is also important, and the rapporteur has quite rightly drawn attention to this, for schools, teachers and places of education to prepare people for the euro.

The euro must become part of education across the board.

It is not enough to have a few successful but extremely modest Socrates projects about the euro in Europe' s schools.

No, this is really a job that needs to be successfully handled at local level.

I think it would be wonderful if the schools, Europe' s young people, welcomed the euro as a tangible sign of Europe, and if everyone used their own preparations to communicate with others.

This is also something that the older generation, who are generally so sceptical about the euro, could do.

Why should older people in the European Union not use their experience, their knowledge and also the time that they have available in order to make the euro a success?

Maybe this is an area where we could have a kind of new pact between the generations that would help the euro project to succeed.

The Commission certainly needs to work even more closely with us and to step up the pace of its involvement.

But we should not forget that the resources for the information campaign are extremely slight and have to be shared out between the Member States.

No company introducing an important product would rely on such modest resources to ensure that a product was a success.

A powerful argument in favour of the euro is the initial positive experience with monetary union, which has in fact provided protection against turbulent currency markets in recent times.

But it is also a matter of turning information into education, because at the end of the day we need to acquire a totally new way of looking at prices, making calculations and judging values.

We should not be deceived by the painless transition on 1 January 1999.

Nor should we be deceived by the almost automatic transition to the new millennium.

We also need to prepare for the euro psychologically.

We must all do this together, at all levels of the European Union!

Firstly, I would like to say that our Group, as it did in committee, supports the Karas report.

We believe that it is a very good report and it makes a very positive contribution to an issue of fundamental importance in the process of introducing the euro into the lives of our citizens.

It is clear that the euro is not purely a macroeconomic and financial issue. It is an issue which will reach every European citizen, it is a European distinguishing mark and, therefore, it is of the greatest importance in the process of European construction.

To this end, it is very important that a campaign be implemented - and a very good campaign - so that in 2002 the euro may enjoy the degree of confidence and acceptance which we all want.

Furthermore, as has been said, there is a great delay in terms of the number of countries and companies prepared for its use and in terms of our citizens' level of knowledge.

In this respect I would like very briefly to highlight three dimensions. The first is decentralisation.

The participation of regional and local authorities is very important. Many of them have very significant responsibilities and are better prepared than the Member States themselves to reach the citizen.

This is an aspect that the European Central Bank and the Commission should bear in mind.

I would like to know Commissioner Solbes' opinion with regard to participation at this level, which Mr von Wogau has also requested.

We must ensure that these administrations play a significant role. It falls to them to do so, since they are best prepared to reach the citizens.

Secondly, this decentralisation must also take place at company and industry level and not be limited to the headquarters of managerial or union organisations.

Thirdly, I recommend that you read the conclusions of the Committee on Culture, Youth, Education, the Media and Sport, which introduce a cultural dimension, which is very important to the success of this information campaign.

Mr President, I welcome this opportunity to give a view from the outside, from Scotland, for the time being part of the UK, where our diet of information about the euro is dominated by a rather lukewarm and unconvincing approach on the part of the Labour government and an almost hysterically anti-euro rhetoric on the part of the Conservatives.

In contrast my party - the Scottish National Party - recently reaffirmed our position of support in principle for entry to the euro currency and we are not afraid to promote that view.

Scotland's traders, from fish processors to farmers, from manufacturers to the tourism sector, are being forced to compete with one hand tied behind their backs.

Mr Karas acknowledges a high level of support for the euro but also some shortcomings in the provision of information within the euro zone and I support his ideas for addressing that problem.

But in particular I welcome the fact that this strategy also addresses those Member States not yet taking part in monetary union, since of course we will be affected whether we join in or remain out.

I call on the UK and Scottish governments to play a full part in that campaign.

Mr President, there are three countries outside EMU.

In these countries, referenda will be held before the governments concerned make the decision concerning the introduction of the euro.

Two of these countries, England and Denmark, have had the good sense not to take part in the euro information campaign.

They have said no in view of the fact that the discussion is not yet concluded and with the forthcoming referenda in mind.

The third country that remains outside EMU, Sweden, has, however, decided to take part in the campaign, despite the fact that it will take place before the referendum and before it is decided whether Sweden will introduce the euro.

This means that the euro information campaign will not be a normal information campaign as it is in other countries, but a sort of persuasion campaign and the beginning of the fight between those that are for and those that are against in the referendum.

It is, of course, difficult to imagine that the euro information campaign would produce any particularly critical information on the euro, as the object of the campaign is to increase confidence in the euro and the euro reform.

This means, in actual fact, that the euro information campaign will serve the political purpose of the Swedish government, which is, of course, to persuade the Swedish people to vote in favour of the euro in the referendum.

Fifty percent of the euro information campaign is financed from EU funds and is to be conducted throughout society, even in schools where it is not usual to carry on one-sided political campaigns, which is what this is.

I think that it would be disgraceful if the Swedish government were allowed to exploit the euro information campaign in this way.

It would be both compromising and embarrassing for the EU if the campaign were allowed to be carried out as planned.

Therefore, I want to appeal to the Commission to take steps to ensure that the agreement concerning the Swedish euro information campaign is torn up or amended in such a way that it may only be implemented once the Swedish people have expressed their opinion in a referendum.

I also want to appeal to my fellow MEPs here in the House to support Amendments 7 and 12 in the vote tomorrow, as the text of these amendments recommends that the campaign not be conducted in countries that have not decided if they are to be a part of EMU.

Mr President, I should like to continue where the previous speaker left off.

I am glad that no money from the campaign is formally being used for propaganda in the Danish debate.

This report is one of the most interesting documents I have read for a long time.

It could form part of a handbook for democrats or perhaps, rather, be used as an object lesson in anti-democratic manipulation.

I read here that the euro is an 'essential, identity-building factor in the process of European integration' .

It is also noted that there is no overwhelming support for the euro in the euro area and certainly not in the countries surrounding this area. As the opinion of the Committee on Culture, Youth, Education, the Media and Sport very clearly puts it, the Commission is therefore urged, "when carrying out the advertising and information campaign, to take account of the fact that large parts of the population continue to be sceptical about the common currency" .

Or, to put it another way: the objective, as stated in the report itself, is that "the right means of communication can be used to respond to the European public' s national and cultural features" .

The situation is that, in this programme, more than EUR 100 million has been used to influence the people of Europe.

That is to say, the Commission is using Europeans' money to manipulate Europeans.

As I see it, that is the very opposite of how we really visualise this project.

Democracy depends upon decision-making by the people, not upon manipulation by the institutional machine.

If I say this, it is because, as is well known, we are holding a referendum in Denmark on 28 September on joining the euro, and it goes without saying that it is the public debate which forms the basis for this.

Such tellingly described manipulation has not been seen since the totalitarian regimes collapsed years ago.

This is a most deplorable report.

Mr President, I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on this highly informative report.

One positive point is that small and medium-sized enterprises have been identified as a very important target group, as this group is one where there could be considerable problems at the changeover stage.

What is more, we should also support any initiative and also call upon the Commission in the clearest terms to introduce measures without delay to counter excessive bank charges for intra-Community money transactions.

We must demonstrate to the European public that the euro will cut administrative costs, to their advantage.

We should not just talk about the euro and provide information about it, but the information we provide must also convince the public that the euro will bring tangible advantages for them.

The excessive bank charges in force at present are giving precisely the opposite signal.

Mr President, for most Europeans, the era of the euro will not actually begin until they are required to use euro coins and notes in the shops.

Out of respect for all our European citizens, it is important not to underestimate the political significance of the changeover, and for this changeover to occur without any hitches.

With this in mind, it is necessary to organise the practical dimension of the changeover well as a matter of priority.

It is, in this context, extremely useful that, after extended pleas, also on the part of this House, frontloading has become possible.

In addition, people need to have faith in the process as a whole.

In order to instil this feeling, we must provide them with information as a matter of priority.

We endorse the plans of the Commission, which set out to achieve this for each target group and by mobilising the organised midfield.

After all, the hallmark of sound information is that it is tailored to the specific circumstances of those involved, and people and companies have a great deal more faith in their own associations and organisations than they do in public institutions.

But not until we manage to reduce the costs of cross-border payments and exchange rates within the euro-zone will people and companies have a sufficient level of confidence, and this confidence is crucial.

It is a prerequisite for motivating people to make the necessary efforts, efforts which are needed to adapt to the new situation.

Let us not delude people into thinking they will not need to make any sacrifices.

The changeover will require an effort.

Everyone will need to adjust, everyone will need to make an effort.

If we can help them in this and guide them in the right direction from the outset, we will have succeeded in our task of providing information.

Mr President, Mr Karas' report was approved by a large majority within the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs.

This is only right, because it is a sound report, on which I would like to congratulate him.

- (PT) Mr President, it seems that since the launch of the euro in January 1999, the European public, far from becoming more interested in it, has in fact been losing interest, as if the extremely long period of three years without notes and coins has turned the euro into a kind of virtual reality.

Although we have repeatedly stated that the euro has, since January 1999, been the official currency of 11 EU Member States, which Greece and possibly Denmark will join at the start of next year, and that the national currencies are just multiples and fractions of the euro, the fact of the matter is that the majority of Europeans do not believe that escudos, pesetas, francs and marks are not still their official currency, because that is what they have in their pockets.

While water, electricity, telephone and supermarket bills are also shown in euros, I regard that as a mathematical exercise of limited usefulness.

Yet in 18 months' time our national notes and coins will disappear and it is high time that we were totally familiar with the new money, developed a sense of its value and recognised its implications for our lives and for the development of our economies and societies.

As I see it, information campaigns on the euro need to focus on precisely these two aspects: first, the value of the euro, its appearance and the way we use it as a currency, and, second, its potential and effectiveness in terms of monetary stability in the European Union, the level of growth achieved - the highest in recent decades - and in terms of controlling inflation and creating employment.

If these campaigns are to deliver the desired results, however, it is vital for the various actions to be coordinated.

It is no good having one campaign by the European Central Bank and another one by the Commission or by Parliament, not to mention all the other campaigns organised by the Members States involved.

It is essential to effectively coordinate the resources available so as to reach the target groups, and for us to be certain that there are no errors of the kind already identified in documents which the Commission has widely distributed in Portuguese schools.

Schools are nerve centres for information and have a multiplier effect, so they must be used in the most appropriate, simple and effective way possible.

This means that the key words in these campaigns have to be coordination of effort, involvement, and human, technical and financial resources.

Whereas it seems that up to now the right hand has not known what the left is doing, and vice versa, and it is important to get past this stage as soon as possible.

2001 should be the year in which the euro takes over the key role of national currencies in setting prices, in company accounting and in cross-border transactions.

We need to call a halt to the scandalous cross-border costs within the euro area, which do not involve any risk for the banks.

The practice of charging a percentage on credit card transactions and on bank debits and transfers is one of the causes of the poor light in which the European public views the euro, and only action by the Commission to outlaw the real cartels that have been created can put an end to this and help to restore confidence.

And this is what the citizens of Europe are waiting for.

Mr President, on behalf of my Group, I should like to express our surprise at the fact that a particularly extensive and sometimes even extremely complex resolution should have ensued from a relatively simple matter.

The European Parliament is bringing many problems on itself in this respect. This is mainly due to the fact that, in this resolution, the concept of government information has been taken to mean government propaganda.

During a previous debate on the information strategy to be pursued, I was already bound to make some critical observations with regard to the highly peculiar wishes of some of my fellow delegates.

Unfortunately, I cannot escape this here, either.

Anyone who uses the euro as a vehicle to sell the so-called European idea is committing a very grave logical error.

It is extremely regrettable that this enormous political error is detected to a far lesser extent by this House than the errors of liability on the part of commercial banks in the course of foreign exchange transactions.

If the cap fits, wear it.

Mr President, the question troubling me over Mr Karas' report is whether we are actually asked to endorse an information campaign on the practical implications of the introduction of the euro, or a propaganda campaign in favour of it.

Surely no-one could challenge the need for information.

True, some British newspapers declare that we already know all the facts, but the recent announcement of the merger between the Frankfurt and London stock exchanges left many British newspaper editors spectacularly exposed on the simple issue of which currency would be used for the exchange denomination.

More than two-thirds of UK businesses are unaware of the practical implications of the introduction of the euro, even for those countries outside the euro zone.

If there is funding available for the many seminars and conferences which UK trade associations, lawyers and accountants are holding, then as a UK lawyer let me declare my interest in ensuring that we get our share of it.

But there is reason to believe that this campaign goes well beyond the provision of practical information.

After all, the European Central Bank is holding its own information campaign, so why should we be duplicating the effort?

Perhaps we see the answer in the evangelical tone of Mr Karas' report and his remarkable declaration that the euro information campaign must help to perpetuate the successful history of the euro.

I certainly wish the euro well.

Currency instability is bad for all of us, whether we are in or out of the euro zone.

But I personally fail to recognise this historic success over the last six months, and the astonishing suggestion that the euro has proved a stabilising factor in the face of international monetary crises.

Whether in or out of the euro zone it should be: information, 'yes' , but propaganda, 'no' .

If there is any change to the amount or distribution proposed in the proposal for a Council decision, both the Council and Parliament will be reconsulted.

So my reply is 'yes' .

Proposal for a Council decision concerning the conclusion of an agreement between the Community and Cyprus establishing cooperation in the field of small and medium-sized enterprises within the framework of the third multiannual programme for small and medium-sized enterprises (SME) in the European Union (1997-2000) (COM(2000) 242 - C5-0324/2000 - 2000/0099(CNS)) (Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy)

Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, the proposal presented by the Council here is one which has our support, although it has one serious flaw.

According to Article 14 of this proposal, and this was also discussed in the committee responsible, the documents are to be available in all 11 official languages of the European Union, but not the second official language of the Republic of Cyprus, that is Turkish.

We request that this agreement should also be translated into Turkish, as an official language of the Republic of Cyprus - not only into Finnish, Swedish, Danish, German and so forth, but also into Turkish.

The Council should take this into account in future in negotiations of this kind, if it wants to secure our agreement under a simplified procedure!

Madam President, my reply is that these sorts of agreements are always translated into the languages of the Community.

This has also been the case this time.

I also have a longer version of the declaration if the President would like to see it.

Madam President, I just wanted to ask Commissioner Liikanen whether Cyprus will be treated in exactly the same way as all the other applicant countries. Yes or no?

As I see it, that is the vital question.

Second report (A5-0176/2000) by Mr Gerhard Schmid, on behalf of the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs, on the proposal for a Council framework decision on combating fraud and counterfeiting of non-cash means of payment (SN 3040/2000 - C5-0265/2000 - 1999/0190(CNS))

Report (A5-0172/2000) by Mrs Lienemann, on behalf of the European Parliament delegation to the Conciliation Committee on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a European Parliament and Council regulation concerning a financial instrument for the environment (LIFE) (C5-0221/2000 - 1998/0336(COD))

Recommendation for second reading (A5-0173/2000), on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism, on the Council common position with a view to adopting European Parliament and Council directive 2000/.../EC amending Council Directive 91/440/EEC on the development of the Community's railways (5386/1/2000 - C5-0178/2000 - 1998/0265(COD)) (rapporteur: Mr Jarzembowski)

Madam President, the framework agreement constitutes a degree of progress, but it is also in danger of being a clear retrograde step when it comes to MEPs' access to information from the Commission.

My political Group and the intergroup SOS Democracy therefore recommend that we postpone the vote and give the agreement a proper reading in all committees, especially in the Committee on Constitutional Affairs, the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market and the Committee on Budgetary Control.

We agree with the criticism from the chairperson of the Committee on Budgetary Control, Mrs Theato, that the agreement directly contravenes Article 276 of the Treaty, which guarantees us access to information as part of the discharge procedure.

Now, the Commission is being given the opportunity to decide what it will hand over for inspection.

It is the same procedure as applies in connection with the ombudsman.

The framework agreement also contravenes our own rules of procedure.

Article 64 requires express equality between the Council and Parliament in the legislative procedure when the Commission transfers documents.

Now, it is only the President of the Parliament and the committee chairmen who are entitled to see different types of non-public documents.

The rapporteurs cannot demand them, and MEPs certainly cannot.

As MEPs, we ought to be legally entitled to have documents made available to us whenever they have been issued to others by the Commission.

That was something all the group chairmen agreed about when we began negotiations with the Commission.

Now, a compromise is being proposed whereby those who are to be inspected can decided what they will have inspected.

This compromise does not correspond with Mr Prodi' s pledges.

I would therefore urge that we reject the proposal today and arrange for it to be improved so that we can vote for an improved version next time.

Mr Bonde is asking for the vote to be postponed.

Madam President, my Group supports Mr Bonde' s proposal for deferment, although this agreement undeniably contains some very worthwhile improvements to Parliament' s rights regarding, for example, talks on international agreements and its participation in the intergovernmental conference.

However, we cannot accept the way in which the Council has interfered in relations between the Commission and Parliament now that the talks are over.

The Council asked, pressed, and actually forced the Commission to remove from the agreement the text that would have required that Member States, the institutions and international organisations would, under this agreement, have had to explain their unwillingness to release some confidential information.

In our opinion, this is absolutely intolerable.

Madam President, I have reason to suspect that this is the direct consequence of the Feira summit.

There it was decided that NATO would release secret information for the purpose of making joint military plans, which would appear to be a clear attempt to exclude both the Commission and Parliament from a common security and defence policy. We thus need a clear explanation from the Council as to why this is happening.

In addition, Madam President, we have to improve the rights of rapporteurs to acquire confidential information, and perhaps a deferment would also provide the opportunity to establish this aspect of the matter.

We thus do not support this text such as it is now since the last changes were made to it, and it would be wisest if we were to take a little extra time over the issue.

Madam President, I will have the opportunity later to speak on behalf of my Group.

I will allude to a number of my Group's concerns and criticisms about this project, but in substance, taking the totality of the work that has been done, the significant progress that has been made, and the prospect that in my view we are unlikely through a delay to significantly enhance the document, I would commend to the House that we should vote to proceed with our discussion and the adoption or rejection of the document, because that choice is there, and we have to hear the debate on it.

At any rate, now is the moment to seize our opportunity to try to draw this prolonged matter to a close, to move on, and to build on our interinstitutional relations in a positive way.

(Parliament rejected the request to postpone the vote)

President. As requested, each group will now have two minutes to explain its position briefly.

Madam President, Mr President of the Commission, ladies and gentlemen, this framework agreement between the European Parliament and the European Commission represents a great step forward in relations between our two institutions.

My Group called for this framework agreement, and it is very much committed to it.

Relations between the Commission and the European Parliament will be put on a very firm and clear footing, and it is our common goal to support the building of Europe.

The Commission is the executive, we together with the Council are the legislative, and this framework agreement will create means for the European Parliament to exercise its parliamentary control function more effectively.

It goes without saying that future regulations which become Community law in the European Union will not be affected by this framework agreement.

As legislators we are of course free to set these in train.

This framework agreement is based on the principles of parliamentarism, democracy and transparency.

The Commission has once again incorporated in this agreement, in a legally binding way, the concessions that it made to the European Parliament last September before it was elected - the 'five points' .

These items relate to the annexes on the legislative procedure, and the involvement of and provision of information to Parliament regarding agreements and on enlargement issues. They also concern the passing on of confidential information.

Of course not everyone' s requirements have been met, including some of our own, but it is not always possible to achieve everything.

However, taken as a whole, this agreement does represent progress, and I would sincerely like to thank everyone involved in it - you, Madam President, Vice-President Loyola de Palacio, the President of the Commission, Mr Prodi, and also the political group leaders, who showed great commitment in their work on it.

The Group of the European People's Party (Christian Democrats) and the European Democrats will be unanimously voting for this agreement.

Madam President, Mr President of the Commission, ladies and gentlemen, I would like to express, on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists, our favourable view of the approval of this framework agreement, on the basis of the principles debated this very week - yesterday, in fact - when we took the view that we were carrying out European construction amongst all of us and fundamentally, as far as we are concerned, with the Commission, based on the principles of democracy, transparency and responsibility.

This is the justification for the fact that the code of conduct - whose negotiation it fell to me to initiate in 1990, when Parliament was much weaker, which President Hänsch continued and which was concluded under his presidency - has been given a greater dimension, since the correlation of forces has changed.

Parliament is more powerful and must therefore act more responsibly.

In this respect, we believe that we have taken an important step.

The negotiation has been very long.

It was expected that the framework agreement would be concluded in December of last year.

There has been a very intense tug-of-war with the Commission, which led us to urge two of Parliament' s committee chairpersons, whose work I am grateful for, Mr Napolitano, of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs, and Mrs Theato, of the Committee on Budgetary Control, to make progress in the negotiation, especially in relation to the third Annex.

Madam President, it falls to you to conclude.

I believe that thanks are due firstly to you, Madam President, and to the chairpersons of the committees I mentioned, to President Prodi and the Vice-President, Mrs De Palacio, for the fact that today we have this code of conduct.

What we now have to do is adapt our internal regulations to this new reality.

I would like to end by making a last observation to the Council, which has not taken part in this negotiation. It would perhaps be a good thing if the Council were also in a position and willing to adopt a standard of good conduct with Parliament in the budgetary field and in the political field.

Madam President, that would be a step forward.

Madam President, I believe the document that is before us today is a very significant document.

I have taken steps to try to inform myself as to the equivalence that exists among governments and among national parliaments.

Exceptionally, there may be one state of the 15 where more things that are conceded by way of openness to its parliament than in other states.

But in the large majority of cases, there is no near equivalent and that is a significant element in this document.

Secondly, we had a major debate in this House last year that centred among other things on the question of commissioners accepting individual and personal responsibility for the exercise of their high office.

In this document there are significant clauses interpreting the mutual relationship between our institutions that also constitute significant progress.

There are two points of criticism that my colleagues and my Group have asked to seek clarification on today.

Article 1.4 in annex 3 regulates which persons or bodies within this House may request of the Commission access to confidential documents.

Many of my colleagues are upset that no explicit reference is made to the rights of rapporteurs.

We have brought the document as far as we can with the Commission, but I would say that, if we vote for it today, you must immediately instruct our Committee on Constitutional Affairs to take up the question of delineating the rules in the House that will make it easier for rapporteurs to make requests either of their chairmen or of the other bodies named in this document.

If we include this, then many of my colleagues who have reservations, will vote yes.

One final comment: this House has now begun its work on the question of transparency and the regulation on access to documents.

Many of my colleagues have said to me - without anticipating the outcome of that work - that, should we ultimately need to review our framework in the light of any emerging trends in this regulation, the Commission President, Mr Prodi, should declare on the record, before the vote, that the Commission will be open to the idea of reviewing the document in the light of any evolving policy on transparency.

Madam President, I would like to thank the President of the Commission, Mr Prodi, and Commission Vice-President Loyola de Palacio, for having genuinely embarked on closer cooperation with Parliament in many respects.

This spirit of co-operation is depicted very well in the agreement in those points which concern, for example, the right of Parliament to be involved when international agreements are being discussed, not only with regard to the end result, but at every stage of such talks.

This we regard as a genuine step forward, and the same is true of the fact that the Commission is promising to do its best to keep the European Parliament informed on the intergovernmental conference.

This symbolises the new spirit we are now creating with the Commission, and it is very important that the Commission and Parliament have mutual agreement.

Unfortunately, however, Madam President, the Council has not approved of the process whereby these relations have come closer.

My Group is very concerned about the developments that are under way in the Council.

We hope and demand that the Council gives a public and open explanation about whether in future it intends to respect relations between Parliament and the Commission, or whether it intends to interfere in them in the future.

The Council particularly seems to be aiming for secrecy in the matter of security and defence policy, and it would appear that not just the European Parliament - and via it, the public - will suffer from this attempt at secrecy, which entered the arena after these talks on agreements, when there was a call to amend the text, but also the European Commission will suffer as a result.

We must support a strong Commission, and we must support the idea that in future the Commission will have a fixed role to play in the development of a common security and defence dimension, as these days no one area can remain exempt from the demand for transparency, and that includes a security and defence policy.

Madam President, a majority of my Group will be voting for the framework agreement before us, even, and I would like to make this very clear, if we are not satisfied with all the points in this agreement.

However, we assume that this agreement will serve to strengthen the relationship between the Commission and the Parliament, a relationship based on trust.

You may be sure that if this House approves the framework agreement, Members in my Group will watch very closely to ensure that it is actually adhered to.

I would like to make two critical comments and I am in agreement with the other members of my Group here.

Firstly, the issue of openness and transparency as regards documents and information is extremely important for my Group.

We assume that the agreement stipulated in point 13 will be strictly adhered to, in accordance with which the Members of this House will, as the only institution which has democratic legitimacy, be the first to be provided with information - and I mean all information - as only in that way can we exercise our mandate as the public expects of us.

I therefore hope that this point 18, which relates to the exceptional provision of point 13, will never need to be applied.

Secondly, we too have a comment for the Council.

We were astonished by the Council' s intervention.

I think that this really amounted to a very dubious form of interference in an agreement between the Commission and the Parliament, and, at that, by an institution that has quite rightly attracted criticism itself for meeting behind closed doors.

Furthermore, given that the common security and defence policy is referred to here, at a time when we are aware that Europe is involved in establishing emergency armed forces for military intervention, this really does not bode well.

One final comment: we all heard President Chirac address this House yesterday.

He promised that the Council' s modus operandi would change in future.

I believe that we will all be paying very close attention to what happens during the French Presidency and to whether the Council operates in a more transparent and democratic way in future.

President, it is appropriate to reflect for a moment on how this interinstitutional agreement comes to be before us today for debate.

It is very important that all the EU institutions operate effectively and efficiently and the 370 million citizens of the European Union must support and have confidence in the Union's internal legislative processes.

One of the key legislative organs is the European Commission, which has the power to initiate the enactment of directives and regulations.

The European Council represents the interests of the fifteen governments of the Union and has very strong legislative powers.

Parliament is a democratically elected legislative body which has the overriding power of supervision over other key institutions.

If the European Union is to operate more effectively then it is very important that the relationship between the Commission and Parliament is well defined and that is why the framework agreement between the Commission and Parliament is being put in place.

The negotiations for this framework agreement have been tortuous.

It may not be a perfect document but it is certainly a step forward.

It is more exacting than the agreement that has existed between the two institutions over the past five years.

I would now like to turn to some of the key provisions of the agreement.

The two institutions will now agree to extend constructive dialogue and political cooperation, to improve the flow of information and to consult and inform Parliament on administrative reform within the Commission.

There is also agreement, albeit not very extensive, on the EU legislative process, international agreements and the enlargement negotiations and procedures are put in place for the transmission of confidential Commission documents and information.

One could argue that much of this framework agreement only clarifies existing provisions under the present EU Treaties.

For example, I know that the Commission is required to keep Parliament informed of the enlargement negotiations to enable it to express its views in good time through appropriate parliamentary procedures.

That is right and proper, in view of the fact that the European Parliament has to approve the right of any Member State to accede to the Union as a new and full Member.

The Parliament also has the final say as to whether or not international agreements such as the WTO talks are approved.

Parliament cannot be expected to make important decisions on such matters unless the necessary and appropriate information has been forwarded to the Members for their consideration.

That is why the Commission must set in train open procedures to transmit up-to-date information on the whole range of regulations, directives and international accords being discussed and enacted by the Union.

Finally, I am satisfied there is always a need to clarify the procedures for the transmission of confidential information.

Madam President, on behalf of the Italian Radical Members, I would like to stress that the framework agreement strikes an important balance in relations between our two institutions.

It was difficult to achieve this compromise, and the Council' s last minute attempts to water down the agreement are evidence of how ambitious it is and of the way it places Parliament and the Commission in a relationship of cooperation, where Parliament performs a monitoring function in line with its prerogatives while the Commission has a range of tasks to add to its primary role of guardian of the Treaties and proposer of initiatives.

I am certain that the right balance has been found. In my opinion, which, I know, differs from that of the Members who criticised the agreement, this was the best agreement that could have been achieved, including in terms of the transmission of documents, and I regret the fact that a slight excess on the part of some Members may well have prevented us from taking the mechanism regulating the transmission of documents further.

However, I feel that this is a great step forward, and we look forward to the adoption and signing of this framework agreement in a few minutes' time.

Madam President, my Group is to vote against the framework agreement.

We are certain that a proper reading in the committees and further negotiation with Mr Prodi himself will produce a better result which we shall be able to vote in favour of.

I should like to begin by correcting a misunderstanding.

We do not want to prevent the Commission from being able to deliberate in confidence.

It is important for every authority to have an internal phase of its proceedings in which any ideas may be discussed and any proposals appear on the table, without its being obliged to make them public.

The Commission should also be entitled to have confidential drafts on the table throughout the preparative phase.

Our demand to exercise supervision applies from the time when the Commission sends documents out or in the case of their being leaked, as happens not infrequently.

If a proposal is no longer within the confines of the Commission, then the latter ought not to be able to refuse to let us see it.

In that way, there would be equality for all, and that is not the case with the framework agreement.

There are two humiliating situations in particular which we should like to avoid.

In the legislation process, we sit, as we all know, in committees and debate draft bills.

Behind us sit students, interns and people from the Permanent Representations with the confidential drafts marked 'restrained' , while we MEPs cannot obtain them.

The lobbyists, who sit behind, also have them, but we elected representatives cannot obtain them.

It also often happens that we read in the newspaper about a leaked Commission proposal.

We are asked to comment on it, but we cannot obtain a copy.

It is a humiliating situation which is completely unacceptable.

When he took up his post, Mr Prodi promised to bring this situation to an end.

We should be legally entitled to obtain documents when they are no longer within the confines of the Commission.

And it is as individual MEPs and rapporteurs that we should have this legal entitlement and not by going down on our knees before the President.

What is more, a President might come along to whom one preferred not to kowtow.

Madam President, on a point of order, I am very concerned indeed about the reports that have appeared in the press, both in France and elsewhere, in the last few days about the opening of an investigation in France by the public prosecutor's office in relation to Echelon as well as, apparently, a parallel investigation into Echelon by the French secret service, the DST.

The European Parliament is an important body.

I am therefore very concerned that these two different inquiries, which may proceed as a result of any votes taken here today, will cause confusion, difficulty and may indeed prejudice the position of the European Parliament.

We shall certainly support the Conference of Presidents' proposal, but in view of my earlier remarks we should now reconsider this position, or at least be given some assurances about the French authorities' actions on this matter.

Mr Lannoye, we cannot open a debate now.

My second comment, Madam President, I am sorry, but we have not had a debate in this House.

I think that we also need to make a clear distinction ...

(The President cut the speaker off)

Everyone in this House is well aware of the difference between a committee of inquiry and a temporary committee.

Madam President, my motion is that we hold a vote on this matter.

The committee which I have the honour to chair examined the STOA report.

We know quite clearly what the position of the different Members of the House is on this, and the Conference of Presidents has quite rightly presented proposals to us.

There is only one question which arises: whether we should look at one particular system which might be an invasion of privacy, or at all potential systems that might be an invasion of privacy.

There are clear amendments on our order paper today which deal with that point.

I move that we now hold a vote on this matter.

According to the agreement between the European Union and Cyprus, the cost of participation in the programme by Cypriot undertakings will be covered in full by the Republic of Cyprus.

However, the equivalent cost for candidate countries in central Europe is covered out of Community funds.

Although the sum provided for in the agreement is small, this is not a question of quantity but of principle.

In addition, Cyprus also covers the cost of its participation in other programmes.

The people of Cyprus are clearly being wronged here.

I should also like to point out that the total cost of adapting Cyprus to Community acquis is put at between 500 and 900 million Cyprus pounds, i.e. between EUR 1 and 1.8 billion, while the funding received by the Republic of Cyprus from the European Union is minute.

Obviously economic relations between Cyprus and the European Union are unfairly stacked against the Republic of Cyprus and the people of Cyprus have nothing to gain from accession, which is why the members of the Communist Party of Greece abstained rather than vote in favour.

- (EL) I should like to use the vote on the agreement between the European Union and the Republic of Cyprus on small and medium-sized enterprises to raise the issue of the new provocative action by the Denktash regime in Strovilia, where the occupying forces have advanced their position on the green line in an arbitrary act of aggression just a few days before proximity talks are due to start in Geneva.

The Council of Ministers, and the French presidency in particular, must react, especially in the direction of Turkey, whose forces now occupy almost half the Republic of Cyprus.

At the same time, the European Union should raise the issue of when the occupying forces are due to start withdrawing during the debate on partnership between the European Union and Turkey as a condition for continuing negotiations between the EU and Turkey.

Mr President, I voted for the Schmid report, which is intended to prevent forgery of credit cards and other means of payment which do not involve filthy lucre.

I voted for the motion partly because pensioners and the elderly are among the most frequent victims of this type of forgery - as always the prime targets - in the hope that, when we return to the issue, a decision will, at last, be taken to acknowledge that when a citizen is the victim of a crime the State is liable, albeit indirectly, in the same way as it is at football matches.

I therefore hope that a decision will soon be taken to oblige the State to pay compensation to victims of common crimes, and therefore also to provide compensation for citizens who have been the victims of fraud.

Mr President, of course I voted for the motion.

Article 3 of this measure sets aside EUR 300 million to be spent between 2000 and 2004 on the protection of birds in general and certain important species of bird in particular.

Of course I am in favour of this measure, for I love birds.

Before I set off for Parliament, I saw Lulù, my pussycat, carrying a bird in her mouth.

I distracted her with some cat food - we all love cats - I distracted her, picked up the bird and took it into the house, where it was lovingly looked after.

I am thus in favour of protecting birds, but I would like the Greens, who are the most prominent party in the field, to attend to the poor old pensioners and elderly people who have nothing to eat as well, and all to come straight over - the Greens I mean - and join the Pensioners' Party.

. (PT) I welcome the fact that the conciliation procedure on the proposal for a regulation on the financial instrument for the third stage of the LIFE Programme (2000-2004) has been completed, thus allowing further projects to be financed under the new programme in the second half of this year.

I also welcome the fact that the amendments relating to the objectives of the programme have been approved, as has the compromise proposal for a new programme.

Nevertheless, given that LIFE is the only instrument for directly promoting the European Union' s environmental policy, and has achieved substantial results, it is bound to be a matter for regret that the reference budget for LIFE-III has been set at EUR 640 million, that is only EUR 27 million more than in the common position of the Commission and the Council. This is a long way from the EUR 850 million proposed by the European Parliament at first and second reading.

Mr President, the three key factors which typify the transport of people and goods in terms of competition are price, reliability and speed.

It is possible that the railway industry has not been quite up to scratch because, for the time being, it has largely lost the competitive battle to road transport and aviation.

This is why it is sensible to find out how the railway industry could function better and how its market share in Europe can grow.

I can think of different ways to achieve this.

French rail is currently expanding considerably, with growing employment, by doing the exact opposite of what Mr Jarzembowski proposes in his report.

Accordingly, the root of the problem is different from how the rapporteur sees it.

The real problem is that politicians have for years neglected the railway industry, mainly because they considered it to be a crumbling vestige of the 19th century which would not make it into the 21st century anyway.

All new investments were poured into a dense network of motorways and increasingly large airports.

Only when the environmental consequences of this policy became apparent did attention shift back to the railways.

But at that time, the concept that freedom for the economy was more important than democratic input in politics had already taken hold.

Politicians no longer wanted that input in public enterprises and, with it, shirked the responsibility of acting as inspector on behalf of the consumer and as guardian of employment.

Public enterprises started to shape up as private companies, increasingly so, where growth, profit and market value were considered more important than the social consequences of their actions.

Taking care of public transport and the environment should be of concern to all of us, including therefore our democratically elected government.

Whether or not it is judicious to separate infrastructure from the operation of the railway industry is to be decided by the national or regional governments and is not a task of the European Union.

And it is certainly not up to the European Union to implement forced privatisation of urban or regional transport companies, as is in danger of happening in the short term.

For my Group, these considerations are sufficient to reject Mr Jarzembowski' s proposals out of hand and to express the hope that they could never be translated into policy.

I voted for Mr Jarzembowski' s excellent report with pleasure, for there is nothing more relevant to Europe and to bringing together its citizens than the railways.

Free competition in the railway sector can only improve the condition of both goods and passenger railway transport, and, in my mind' s eye, I can already see pensioners and elderly people who are, at last, able to spend their time travelling around Europe in sleeper and restaurant cars - comfortable carriages which are absolutely essential for them precisely because of their age.

I look forward to the day when, thanks to this and future measures, it will be possible to travel here to Strasbourg by rail to visit the European Parliament from anywhere in Europe.

Mr President, complete liberalisation would lead to an increase in competition in the rail sector and enhance the competitiveness of railways as compared with road transport.

There is no point in talking about projects to extend the European rail network until complete liberalisation has taken place.

This is therefore a matter of urgency. Projects such as the Brenner base tunnel can only compete if freight transport can be offered at competitive rates.

Adopting this directive would give a clear signal about liberalising rail transport.

If a clear split is not made between the trains operated by the railway companies on the one hand and the management of railway infrastructure on the other, the objective of this directive will be seriously undermined.

I have therefore rejected the solution opted for in Article 6(4) of the common position.

- We all applaud the coming of the second age of railways, and acknowledge that market liberalisation can continue with economic opportunity and public service needs to bring it about.

The UK invented railways, developed them and was the first to privatise them.

As a member of the Rail Maritime and Transport Union in Britain my view is guided by the balance we strike in railway development.

We should have acknowledged here that European railway systems are all different, and their diversity merits the derogations proposed.

We should have placed greater emphasis on the introduction of rail regulators, as the UK now has, and less on the ideology of physical separation of infrastructure and operating services.

And we need to be absolutely certain that we have licensing systems which carry obligations, and network benefits for passengers.

No one should have ignored these issues in the vote we cast today.

Mr President, everyone is agreed that something needs to change within the railway industry.

It needs to operate within a large-scale European network instead of just within the individual Member State borders.

Long waiting and transfer times at borders and the fact that direct international connections have ceased to exist are a cause of frustration.

We would all like to see ineffective, conservative and bureaucratic procedures brought to an end. Indeed, they cause frustration amongst users and unnecessarily drive freight and passengers onto other types of transport.

I indicated yesterday as well as during previous debates that cooperation between the railway companies of the different Member States should be stepped up, so as to offer joint solutions for cross-border traffic.

This cooperation should have been sought a long time ago.

If this had been the case, there would have been fewer opportunities for those intending to elbow out existing railway companies by introducing newcomers onto the market which offer price reductions to the detriment of the working environment, working conditions and the environment in general.

Mr Swoboda is right in stating that years of lack of investment in capacity, infrastructure and technology must now be rectified.

He entertains the possibility of authorities offering financial compensation in order to make the use of railways safe for public transport and does not rule out a role for public companies in future.

On the other hand, however, his statement that, in this line of industry, rights must be available to all to an equal extent, makes him a hostage to liberal ideas.

This is borne out in his ideas that we should aim for full recovery of costs rather than expect extra charges for each additional train.

One unintended consequence could be that passengers and freight are forced to use alternatives which, can, on this basis, compete structurally at lower prices.

These are cheaper for the consumer, but cost society as a whole more dearly because these alternatives cannot afford to care as much about workers and the environment.

In addition, Mr Swoboda has deleted the exemption rules for islands and Member States which do not have cross-border railway connections, as formulated in the Council' s common position.

In his opinion, everyone should be affected by liberalisation to the same degree.

In our view, this deletion does not constitute an improvement on the Council' s position.

Mr President, I voted for the Swoboda report as well.

I totally disagree with the previous speaker, for I consider that the liberalisation of public services may work to the advantage of the citizens, particularly in that the Swoboda report provides for an appropriate public-benefit transport service eligible for State compensation.

In voting for the motion, I call upon the States to decide to allow the least well-off citizens, those who have nothing, and that includes pensioners and the elderly, whose pensions are not even sufficient to allow them to live properly, to travel free of charge.

The States of Europe must assist the least well-off citizens by providing them with free services.

The Railway Infrastructure Package agreed by the Transport Council last December was the result of some very difficult negotiations.

The common position represents a delicate balance which supports the principles of liberalisation of the industry while giving due consideration to the particularities of individual Member States.

Part of this common position includes a complex derogation in respect of Ireland, Northern Ireland and Greece as well as further considerations for Luxembourg.

In the case of Greece and of both parts of the island of Ireland there are obvious geographical obstacles to full participation in a single rail market.

In these circumstances, full implementation of the Rail Package would result in a considerable burden on the administrations of these Member States without any of the benefits to consumers that the Package is designed to bring about.

The amendments which I tabled to Mr Jarzembowski' s and Mr Swoboda' s reports aimed at restoring the equilibrium established by the common position.

The Council position is, I believe, in the best interests of both the rail industry and the consumer.

I would further like to point out that the derogation for Ireland, Northern Ireland, Greece and Luxembourg only covers those elements of the package where implementation would serve no real and practical purpose.

Furthermore, there are even in-built safeguard clauses in this derogation which would cause the whole derogation to lapse should any new entrant to the rail markets of Ireland or Greece appear.

In summary, colleagues, as a member of the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism I recognise the desirability of developing a single market in rail-service provision and the potential benefits for the consumer.

The granting of a derogation to the geographically-separated rail networks of Ireland, Northern Ireland and Greece does not in any way undermine this principle.

On the other hand, removal of the derogation would impose unnecessary administrative burdens and costs in these Member States without bringing any visible benefits to anyone concerned.

- I wish to place on record my serious concern at the decision of the EP to seek the deletion of the Irish (including Northern Ireland and Greece) derogation from the full effects of this directive.

The European Parliament's position is based on the mistaken view that it is possible to have a 'one size fits all' approach to Europe's railways.

There are clearly circumstances relating to the island of Ireland and the isolated position of Greece as far as railways are concerned which require to be taken into account.

- (SV) The present increase in haulage in Europe is untenable in the long term.

The heavy goods traffic on the roads creates problems in the form of congestion, noise and emissions of environmentally harmful substances.

In order to curb this development, goods transported by road ought to be transferred to the railways.

However, the system that we have in Europe today with fifteen separate railway systems makes it impossible for railway traffic to compete on the same terms as road traffic.

Therefore, the railways in the EU need to be liberalised and the market for the transportation of goods by rail needs to be opened up.

The members of the Swedish Social Democratic Party, Pierre Schori, Anneli Hulthén, Jan Andersson, Maj-Britt Theorin, Göran Färm and Ewa Hedkvist Petersen would like to stress the following points of view in connection with the consideration of Mr Jarzembowski's and Mr Swoboda's draft recommendations for second reading.

One of the most important measures for reducing the competitive disadvantages faced by the railways is to separate those responsible for the infrastructure from the transport firms.

Such a separation must be effected as quickly as possible, as it is a prerequisite for different transport firms being able to compete with each other on the same terms as apply within other forms of transport.

Fair competition also requires rail fees to be based on the principal of marginal costs.

The fees must be based on the traffic-related costs arising during transportation in connection with, for example, noise, effects on the environment, risks of accidents etc.

The aim is to create a system of fees that is neutral with regard to competition and does not discriminate against any form of transport.

Mr President, I voted for the Wieland report because there needs to be an increase in professional requirements in the European Union.

I am referring in particular to the skills of nurses and doctors.

This report rightly increases the minimum length of training required to become a general practitioner from two to three years and I support this step.

However, in voting for the motion, I am also expressing a desire for further measures. Although it is a good thing to have skilled doctors to treat patients, it is also a good thing if citizens who are ill in the European Union are able to treat themselves.

Sadly, the poor, the elderly and a great many pensioners hardly have enough money to live on and can only afford one meal a day. These people cannot afford to buy medicine.

In voting for the motion, I therefore call for medical assistance to be provided for the citizens who are least well-off as well.

- I wish to place on record my satisfaction that current directives governing architects' qualifications are adequate to enable those who are not currently registered as architects in Ireland to become registered as such.

This obviously requires negotiation and agreement between various architects' representative bodies in Ireland on a registration process.

Framework agreement on relations between the European Parliament and the Commission (C5-0349/2000)

Mr President, the framework agreement between Parliament and the Commission, as has been presented to us today, is diametrically opposed to the prospect held out by President Prodi of making European documents as widely available to the public as they are in those Member States which have moved furthest in the direction of transparency.

The agreement bears out existing practice and even limits public access to a certain extent.

A right which all MEPs still have at present would, on the basis of this decision, soon be limited to a chosen few, whilst at the same time, the list of documents which can only be supplied with the permission of third parties would be extended to include international organisations such as the WTO and the World Bank.

Parliament has not even had the opportunity to discuss or amend this agreement.

A government which keeps information from its citizens is unreliable but a government which does not even take its own parliamentarians seriously is not ready for democracy yet.

Fortunately, a number of Member States, including the Netherlands, have enjoyed better practices for many years now.

This framework agreement illustrates how backward the European Union still is, and this promises little in the way of the possibility of involving the electorate in a democratic way.

This is why I have naturally voted against.

Mr President, I have both spoken and voted against the framework agreement, because I think it is an insult both to freely elected Members of this House and to the electorate.

I cannot understand why we are being given a two-class system of rights, why ordinary Members and even rapporteurs are not being trusted to see confidential information.

This is a fundamental requirement if we are really to take our job of scrutinising the Commission' s actions seriously.

I fear that this framework agreement will basically perpetuate the policy of inadequate transparency that we have seen in recent years, instead of seizing a genuine opportunity and finally attempting to do justice to our remit by ensuring greater transparency and preventing the Commission from continuing to take refuge behind confidential documents.

I would have liked to have seen all Members being treated equally and no one having more or less rights - that should have been the starting point!

- (DA) The Danish Social Democrats have voted against the framework agreement because it does not, in its current form, fulfil the conditions for an open and transparent exchange of information between Parliament and the Commission.

Article 276 of the Treaty states that the Commission should submit all the necessary information to Parliament in connection with the discharge procedure.

The framework agreement restricts this provision.

According to the framework agreement, it is only the Conference of Presidents, Parliament' s President and the chairman of the Committee on Budgetary Control who can ask the Commission for information.

Rapporteurs and 'ordinary' MEPs can therefore be denied access to information.

From a political point of view, it is unacceptable that the chairman of the Committee should be able to decide which information can be passed on.

It is also problematic from a legal point of view because, according to Parliament' s Rules of Procedure, liability is delegated to the rapporteur.

From a practical point of view, it will lengthen the discharge procedure.

According to the framework agreement, Parliament and the Commission are to come to an agreement as to which documents are to be handed over.

It is unreasonable, however, that the Commission (which is to be supervised) should be involved in deciding which information is to be made available.

Moreover, the procedures governing confidential documents are very protracted and may be misused by the Commission to avoid making information available.

We hope that a better agreement will successfully be reached regarding the provision of information as an integral part of the discharge procedure.

In its present form, the agreement constitutes a restriction on Parliament' s right to information, as guaranteed under the Treaty.

- (SV) Parliament is responsible for granting discharge from liability and for monitoring how the Commission has utilised the Union's funds.

In order to be able to make a well-founded decision, Parliament needs the information that it considers to be necessary.

The way the framework agreement, and in particular Annex 3, is worded, it gives the Commission the final decision in any dispute as to whether a document shall be handed over to Parliament or not.

It is completely unacceptable that the body that is to be inspected should make its own decision as to what information the inspector is to have.

We consider this agreement to contravene Article 276 of the Treaty which clearly stipulates that Parliament shall have access to the information it requires.

The agreement also applies to other areas of cooperation with the Commission, and in these areas, too, there are retrograde steps in relation to promises that were previously made.

As regards information on international agreements, there had been a step forward in this area before the governments of the Member States intervened and changed the text for the worse.

Even the Nordic governments have supported a change for the worse that has now resulted in Member States not even needing to give reasons why they do not want the Commission to pass on documents that they themselves have given to the Commission.

On 8 June 2000, the Conference of Presidents of Parliament adopted the framework agreement between Parliament and the Commission.

The vote on this issue will be held during the July part-session, but Members of Parliament will not be given the opportunity to discuss it or to table any amendments.

Without any more detailed examination or discussion within the groups, the group chairmen have adopted this framework agreement which transfers the power of decision over which documents Parliament shall have access to the Commission.

This means that the elected representatives will not obtain any real insight into the legislative proceedings, but will be left in the background or on the sidelines.

The group chairmen unanimously requested the Commission to grant the Members of Parliament the legal right of access to the documents which are issued in other connections.

On 8 June, however, they accepted that Mr Prodi would not fulfil all the promises he made when he took office.

As Members of Parliament, we ought to have the legal right to complete information.

Of course, there may be justifiable exceptions that must be respected.

There is no doubt that the Commission, as an executive body, is fully within its rights to investigate different points of view and prepare drafts in the form of internal working documents without the obligation to publish them.

However, it ought to be beyond all doubt that, at the same time as a document is given to someone outside the Commission, Parliament should have the right to the same information.

If a newspaper publishes material from documents that have been leaked, Members of Parliament cannot get access to the documents in question.

Trainees at the Council of Ministers or at the offices of the Permanent Representations of the Member States have access to documents which Members of Parliament have no opportunity to consult, not even the committee and group chairmen or the rapporteurs.

When Romano Prodi visited Parliament last spring to introduce himself before the present Commission was installed in office, he promised that Members of Parliament would have access to documents if they were passed on to authorities or organisations outside the Commission or leaked to the media.

Because the framework agreement involves certain improvements upon current practice, it should not be rejected in its entirety.

It should, however, at least contain the promises Mr Prodi made on behalf of the Commission.

The closed door policy is unacceptable to the public, the elected representatives and journalists alike.

Members of Parliament must fight for their rights as elected representatives.

. (NL) The framework agreement undeniably contains a number of interesting ideas for increased transparency in the relations between the Commission and the European Parliament.

But I cannot endorse the proposed regulation with regard to confidential documents.

The fact that an application to peruse confidential documents has to go through committee chairmen or the President of the European Parliament is unacceptable to me.

Furthermore, it is not up to one institution to decide on what is confidential and what is not.

This is why I have abstained from the vote.

The 'Echelon' System (B5-0593 and 0594/2000)

(EL) According to the hearing of the parliamentary Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs, the Echelon system has been upgraded by the USA. and the United Kingdom to a global telecommunications spy system, the victims of which include the countries of the European Union.

The presence of Echelon bases in the Republic of Cyprus, i.e. the British bases, are particular important and are tied into Anglo-American attempts to obstruct the independence of Cyprus.

The issue has huge implications for the democracy and freedom of communications.

The European Parliament should set up a full committee of inquiry pursuant to Rule 151 of the Rules of Procedure, just as it did with extremely positive results during the mad cow crisis.

Setting up a simple temporary committee pursuant to Rule 150 will not, I fear, allow Parliament to throw any light on Echelon and will be tantamount to bowing to pressure from the USA. and Great Britain.

- (DE) I am in favour of setting up a genuine committee of inquiry to investigate an infringement of fundamental rights by the Echelon interception system.

However, I am voting against setting up a temporary committee, which, without a remit for its inquiry, I regard as a sop.

If we only set up a temporary committee, the European Parliament will just be viewed as a paper tiger in its endeavours to cast some light on the activities of Echelon.

The caution displayed by the major political groups in the EP about investigating Echelon demonstrates that there is no great interest in focusing on secret service activities, as the European public would then be quite justified in asking what the national secret services and so-called 'defenders of the state' actually do.

Yet this would be even more important because not only are industrial secrets being monitored, but also the private and political activities of people in the EU.

Mr President, the Lehne report on money laundering.

First of all, I would like to congratulate Mr Lehne and the entire group for the work they have done.

The document is very sound and strikes a fine balance.

The Green Group as well as the regionalists have voted in favour of this report because it is an instrument for fighting laundering practices, and fighting money laundering is the best way to tackle organised crime.

The 1991 directive confined itself to examining money laundering practices with regard to drugs money.

But organised crime embraces a great deal more.

Hopefully, the proposals submitted by the rapporteur will open up the possibility of adopting a forceful approach in the fight against organised crime, such as trafficking in people and smuggling, but also fraud and corruption in the art trade.

It is important that the exchange of information should be compulsory and we also set great store by the fact that a standard set of rules will be imposed on Member States and candidate countries in the fight against money laundering, thus guaranteeing minimum measures.

The rapporteur also states, by way of justification, that the new directive provides for the possibility of requiring proof of identity from estate agents, notaries, external accountants and legal consultants, unless they represent their clients in legal proceedings or provide legal advice.

This report can be used as a basis for further action.

Our Group welcomes it with open arms, and I do not think that organised crime will receive this report with too much enthusiasm.

Mr President, I abstained from the vote on Mr Lehne' s report, not because I am against the measures it lays down - it is right to employ all possible means to combat crime and the fact that we are combating the laundering of the proceeds of criminal activities is important, useful and right - but because I consider that the European Union is not doing enough to fight financial crime. Financial crime is a drain on energy, resources, means and therefore money which could be used by our governments in activities which are more important for society such as meeting the needs of the less well-off part of the population such as pensioners and the elderly.

This is why I abstained from the vote.

. (PT) I voted in favour of the Lehne report, which improves on the original initiative to widen the scope of the directive on money laundering.

The great advantage of this directive was that its adoption led to all the Member States declaring money laundering an offence subject to criminal prosecution.

By virtue of its overall preventive effect, it has helped to protect the financial system by discouraging those who might be interested in money laundering from exploiting the financial system to that end, by obliging credit and financial institutions to inform the relevant authorities of anything which might indicate money laundering.

The aim of widening the directive' s scope in this way is to reinforce efforts to combat potential money laundering outside the traditional financial sector.

The directive, which applied to various financial sectors, including banks, insurance companies, and so forth, is to be extended to other non-financial activities and professions which are nevertheless extremely vulnerable to money laundering.

In the case of lawyers, there are to be clear safeguards, particularly as regards maintaining the right of confidentiality. The fact of the matter is that although there is an awareness of the enormous impact of money laundering and other forms of corruption, it is necessary to safeguard our citizens' right to legal advice and assistance.

Furthermore, it is also intended to extend the list of defined offences. In addition to income from drug trafficking, it is also necessary to include activities associated with organised crime, and we need to find a uniform definition of organised crime not just at European level but also at international level.

Efforts to approve definitions, types of crime and common sanctions with a view to harmonising criminal law are intended first and foremost to apply to particularly important areas such as money laundering.

Because the world is becoming ever more sophisticated, many organised crime syndicates can take advantage of legal loopholes and differences between legislation in the Member States to exploit anomalies between the various systems.

- At the outset, I would like to place on the record my thanks and appreciation to the rapporteur Mr Lehne on the way he had dealt with this difficult brief.

Each of us I am sure would wish to see action being taken to tackle the proceeds of cross-border crime and money laundering.

This directive will go some way to linking cooperation and exchanges of information, as well as extending the scope and range of the offences.

In Ireland, where there is already existing legislation, the Criminal Justice Act 1994 is presently being updated to take into account some of the proposals contained in this directive.

Whilst I voted in favour of the report, I must confess to having some disquiet with regard to two aspects contained within it.

Firstly, the continuing attempt to create a European Public Prosecutor's office, is something which I am resolutely opposed to.

We already have at our disposal many agencies at a national level, which are most efficient and which are able to deal with the vast majority of cases - and also the Court of Auditors, OLAF and other departments to deal with these issues at a European level.

Secondly, the new disclosures requirements on lawyers, I believe, would seriously undermine the long established precedent of lawyer/client confidentiality.

We must not interfere with the rights of individuals to a fair defence, trial, or prejudice the doctrine of presumed innocence.

However, in spite of these concerns, which I hope to alter by amendment later via the legislative process, I vote in favour.

. (PT) It is a good thing that there is a desire to step up measures against money laundering, not just in relation to crime associated with drug trafficking, as in the previous directive, but also as regards money laundering linked with organised crime and a wider range of defined offences, that is to say fraud, corruption and other illegal activities damaging the Community' s financial interests.

However, the proposal for a directive is not without its controversial aspects, particularly in so far as it undermines professional secrecy in certain sectors, notably the legal profession, whilst failing to impose a corresponding obligation to declare suspicious activities relating to high-value business transactions on professionals such as those selling luxury items, auctioneers, customs officials and so on.

The rapporteur of this European Parliament report accordingly puts forward certain approaches which are slightly different to those contained in the proposal for a directive, but he basically supports it.

In any case, one important and central issue, that is the growing liberalisation of financial markets and movements of capital, is not addressed, which means that the practical effects of this liberalisation will continue to be weakened.

That is why I am abstaining.

We have abstained from voting on Amendments 8, 16, 26 and 45, as we do not think that these amendments sufficiently reflect a good balance between, on the one hand, an effective reporting obligation to combat money laundering and, on the other hand, an advocate' s/lawyer's duty of confidentiality to his/her client and the obligations that this entails.

It is important that an advocate/lawyer should not be covered by the reporting obligation when he/she represents a client in a case.

However, it is more difficult to determine in which situations a lawyer/advocate shall be subject to the reporting obligation when he/she has access to relevant information in relation to so-called legal advice.

We think that lawyers/advocates should, to a certain extent, be exempt from the reporting obligation, but the proposals from both the Commission and Parliament are not sufficiently balanced or precise in this respect for us to be able to support them.

Finally, we would like to point out that the proposal has certain deficiencies with respect to definitions that could lead to confusion.

In the proposal, the words advocate, independent lawyer and lawyer are used without it being clear what the distinction between these terms is intended to be.

It is important to emphasise that lawyers must be considered equal to advocates in those countries that do not have the compulsory employment of counsel.

Mr President, I also abstained from the vote on this document on the list of States into which it is permitted to enter with or without a visa, for this is certainly a barrier to the free movement in the European Union of citizens resident in other States.

I abstained because I would like us to focus more on the free movement in our Union of citizens who are severely disabled, blind or partially sighted, deaf or totally disabled and in need of full time care, who, if they move and go to live in another country - if they move from England to Italy, for example - are no longer entitled, under a regulation which is still in force, to the disability allowance or to the attendance allowance for their carer.

We must take steps to amend this regulation.

I have two points to make in connection with the proposal for a Council regulation listing the third countries whose nationals must be in possession of visas when crossing the external borders and those whose nationals are exempt from that requirement:

I am pleased that the list of countries whose nationals are exempt includes Bulgaria and Romania, which have both made specific commitments concerning security on their external borders.

As chairman of the Joint Parliamentary Committee of the European Parliament and Bulgaria, I should like to call on the Council to apply this position.

The abolition of visas is one of the positions covered by the proposals of the Joint Parliamentary Committee of the European Parliament and Bulgaria which starts sitting today in Strasbourg.

The Council of Ministers and the Commission should make representations to the authorities in the USA, which insist on visas for Greek nationals.

If - and rightly so - American citizens have free access to the entire territory of the European Union, then the opposite should apply, on the basis of reciprocity, and they should stop this unacceptable discrimination against Greek citizens.

- (DA) The Danish Social Democrats in the European Parliament have today voted in favour of Mr Lehne' s report about the proposal for a Council regulation listing the third countries whose nationals must be in possession of visas when crossing the external borders and those whose nationals are exempt from that requirement.

We note that, in its proposal, the Commission considers that this proposal is not covered by the Danish reserve, in spite of the fact that this matter concerns a positive list which, as we understand it, is in fact covered.

When we vote in favour of the report, this should be seen in the light of our view that a solution should be found which satisfies all countries and respects the Danish reserve.

- (SV) The EU' s strict visa policy constitutes a major barrier for people coming to Europe.

The tightening up of the visa requirements that has been carried out over the last few years has unavoidably led to more cases of people smuggling and to an increase in so-called illegal immigration to the Member States of the EU.

The people who have been smuggled in, or have found their way into the European Union in some other way, have often suffered terrible tragedies on the way here.

Once they have arrived in the EU, they are completely lacking in rights and social protection.

The list of countries whose citizens require a visa for entry into the EU contains more than 130 countries.

There are not even as many as 50 countries among the states whose citizens are exempt from the requirement for a visa.

This practice, i.e. of having the requirement for a visa as the rule rather than the exception, is not worthy of a democratic Europe.

The basic rule must be that people have the right to enter the EU freely, not the opposite.

Europe needs to change its attitude to immigration.

Within the next few years there will be an acute labour shortage in the EU.

It is therefore important that we recognise and welcome people who are seeking a better future in the EU' s Member States.

A more generous visa policy is also a prerequisite for pursuing a common and humane refugee and asylum policy.

By means of a policy that affirms the value of immigration, we can put a stop to the organised crime and the human tragedies that people smuggling is to blame for.

Mr President, firstly I wish to express my satisfaction with the fact that the entire budget has been tightened up and the increase in appropriations amounts to 1.07% of total GNP for the Member States, while the corresponding figure in the budget for 2000 was 1.11%.

In addition, I am pleased with the increase in the appropriation for youth organisations to EUR 1.5 million.

However, I would particularly like to explain why I supported the proposals for amendments tabled by Mr Virrankoski and Mr Mulder.

I base my opinion in the notion that strict budgetary discipline should be continued and that the prevailing financial frameworks should be respected.

Regarding funds for the Western Balkans, we must take account of the real needs of the regions, the prevailing political situation and the possibility of obtaining funds from other quarters.

For this reason, I do not support an amendment to the financial perspectives in the area of appropriations under External Action.

- We have voted against point 9 in the Haug report, concerning the transfer of funds from the budget for Agricultural Policy to the reconstruction programme for the Western Balkans.

Estimates show that a significant surplus will be available in the agricultural budget under heading 1a.

As a great part of the programme for reconstruction of the Western Balkans is still not financed, we believe that it would be wise to transfer part of this surplus to heading 4 in the budget, should a revision of the financial perspectives become necessary.

The reconstruction of the Western Balkans is on top of our political agenda.

It is also one of the most important tasks for the European Union in the coming years.

We agree with the intention of the Haug report that the financing problem cannot be solved only by redeployment in the Union's existing priorities in external policy.

Funds must be found elsewhere, but this does not necessarily create a need for 'fresh money' from the Member States.

Since a significant surplus will be available in the budget for agriculture, a reduction of the ceiling in heading 1a in favour of an increase of the budget for external policy would be a reasonable solution.

. (PT) Faced with the task of setting new objectives for the European Union, we consider it essential to carry out a wide-ranging revision of the financial perspectives with special emphasis on Heading 3, "Internal Policies" and Heading 4, "External Actions" .

We believe that the new priorities need to be matched to the 'fresh money' available.

In view of this we fundamentally and above all reject the prospect of cuts in the cooperation policy, as implied in the Commission' s preliminary draft.

The same applies to the cuts they propose in the areas of employment and the environment.

In the same way, we reject the cut of EUR 300 million for agriculture.

Indeed, as regards agriculture, we believe that it is vital to set up a fund to tackle the enormous problems in the primary sector.

Accordingly, we agree with some of the rapporteur' s proposals.

However, although she does suggest some improvements, they fall well short of what is absolutely necessary.

Furthermore, some of the amendments made in the final vote limited and even changed its scope.

And that is without even looking at the position on defence policy.

For these reasons, we voted against the final version of the report.

Mr President, I voted for the Paciotti report because I feel that it is right for the European Union to take an interest in anything to do with the protection of personal data. Sadly, personal data is all too often used by criminals to exploit confidential data for their own gain.

As I have already said on a previous occasion, pensioners and the elderly are certainly among the victims.

However, in voting for the motion I would also like to stress that, in addition to having our personal data protected, it would also be nice to be able to know what are own personal data are.

In Italy, for example, workers are still unable to discover the size of the pensions they will receive and how much money they have paid in contributions. They are therefore ignorant of some of their personal data.

In voting for the report, I therefore hope that, in the future, not only will our personal data be protected, but, as well as our name, surname and date of birth, we will all know how great our pension will be when we retire.

Mr President, I hope that Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi will give a written explanation of vote on behalf of our political Group, but I want to say a couple of things.

First of all, I wanted to vote against Amendment No 11.

It was purely a mistake that I voted in favour of that amendment, since any amendments to the Commission proposal were very bad and endanger the whole procedure of getting the safe harbour agreement enforced.

We have negotiated with our US counterparts for over two years.

We had a very good compromise but now the work here in the European Parliament means that European consumers and citizens have to wait until the new compromise proposal is made.

It is not certain that the new compromise proposal will be as good as this was.

I voted against the committee proposal along with other members of my Group.

We are all very sorry that we have to wait for this agreement to come into force.

. (PT) I was unable to make the speech I had prepared during the sitting itself for lack of time.

I am therefore summing up the key points during the explanations of vote.

I share the rapporteur' s concerns that this proposal does not provide Europe' s citizens with an appropriate level of protection as regards transferring and processing personal data relating to them, especially if we take into account the protection they are guaranteed under the European directive on data protection.

However, we all know that at present data is already being circulated in practice, but in an unregulated way.

So while the safe harbour principle may not be an ideal solution to this problem, it will at least impose a certain number of rules and will be a way of preventing abuse.

Work has progressed on attempting to reconcile two differing approaches, namely our own legislation-based system, in which compliance with legal restrictions on obtaining and using personal data is ensured by the public authorities, and the Americans' preference for self-regulation.

The agreement reached represents a limited step forward as far as the guarantees involved are concerned, but it is positive in terms of what it offers for the future by way of security.

We accordingly support the position adopted in the Paciotti report with the amendments tabled by Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi.

- (DE) The Paciotti report on the 'safe harbour' agreement has my approval, although it will not solve the problems attending transatlantic data protection for the following reasons:

It will still be possible, even with the 'safe harbour' agreement in place, to find ways of getting round it and selling clients' data to third parties without having to obtain the client' s consent.

Even if the agreement succeeds in defining vague data protection standards, it is not clear precisely what action will be taken when companies violate these standards.

Will it be possible to take them to court?

Will they have to pay compensation?

The question as to how far EU citizens will actually be able to assert the rights laid down for their benefit in the 'safe harbour' agreement remains unanswered, particularly as the court of jurisdiction for the US companies is in the USA and so they have a natural advantage over individual EU citizens.

That said, I still subscribe to the report because, as matters stand, there are no provisions whatsoever for guaranteeing EU data protection standards in the exchange of data with other continents.

The 'safe harbour' scheme does at least represent an attempt to guarantee data protection beyond EU borders.

(EL) Neither the letter, i.e. the legal basis, nor, more importantly, the spirit of the way in which the burgeoning e-commerce industry is developing and the speed with which it is spreading augur well for the protection of citizens' personal data and privacy; on the contrary, they give cause for serious, widespread concern as regards both the decimation and restructuring of commerce and the market itself and the intensification of efforts to abolish civil rights, make citizens slaves to technology and the savage laws of the capitalist market and turn their personal lives and their very existence into cheap, malleable raw materials to generate profits.

The application of technological innovations, especially the innovations made during the impressive and rapid development of the information society, will cut right through the fabric of society.

The dangers of misuse which lie in ambush behind the huge potential which is developing should encourage and oblige us to be vigilant when it comes to ensuring that the human factor and respect for citizens' fundamental rights and freedoms come first.

New applications and technology cannot be stopped, but nor should they be allowed to develop with no regard for man and his needs, and under no circumstances should they be used to undermine political values and human dignity or to attack basic and inalienable rights such as the sanctity of privacy and personal data.

The proposals and policies for electronic commerce and the measures being promoted to support it are coloured by the totally one-dimensional perception of profit and competitiveness.

This policy is being driven by the huge and constantly inflating sums of money being invested in and thrown at e-commerce in order to serve the needs of the big multinationals in the sector and remove any obstacles which prevent them from adapting as quickly as possible to the rapid developments on this market and acquiring huge, fast profits and influence.

The proposed Community model behind the EU's texts and proposals is supported by and vigorously supports unadulterated competition and unbridled, excessive profit.

This perception is not a guarantee for, it is a blatant threat to the future of society and mankind: uncertainty, insecurity, a breach with man's own needs, categorisation of citizens and workers who will no longer shape their environment but will be shaped by it in order to serve those who define it in the best, fastest and cheapest way possible.

As far as we can see, the term "adequate protection" as used in the report means the continuous and arbitrary definition and distortion of the concept of the protection of personal data, given that sanctions and compensation for breaching doors which are already wide open are advocated as deterrents and safety valves.

Personal data on EU citizens is already circulating in third countries, without any fundamental control; in fact we barely even know the extent of the arbitrary acts already committed.

Knowing as we do from the Echelon interception system that every form of democratic control is being flagrantly violated from without or from a distance, knowing that American multinationals are engaged in wholesale monitoring and spying at the expense of European undertakings and the economic, social, political and cultural activities of the Member States and the private life of the Union citizens as a whole, it is slightly hypocritical of us to approach this huge issue in stockinged feet with our prayer-book in hand.

The current protective framework and the proposed standard contractual clauses are inadequate in the extreme, riddled with holes and inefficient.

You cannot appeal to good intentions for doleful competition and a profit monocracy.

We would only dare call the snake pit of unaccountable monopolies which find it easy to spring up, spread and act with impunity in cyberspace 'safe harbours' euphemistically.

That concludes the explanations of vote.

(The sitting was suspended at 1.40 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m.)

The next item is the debate on the report (A-170/2000) by Mr Karas, on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, on the Commission communication on communications strategy in the last phases of the completion of EMU.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, although the euro has been around for a while now, it is still an abstract concept.

It is something which is not tangible in our day-to-day life, and there is still no so-called 'euroreflex' on the part of the population.

The present currencies are not yet being converted into the euro.

That is why I cannot stress enough the importance of this information and awareness campaign for the euro.

It is not yet too late, but we must all realise that 2001 will be crucial in our efforts to involve the entire European population in this giant operation.

By means of the amendments which I have tabled and which have also been included in the report, I wanted to underline a number of aspects of this campaign.

In the first instance - and I will not labour the point as it was sufficiently highlighted this morning - the campaign must devote special attention to making young people aware and involve education in the information campaign.

Secondly, an information campaign must obviously be tailored to specific target groups, such as the weaker members of society.

I would also ask for special attention to be paid to people on extremely low incomes.

As you know, there are two groups of people who spend a great deal of their time thinking about money: those who are extremely rich and have a great deal of money and those who have very little money or who need to budget every day to make sure they can make ends meet for the rest of the month.

Well, the euro will have a great impact on them and it is they who deserve our special attention.

For this reason, and for other reasons, but especially for this reason, it is important that consumers should not be cheated when they convert their money into euros.

The switch to the euro should not lead to improper price increases.

I have therefore called for the setting up of local hotlines within every local community to ensure that citizens can report improper price increases in a way which is simple and easy.

I have also asked the Commission to submit proposals in this respect and to present best practices to the Member States.

Mr President, not being used to speaking for two consecutive minutes, I am a little worried that I will not manage to fill the time available to me, but I will do my best.

Commissioner Solbes, I must express my approval of this report for I feel that the introduction of the euro is one of the most important, key results of the formation of the European Union out of our 15 States.

Therefore, preparing the population for practical use of the euro is certainly a positive move.

I would like to thank Mr Karas for incorporating a request I made to remove a point from the original measure which stated that adolescents and children must receive good teaching so that they can in turn teach their grandparents.

I would hope that, also on this occasion, it will be the grandparents, the elderly, the pensioners - who elected me here to the European Parliament to represent the Pensioner' s Party, no less - who will teach the adolescents. This is quite possible, for I am sure that pensioners - who fill all the markets of the European Union every morning - will be among the first to understand the relationship between the euro and their national currency.

I believe I can make a small contribution to this effort: I will have posters put up in the areas in Italy in which I was a candidate for the elections, calling upon the Italian Government to raise the minimum pension to EUR 500.

The poster will not specify exactly what this amount corresponds to in Italian lire, and this will force all the citizens to find out the value of EUR 500 in lire.

It is a shame that the Government will not accept this proposal, but, at least it will serve to teach the Italian pensioner citizens the value of the euro.

Mr President, as I and many colleagues have argued for some time, the monetary union project is profoundly dangerous.

It is economically naive and will do huge macroeconomic damage.

Politically it is clearly intended to undermine the nation state, and thus it threatens democracy in Europe.

The proposal before us talks of information on the euro, but we already have all the information we need.

Every newspaper I open has stories about the euro.

Banks and accountancy firms are running seminars and briefing clients.

This is not about information, this is about propaganda.

I do not trust the Commission to provide unbiased information.

I was particularly horrified by the idea of Mrs Randzio-Plath that we should actually enrol schoolchildren as the stormtroopers of this euro propaganda blitz.

Now, if the 12 euro countries wish to undertake a propaganda campaign, that is no business of mine.

But in three countries, Denmark, Sweden and Great Britain, the euro decision is not yet made.

It would be a gross abuse of the democratic process for the Commission to undertake a euro propaganda campaign in those countries before referenda on the currency take place.

It would be outrageous to take money from the taxpayer and to use it to influence the voters' decision.

In Britain, 70% of people are opposed to joining the euro.

We do not want our money spent on promoting it either in the UK or elsewhere.

I therefore have two demands to make of the Commission.

Firstly, please tell us today that no such campaign will be undertaken in Great Britain, Denmark or Sweden.

Secondly, please assure us that the share of funding which might have been spent on those countries is returned to their national exchequers so that people can see clearly and transparently that their money has not been squandered on objectives they do not support.

Better still, cancel the whole project and put all the funds into a special account to help defray the enormous costs that will be incurred when the euro is eventually dismantled.

Mr President, I would firstly like to thank the rapporteur, Mr Karas, for his report, and all of you for participating in the debate.

Mr Karas' s report contains many interesting elements, including 38 proposals, which in many cases coincide with the proposal in the Commission' s communication in February and, in other cases - as he has explained very well in his initial statement -, are proposals which fine-tune, improve and even extend some of the initiatives.

Having made this initial comment, I would like to clarify certain points which I consider to be essential.

Firstly, the communication is part of a very complex operation, that is, the introduction of the euro, in the form of coins and notes, on 1 January 2002.

Secondly, in the application of this process of introducing the coins and notes, the principle of subsidiarity plays a fundamental role.

This means that the Member States, through their governments and central banks, are fundamental to the whole process and also to the operation of providing information.

Our role as Commission consists, in some cases, of persuading, in others, of acting and, in the majority of cases, of communicating to the Member States ideas which they can or cannot apply, and, in some other cases, of proposing specific actions.

The main concern at the moment is to determine the level of preparation of Member States, companies and citizens.

With regard to the Member States, I can tell you that next week I will present the Commission with a report on the practical application of the euro.

This will contain a summary of the situation of the national plans for the introduction of the euro in each of the Member States.

Companies are the special objective of the information campaign at the moment.

According to the latest information available, regarding September, approximately 88% of small and medium-sized businesses assure us that they are prepared for the euro or, at least, are aware of the need to prepare themselves now.

Nevertheless, this figure would be deceptive if I were not to give two additional figures, or make two additional comments.

Firstly, of this 88%, only 22% have already implemented the plans necessary for the introduction of the euro.

As for the rest, there is a certain contradiction between this position, which in theory is so favourable to the companies, and the lack of use of the euro in normal operations at the moment.

To put it another way, we have the impression that companies view the operation with relative optimism, in the belief that it will be easier than it may turn out to be.

This is the reason why we believe that we must pay special attention to companies during this period, as well as to citizens.

The Commission intends to implement certain specific actions, apart from the July communication, regular reports to ECOFIN, a proposal on counterfeiting, which will be presented before the end of the year, and also a series of measures necessary for coordination.

I would like to make some comments relating to the various points mentioned in the debate.

On the whole, the proposals in the communication coincide with the proposals which have been made here.

Nevertheless, there are certain points which deserve additional comment.

Firstly, what action must we take in the 'pre-in' countries or in third countries?

The countries which are not currently members of the Monetary Union have the right, like other Member States, to information campaigns.

This will clearly happen, as long as those countries want it to happen.

Two of them, for the moment, Denmark and the United Kingdom, have not shown any interest in implementing these information campaigns.

Your recommendations include many of the actions which, in our opinion, must be asked of the Member States and, to this end, we will send a communication to the different countries so that they may take account of them.

I would like to highlight certain very interesting aspects which have been mentioned such as paying special attention to training, schools, women, specific sectors, such as tourism, or the tremendously interesting initiative of the distribution of price tables, or the initial or additional obligations of public administrations.

We will communicate to the banking sector your proposals on the possibility of using some of the 'savings days' for information purposes, and we will move forward on all aspects relating to charges on the exchange rate.

The Commission is favourable to the idea that there should not be a differential between the charges made for cross-border operations and for national operations.

The Commission is absolutely prepared to work with Parliament, with the European Central Bank and with the Member States in order to implement a programme which is more efficient, bearing in mind however that, in accordance with the current model, approximately two thirds of the total expenditure of the programme will be met by the Member States, according to their specific programmes.

With regard to the possibility of providing more resources or extending the information process, as proposed in the Karas report, the Commission is in favour of both options.

Of course, we will have to debate them in the future, when we discuss the budgets for the coming years.

The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon.

Use of certain dangerous substances and preparations

The next item is the report (A5-0149/2000) by Mr Arvidsson, on behalf of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive amending for the 22nd time Directive 76/769/EEC on the approximation of the laws, regulations and administrative provisions of the Member States relating to restrictions on the marketing and use of certain dangerous substances and preparations (phthalates) and amending Council Directive 88/378/EEC on the approximation of the laws of the Member States concerning the safety of toys [COM(1999) 577 - C5-0276/1999 - 1999/0238 (COD)]

Mr President, there are two reasons for this report on phthalates in toys: firstly, these substances are a health risk to young children, and secondly several Member States have already adopted their own laws in this area, which is why this report is aimed at reestablishing the common market for toys.

When we deal with issues relating to the health of young children, the commitment is often strong, wholehearted and sincere.

According to experts in the World Health Organisation, it is not possible to prove that phthalates are carcinogens.

However, the WHO thinks that phthalates may cause reproductive damage and hormonal disturbances, mainly amongst young children who are exposed to large amounts of phthalates.

For scientific reasons, phthalates have, in common with other toxic substances, been assigned limit values which give the highest recommended exposure level based on calculated risk levels.

I want to emphasise that this handling of phthalates does not deviate from toxicological routine.

The Commission' s Scientific Committee on Toxicity, Ecotoxicity and the Environment has evaluated the risks posed by a number of phthalates and has thereby unanimously established that the two phthalates that are far and away the most common in toys and articles used in childcare are in danger of causing the limit values to be exceeded in the case of young children and of causing health problems.

In this scientific assessment, it is a concern for young children' s health that is being expressed.

These are children who are at the teething stage, which is a time when they often bite and suck on all sorts of objects.

I would like to caution Parliament against making decisions that go far beyond what is justified by the scientific basis for this standpoint.

I am all in favour of information and informed consumers who can make their own choices, but the labelling that has been proposed by the Commission does not provide information but, rather, a sharp warning.

People who read this warning will not buy these toys for their children or grandchildren.

In this way, the warning will constitute an indirect ban.

In addition, the process of labelling toys is expensive and difficult to carry out in practice.

Tradesmen and tradesmen's organisations have informed me that staff in shops have neither the time nor the knowledge to answer all the questions that customers are going to ask.

Introducing this warning system on toys designed for older children is likely to be tantamount to an extended ban.

The Scientific Committee has identified two phthalates used in toys that may be hazardous to young children' s health.

A decision in favour of a limited ban on these grounds would not primarily be based on the precautionary principle, but on the routine procedure for dealing with toxic chemical substances.

To ban all of the 350 or so currently known phthalates is to proceed on the assumption that all phthalates are associated with more or less the same risks.

However, there is no scientific basis for this assumption.

Once these phthalates are no longer used in toys, further risk assessments and the proposed review of this directive in two years' time ought to be sufficient.

In this short presentation of the document, I wanted to stress the fact that decisions ought to be based on scientific grounds and should cover the high-risk group that has been identified, i.e. young children, as well as the fact that the labelling of toys is very difficult to implement.

There is still no scientifically approved method for migration tests which could partly replace the proposed legislation, and no such method should therefore be alluded to in the legislative text.

Speakers will also put forward their own assessments of the scientific basis.

Allow me to anticipate these and state that politicians ought to listen to scientific assessments and conclusions and not try to make their own assessments of the scientific research material.

It is my hope that this report and tomorrow's decision will make the world a safer place for young children.

Mr President, on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs let me state in very clear and simple terms the position of the committee as we voted; (a) to ban all phthalates and (b) as a consequence to delete all labelling, since if you prohibit all phthalates you do not need labelling.

As the rapporteur, I share the concerns of the Members of Parliament in my committee.

As elected politicians we clearly cannot afford to play fast and loose with children's health.

We must ensure that they are not exposed to unnecessary and unacceptable health risks and acknowledge the public concern on this issue.

In the interests of the single market we must achieve the highest common standards for product safety.

We also need legislation which cannot be undermined or discredited by legal challenges.

This debate has unfortunately been clouded by confusion and uncertainty fuelled by comments in Parliament from Scientific Committee members who doubted the need for any ban on phthalates and questioned whether the health risks are serious or immediate enough to warrant a ban.

As politicians we need clear advice from scientific committees if we are to make rational judgements, take the necessary risk management measures and produce good legislation.

In this case we have not been able to do that effectively because of the gaps in our knowledge, and so my committee understandably decided to go for a blanket ban.

Nor do we have any information on substitutes to plasticisers which might have toxic or chronic effects.

I believe that this legislation shows us that we need action on a number of areas: (a) we urgently need to continue work on migration testing and research into chronic toxicity and the behaviour of children; (b) we need to review and update this legislation periodically and as gaps in knowledge are filled, where necessary add new substances to the ban in the Commission's legislation.

We need to formalise and accept the permanent ban which the Commission is proposing now and we need stringent health warnings and labelling to inform our consumers of the risks.

We have to answer to the public on the legislation that we produce in Parliament, and we cannot afford to be complacent about risks to children's health.

Mr President, the discussion on the harmfulness of phthalates, or plastic softeners, has been dragging on for a long time.

Today, we in Parliament need to speak out regarding the desirability of a total ban on these substances.

Let it be clear that no one in our Group disputes the many useful applications that phthalates have, such as cable casings, and also uses in medical equipment.

The snag is that phthalates are also used to soften children' s toys, many of which end up in their mouths, even if they are not intended for that purpose.

When, in 1998, reports emerged about the possible harmful effects on children' s health, the European Commission proposed - or tried to propose at any rate - a ban on the application of certain phthalates.

Intense consultation with industry to establish a ban from within and to introduce self-regulation in the processing of these substances, came to nothing.

In my opinion, and I say this on behalf of the Group, that was very much a missed opportunity.

It strikes me as rather odd, though, that the harmfulness of the substances has not been established beyond question.

Accordingly, in response to the Commission' s action, we have met with a barrage of contradictory research studies.

Consumer organisations pointed out the harmful potential, while industry tried to demonstrate that things were not all that bad.

The chairman of the scientific committee too was dragged into the debate, which was certainly not an ideal situation.

It is now up to us to assess the proposals.

I have not seen a proposal as ridiculous and complex as this one for a long time.

I do not know how harmful these phthalates are, but if I do not know, then I need to at least ban a number of these phthalates in line with the precautionary principle, because, in my view, this is also what the internal market wants.

Consequently, I hope that the plenary opts in favour of safety, in line with the precautionary principle. Research, however, should not grind to a halt, but rather come up with alternatives to these softeners.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I regard the proposal for a directive we have here as an inadequate attempt to ban the use of six phthalates in toys for infants under three years old on the basis of the opinion of the Scientific Committee.

As I see it, this goes no further than accepting the inevitable, and the proposal does not comply with the precautionary principle, which it is particularly important to apply when it comes to small children.

Until it has been proved that all phthalates are harmless, there is no place for plasticisers in toys for children under three.

Children in this age group will put any toy in their mouths.

They learn about the shape of toys and the materials used to make them by putting toys in their mouths, and these children should be able to suck toys like this without any risk to their health.

This can only be achieved by a ban on all phthalates in toys.

We also need labelling for the three to six age group.

This is not only because there are smaller children who play with toys produced for older children, but also because there are also children in this age group who still suck things.

In addition, we want to help parents in deciding what to buy and in sorting out what toys are unsuitable for their children.

The amendments before us, which call for a review after two years, for the evaluation of new test methods and for scientific studies on the dangers of PVC products, are helpful in maximising health protection for us all in the long term, not just for small children.

To sum up then, it is for us to decide whether to opt for the precautionary principle and a high degree of protection, or whether we intend to hide behind scientific reports, which can, however, never relieve us of the responsibility of taking the necessary political decisions.

Mr President, I cannot deny that this issue is extremely tricky for the Liberal Group.

The problem of phthalates in children' s toys is receiving wide public attention and the campaign which focuses on this problem, largely in the hands of Greenpeace, can be termed extremely successful.

This is only natural and right, of course, because children are helpless and are entitled to protection.

We know that phthalates in animal trials - in itself not a very pleasant thought - proved harmful, and we can therefore assume that they will be harmful to people, too.

But we do not know to what extent they would be harmful, or in what dosage. Neither do we know for which application they are harmful or whether there are alternatives, and how harmful these would be and in what form.

As there is no usable test, the question arises as to the basis on which we pursue our policy?

As far as this is concerned, we cannot shake off the impression that this decision is premature in a way.

But anyway, it is now before us.

Phthalates are intended to soften PVC toys, but the substances leach out, certainly if the toys are chewed, as they in fact are by small children, of course.

As far as we know, not many alternatives appear viable either.

We value the assertive course which our rapporteur has taken and we therefore back the thrust of his proposal, that is to say we endorse a ban on this type of toy for children under the age of three, provided it is extensive.

If we go for this option, then we should at least be consistent.

In our view, therefore, this ban should apply to all toys, not just those intended for sucking and chewing.

We also believe that we should look into toys for older children, although we should still have this option available once the test methods are there.

I am interested to see what the European Commission' s opinion would be on this.

What do you think of these test methods and what is your view on revising these regulations once they are there?

We are in favour of a ban on the six tested phthalates, but are as yet unable to ban all the other phthalates and softeners, which may indeed be harmful.

This may well be possible at the time when we have more data available that demonstrates that they are actually harmful.

We have insufficient data available at this stage to establish this.

On a final note, how far do we take the precautionary principle at the end of the day?

As far as we are concerned, the principle should not mean that we simply reject everything we are not completely sure about at the moment.

Mr President, we in the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left think that this is a very good, clear and precise example of a situation in which the precautionary principal should be applied.

There are very clear warning signs with regard to the risks associated with phthalates.

Experiments on animals show that phthalates cause damage to the liver, kidneys and testicles.

With this in mind, it would be totally absurd to allow these substances to be used in toys, which children can put in their mouths - something children very often do.

These substances, phthalates, are a very large constituent of the toys concerned -and quite large percentages may be present in them.

It is clear that these substances will leak out and that children will then ingest them via their mouths.

It is also completely absurd to believe that a warning label would be sufficient when it comes to young children.

It is obvious that children who are only a few years old cannot assimilate a warning text.

Once they have the toy in their hands, it is, as it were, too late.

Therefore, the only sensible thing to do is to implement as extensive a ban as is possible in this case.

The Commission's proposal is also completely insufficient for this.

A ban is already in place in several Member States, as several speakers have already mentioned.

If the legislation is now too weak in this area, there is a risk that the Member States that have taken steps forward in this area will have legislation forced on them that is worse than what they already have - according to the bizarre logic that exists with regard to the single market, i.e. that the market is always put before considerations relating to health or the environment.

I consider that this would be extremely unfortunate.

The rapporteur for this report is a member of the Swedish Moderate Party.

We are usually clear political opponents - I am a member of the Swedish Left Party.

Our opinions differ also in this case, but I also know that Mr Arvidsson has been subjected to quite a lot of pressure and harsh criticism from sections of his own Group because he has not been sufficiently industry-friendly.

I think it says something about him that he has resisted some of this criticism.

Mr President, this debate again confirms Parliament's commitment to public health and indeed to environmental issues as well, and I welcome the opportunity to make a brief intervention.

It is well known that PVC may present a risk when used in toys for young children.

The proposal to amend the original directive on this matter will ban the marketing of toys and childcare articles containing PVC which are designed to be placed in the mouths of children under the age of three.

I welcome the fact that in future health warnings will have to apply in relation to the manufacture of these products.

Every time the European Parliament has debated this issue there have been increasing doubts as to the safety of these toys which derive from PVC.

Another problem is clearly the fact that much of the scientific evidence on these matters is conflicting.

We know that when there is doubt about a particular measure, the European Parliament must apply the precautionary principle.

This principle in essence means that safety and health must be put before any conflicting scientific evidence, and I fully support the previous speakers who again referred to the importance of applying the precautionary principle.

Mr President, last month, we held a debate on tobacco.

The risks to public health when using tobacco are clear and scientifically proven.

This is not so for the use of phthalates in toys.

Although a ban on the use of tobacco was not even entertained as a serious option, a large majority within the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Protection did go along with a ban on phthalates (softeners) in toys.

Although after 40 years of use, no cases of damage to health are known, the seed of suspicion has nonetheless been sown that softeners are harmful.

In accordance with the precautionary principle, this possible harmfulness has to be underpinned scientifically.

The studies included tests on animals, which is common practice with regard to suspected substances.

These tests resulted in a so-called 'acceptable daily intake' for animals.

For humans, a further safety margin of a factor of 100 was added on.

By testing toys, it can be indicated whether or not this 'acceptable daily intake' is exceeded in the case of humans.

On this basis, toys can be approved or rejected.

In short, this is a method based on an acceptable margin, taking a generous safety margin into consideration.

By launching an extensive campaign, spearheaded by Greenpeace, it was possible to convince many policy-makers and politicians of the need to institute an immediate ban.

I can understand that; emotions run high where children are involved.

The argument that children are affected, however, is two-sided: children eat and drink all kinds of things which entail a certain health risk.

Why are these risks accepted and not others?

It is my impression that this issue is being played up in order to use this ban as a weapon in the fight against other substances.

I fear that if we now vote in favour of a ban on phthalates, this will unleash a witch-hunt against all kinds of substances, without any scientific basis.

Moreover, we do not know what the harmful effects of alternatives will be.

These reasons also indicate that a ban on phthalates contravenes the correct application of the precautionary principle.

Mr President, Mr Arvidsson, I fully appreciate the work which you have done on this report.

I would like to concentrate here on the application of the precautionary principle and on the difficulties in this case of dealing with an issue on which scientific considerations are confused and mixed up with emotional considerations, as well as a long history of disagreements between the industry of PVC and its derivatives and the environmental lobby, which, of course, is also deeply involved with this issue of phthalates.

We are talking about risks to children' s health.

This is of interest to all of us, certainly.

However, we must not forget that we are also talking, with reasonable certainty, about the harmful effects of six phthalates, and also, with a degree of uncertainty, of the other substances belonging to this group.

To ban all of them, as a precaution, may not be a good decision since this may mean abandoning an area of research which is being pursued at the moment, in order to opt for substitutes whose harmful effects we know even less about.

In this respect, there is one good example: four years ago, given the opinion that silicon implants may be carcinogenic, several countries adopted an alternative substance for their manufacture based on soya oil.

A few days ago the United Kingdom banned these implants and is gratuitously withdrawing existing stocks, having discovered that they are carcinogenic.

The social and health cost of a hasty decision may be medically and economically irreparable.

The scientific evidence demanded in Amendments Nos 11, 13 and 24 seem to me to be absolutely necessary in any event, but especially in the case of this type of issue where lives are at stake and where we are likely to punish or benefit certain production sectors.

Mr President, we congratulate Mr Arvidsson for his hard work.

He is in the unusual position of producing a report on Commission action which has already been taken and it is the way it has been taken that we are to some extent talking about here.

The ban on a range of identified phthalates was precautionary.

It attracted broad support and was also in line with the accepted practices of a number of Member States.

If we were simply balancing the health and safety of children against the needs and priorities of industry there would be no contest, but there are related issues which we should address.

The first is how the Commission handles the scientific advice available to it.

Was it done in a balanced way?

Does it give us confidence that this powerful and sometimes necessary weapon of a product ban was used correctly?

I am not sure about this and I want to return to it in an explanation of vote.

Secondly, on the wider issue of PVCs in general, how soon will we get the kind of migration testing from which phthalates' safety can be assessed and the review which is called for in one of the amendments?

We also need information about when the substitutes which the industry may introduce will be open to equivalent testing.

It is no good banning something if you are unsure about what will replace it.

On the issue of labelling, I am sorry to see that there are amendments against this.

Personally I believe that we have to have it, certainly for children up to the age of six, although some will argue that that leads to another kind de facto ban.

Essentially, the number of plastic objects which could be put in the mouth and swallowed is increasing.

This House should be more concerned if it went to bed worried that it had done too much, than if it woke up finding it had done too little.

Mr President, the Commission's approach to this whole issue is totally inadequate.

The fact is that you have accepted a ban on the substance we are speaking about for certain objects, for example teething rings.

We all know that children under three put toys in their mouths.

Allowing the sale of objects containing dangerous substances which children will put in their mouths goes completely against the precautionary approach.

To justify this by saying that we label them is completely ridiculous.

Children under three years of age cannot read and even children up to the age of six are not really capable of reading and even if they are, are they really competent to make decisions on this?

What is happening here is that the Commission and others are bowing to the pressures of industry.

When we talk about the precautionary approach, Mr Blokland is wrong.

We should be looking for materials and substances for children's toys where there is no doubt about safety whatsoever.

In banning some of the objects the Commission recognises that these substances are dangerous.

It is just not acceptable to turn a blind eye to the others because of pressure from industry.

Which comes first: children's health or the vested interests of industry?

We must take the precautionary approach.

Mr President, it is high time that a total ban were introduced on phthalates in all toys for children under three years of age, as is already the case in Denmark.

It is quite unacceptable that we can get into a situation in which we are going to reduce the level of safety for our children.

I know that the Commission is very busy, but is it acceptable never to have time to attend to one' s own children?

Now, I see that the Commissioner is not listening. Perhaps he does not have time to do that, either.

Anyone who did go to the trouble of observing their children would quickly discover, as has already been said a number of times, that children suck away at anything they get their hands on, and not only on things that are intended to be put into their mouths.

In Denmark, investigations have been carried out which show that the quality of the semen of young men appearing before army medical boards is 40% poorer than that of the 50 year-olds.

It can no longer be taken for granted that people can have children, and suspicions are mounting where phthalates are concerned.

It is only four months since the Commission sent out a communication of just under 30 pages concerning the precautionary principle.

Is it not only right to put all the fine words into practice now about protecting health and the environment and to make use of this principle in an area we still know very little about?

If the precautionary principle is not to be employed in respect of one of the most vulnerable consumer groups - our children - it is very difficult to imagine when, in fact, it is to be employed.

I should like to know why the Commission only wants the six phthalates which have been investigated to be banned, instead of them all.

I support Mr Arvidsson' s report which - unlike the Commission' s proposal, which is open to criticism - takes our children' s health seriously.

I think still further action needs to be taken and a ban imposed with no restriction on age, but I hope at least that Amendment 20 will be adopted.

Mr President, some speakers in the House today have said somewhat critically that this discussion is dominated by 'emotions' .

I think that it is a healthy sign in the House if it really is emotions that are setting the agenda for the discussion when children' s health is at stake.

It is better for it to be emotions that govern this discussion than for it to be industry!

In our private lives, in our own homes, we take all the safety precautions we can in order to take care of our own children.

We put safety locks on the doors, we put barriers in front of ovens etc. because we know that it is dangerous to be a child.

I think that we should behave in the same way even when we are in this House.

We have enough information to make the necessary decisions.

It is not the children who must prove that toys are dangerous but the producers who must prove that they are in fact safe.

This is a principle which should apply to all consumer protection, but particularly protection in relation to children.

Several speakers here have said that we know that these substances can be hazardous to health.

Several Member States have already imposed a ban on phthalates in toys for children under the age of three.

The precautionary principle must be applied!

Hopefully, more nations and countries may also realise that this is necessary.

The Commission's proposal is neither sensible nor sufficient.

I can only imagine a situation at a play school or a nursery school where the nursery teacher has to try to keep a check on which children are under and which are over three years of age as well as which children are allowed to put what in their mouths in accordance with all the experiments the Commission is trying to include.

It is, of course, possible for the Commission to issue a special directive concerning what nursery school staff, or other adults, should do when they have more than one child to take care of.

The only sensible solution is a ban, a total ban, when it comes to toys for children under three years of age.

Our aim must be to limit the occasions on which we subject ourselves and our children to dangerous chemicals.

In this case it is taking an unnecessary risk to permit the use of chemical substances in toys which affect those that are smallest and most vulnerable in society.

Mr President, I congratulate my friend and colleague Mr Arvidsson on attempting to make sense of this draft directive.

Of course, if young children are at risk then it is right to take action to remove that risk.

The question on PVC softeners in young children's chewing toys is: Who says there is definitely a risk?

Who says there could remotely be a risk?

The answer is Mr Suresh Rastogi, a Danish researcher who used the phthalates he happened to have in his laboratory.

His research has never been confirmed by peer review - indeed it was rejected by the Commission's own scientific committee, the CSTEE.

Of the six named phthalates to be banned as a result, two are used for flooring and cosmetics but not for children's toys, one is not used at all, one is not made at all, one is not used because of fears it might be carcinogenic (though on 8 February it was totally cleared by the WHO) and that leaves one, DINP that is used to soften PVC in chewing rings and so on.

So, what does the CSTEE say about this?

It said that there was no identifiable risk that could lead to a justified ban, that they were safe if they were used according to existing rules.

The CSTEE met and decided on 25 November.

On 22 November, three days earlier, the Commission had imposed a temporary ban, and we have to ask the Commission why.

It is only justified under the general product safety directive if there is 'immediate and serious risk'.

If that cannot be shown clearly, then the legality of the temporary ban can and should be questioned in this case.

Indeed, the case was to be brought to court but was put on hold when the Commission agreed to work to produce validation systems for the test methods by the end of this year; so we can test these and test the alternatives.

Why is the Commission rushing forward now?

Why are the CSTEE minutes not published until April, and why has a statement critical of the Commission's misunderstanding or misinterpretation of the research still not been published?

Crying wolf damages the credibility of the precautionary principle.

I ask the Commission to answer these questions today, and to get its internal scaremongers under control.

Mr President, I think there is every reason to thank both the Commission and Mr Arvidsson: the Commission because, in spite of criticism, it has come up with a proposal in this area, and Mr Arvidsson because I think that, with his report, we are obtaining a responsible framework for the use of phthalates in toys.

Phthalates are, of course, a group of chemicals there is every possible reason for being on guard against, not only in connection with toys but also more generally.

We know that they are suspected of possibly causing cancer, as well as disturbing the balance of hormones.

I am therefore in favour of banning all phthalates in toys designed for the smallest children.

If we were not to make use of the precautionary principle in this case, I find it hard to see when the principle might be applied at all.

There are some who have argued that banning the use of phthalates in toys would have an adverse effect upon the plastics industry and upon employment in that industry.

We also heard this argument in the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy.

I think the argument is completely unacceptable.

If it were in fact to be accepted, then any restriction at all upon the use of dangerous chemicals, not merely in toys but also in foodstuffs and other products, would be prevented.

I personally should like to see the ban we are now devising extended to cover toys designed for children of between three and six years of age.

That would be the ideal situation, but I am inclined to vote in favour of the present proposed compromise whereby, as a first step, there should be a warning label on toys for that group.

I also think it would be sensible to review the directive in no more than a couple of years' time against the background of new scientific knowledge, including knowledge which can tell us for certain whether we should also intervene in the case of phthalates in products other than toys.

I think that would be a sensible health policy.

As other colleagues have said, this is a thoroughly odd proposal.

It is a very bad proposal and I hope that Mr Liikanen when he speaks will agree to suspend it.

I do not think it should be withdrawn, I think it should be suspended.

I am concerned about the precedent that this proposal will set.

The precautionary principle is very sensibly described in a recent Commission paper.

There is an obvious danger of applying it too widely because it brings the European Union approach into disrepute.

For example, a thousand people a year - no doubt some of them small children - die in England and Wales while falling downstairs.

I do hope that does not mean that we are going to see a European Union regulation restricting us all to living in bungalows.

This proposal suggests that, on emotive subjects, the Commission is prepared to act on the basis of that emotion, without the kind of sensible assessment of risk that we need here, as we do for example on risks in foodstuffs.

There has to be, even with the precautionary principle, a substantial link between the assessment of risk and action by the European Union.

If not, then surely we do not even need a European Food Agency: we can just legislate on the basis of the precautionary principle.

It is the Commission's task to assess that risk.

In this case I am not satisfied, as Mr Bowis has said, that the Commission really heeded the advice of its own advisers.

When the chairman of the scientific committee came to us he most certainly did not convey to us any sense of the urgent need for action.

The conclusion I draw from this is that in future, to avoid this kind of emotive reaction on an emotive subject, we should have a European Union chemicals agency, which will not be the creature of the Commission, to assess risks.

I am concerned that the science behind this proposal is incomplete.

Yes, eight Member States have banned phthalates, but when the Commissioner replies, can he tell us whether those eight Member States have supplied the Commission with the scientific evidence that they based their ban on?

We also lack the evidence on migration limits, and that has been mentioned.

That might have enabled the Commission to bring forward a proposal we could all agree with.

What we therefore have is a thoroughly unsatisfactory proposal.

Six phthalates are identified, and a system of warnings proposed that makes no sense.

The Environment Committee has taken the logical step that the Commission avoided.

If these are dangerous, then they should all be banned and warnings would then be unnecessary.

The only problem with this is that the action is then quite disproportionate to the risk, and sets a thoroughly bad precedent for future European Union action in relation to the chemicals we use.

Mr President, the matter under discussion concerns children, and is therefore highly emotive.

I know that very well, as a mother of three. Furthermore, the facts available to us are such that there are very good reasons why people might end up expressing exactly opposite points of view, all of which might be quite valid.

The person making the decision should look at the issue calmly.

Parliament has even shown a desire to ban all of the nearly 350 phthalates instead of the six proposed by the Commission.

However, there is some kind of evidence of the possibility of danger in the case of only two phthalates.

In addition, a warning was called for on products designed for 3 - 6 year olds, although the risk is likely to be associated with very small children, who like to put things in their mouths, in their discovery of the world.

Reliable migration tests in respect of phthalates are not available, however.

It is excellent that the EU is active in this matter, as seven Member States have already introduced national regulations.

What is even better is that the issue is being dealt with in a consistent way.

In my opinion, Mr Arvidsson has made a rational and responsible contribution to the issue, and is applying the EU precautionary principle to this problem of toxicity properly.

The precautionary principle is a very important tool in environmental legislation.

It should only be used, however, when there is scientific reason to suppose there is a real risk.

This therefore concerns the existence of a scientifically demonstrable risk and the reaction to it, not the existence of a fear that might surround the substance.

You can cry wolf once too often.

Neither is it sufficiently justifiable to resort to the precautionary principle if, for example, some Member States have introduced national legislation in this area.

Parliament' s struggle to ensure the safety of children is very worthwhile in a Union that often just concentrates on hard values.

Parliament will be doing the safety of children and everyone else a disservice, however, if it erodes the basis of the precautionary principle, the possibility of a real risk.

That is what we are in danger of doing in the case of phthalates.

What sort of repercussions will it have, for example, on food safety?

It is at least as important today to make sure we preserve the precautionary principle for future needs as it is to take a decision on the banning of phthalates.

Finally, I would like to say that not one lobbyist from the chemical industry has come up to me. My concern relates solely to the vague application of the precautionary principle.

If we want to ban PVC, let us do so freely and openly.

Mr President, this Commission proposal aims for a long-term ban on the use of phthalates in toys as an emergency measure.

Nevertheless, this emergency measure is already applied in several countries and is renewed every three months.

Furthermore, the Commission proposal is the result of two opinions issued by the Scientific Committee on Toxicity, Ecotoxicity and the Environment.

It appears that the Commission has interpreted these opinions according to criteria which are no doubt very well intentioned, but which can at best be described as hasty, in light of the audience which took place in the Environment Committee with the scientists responsible for the opinions.

One of the premises for the application of the precautionary principle must be proportionality, which appears not to be the case here.

In fact, DEHP, the phthalate so far considered the most dangerous to human health, has been declared by the international cancer research association not to be classifiable as a carcinogen in humans.

Furthermore, we should bear in mind that, in order to establish the toxicity of any product, the dose and the exposure time of that product must be defined.

It is not sufficient that a product is intrinsically toxic. Even water can be fatal if consumed in an enormous enough quantity to cause drowning.

A substance as toxic as heparin, a rat poison, turns out to be an effective anticoagulant which has saved many lives.

Viruses and bacteria, in minimal doses, become vaccines.

Furthermore, there has been much less research on the substitutes for phthalates than on the phthalates themselves.

If this ban is adopted - and we can support it, above all if there is a supposed risk to children - we will also support Amendments Nos 11, 13 and 24 because the Commission should amend this directive in the event that the Scientific Committee approves the use of methods of measurements for practical purposes.

Mr President, I would like to thank my colleague, Mr Arvidsson, for his excellent work.

The debate on phthalates can only be fruitful if the arguments are based on scientific evidence, not populist theory.

More research is needed so that the long-term effects on health of the different phthalates can be accounted for thoroughly.

I would be very pleased if we could ban tobacco, which we have classified as dangerous.

As legislators, we cannot use excessive force.

If a good deal of phthalates were banned with no clear justification, the toy industry would seek refuge in other PVC plastic softeners, about whose long-term effects there is even less knowledge than phthalates.

Let us now just ban those which have been shown to be dangerous.

As it is a matter of the most tender age group of all, the under three-year-olds, precaution is really relevant here.

What the toy is used for cannot in itself be a determining factor in deciding which phthalates can be used and which cannot.

The labelling of toys alone is not sufficiently safe.

Everyone understands that small children put everything that is in reach in their mouths first, including dirt.

In families where there are children of different ages, it is utterly impossible to sort toys for them to play with according to how suitable they are.

It is best if we simply do not buy these products.

Mr President, this report requesting banning the use of phthalates in some soft PVC children's toys is flawed in many ways and rests on a dubious legal basis, given that the Chairman of the Scientific Committee for Toxicity, Eco-toxicity and the Environment, Professor Bridges, when he appeared before this Parliament's Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy on 23 May, stated: "It is hard to see how it" - the ban - "would come under a scientific interpretation of serious and immediate risk" , which is the required criterion for the ban imposed in December.

The Commission seems to have ignored its own scientific committee on the basis that some Member States are imposing their own ban.

They are entirely within their rights, of course.

Instead I support the development of tests to determine migration limits, and for these to be legislated on in due course, rather than a long-term ban as proposed.

It is particularly galling that, of the six named phthalates to be banned, five are not even used for children's toys and only two are suspected on the basis of unreplicated tests on rats.

I too am concerned for the welfare of small children, but based on reasoning and science, not on emotions.

This whole business contrasts markedly with my request for restrictions to be placed on the use of mobile phones by young children, in a formal question to the Commission under the same precautionary principle.

This was, of course, refused even though it admitted there was no research evidence on the safety of child use of mobiles and there was some data for adult brain damage in the prolonged use of mobile telephones.

A recent UK government report has recommended restrictions to child use of mobiles as a developing brain is more sensitive to electromagnetic radiation.

We have to face the fact that here in the West brain tumours have risen dramatically by some 100% over the last ten years for totally unknown reasons.

Therefore I call again on the Commission to use the precautionary principle consistently or admit that the whole thing is a politically motivated exercise with powerful commercial interests at play, undermining the precautionary principle and risking turning it into a farce.

Mr President, so much has gone wrong on the phthalates issue that it is difficult to know where to start.

The Commission's temporary bans have no legal basis.

The Commission may introduce an emergency ban where there is a clear and immediate danger, but no such danger exists with phthalates.

These materials have been in widespread use around the world for forty years, yet there is no evidence of any kind that any damage has ever been done to anyone.

There was one test on rats in which massive quantities of phthalates appeared to cause problems, but researchers have been unable to replicate this test.

We are dealing here with little more than media hysteria and ignorance.

More people have died in Teddy Kennedy's car than have died of phthalates!

Compare and contrast our position on phthalates with our position on tobacco.

Phthalates have never done any harm to anyone, yet we are banning them.

Tobacco, we are told, kills half a million people each year in the European Union but do we ban it?

We subsidise it with millions of euros.

If we ban existing products, alternative products may be even more dangerous.

As Mrs García-Orcoyen has pointed out, this has already happened, for example, with breast implants, where alternatives to silicon have proved to be more dangerous than the implants they replaced.

In trying to defend an untenable position the Commission has shamelessly sought to gag its own scientific advisers.

It has bowdlerised their reports, it has pressured them into changing their positions.

Honesty and transparency have been sacrificed to expedience.

I and other colleagues wrote to Commission President Prodi on this point two months ago.

I understand that his reply has been held for some time 'awaiting signature' , presumably to ensure we should not see it before today's debate.

Neither the temporary bans nor the permanent ban are justified by the evidence.

Migration tests for phthalates are currently under development and will probably be available within months.

We should wait until these tests are available and then, if we must, impose migration limits.

We hear far too much about the precautionary principle.

To be meaningful the precautionary principle should be invoked only when there is a clear and demonstrable risk.

If we continue to invoke it when there is no prime facie risk at all, we make both the precautionary principle and ourselves look ridiculous.

Mr President, firstly I would like to express my thanks to Members of Parliament for their keen interest in this file, especially to Mr Arvidsson, the rapporteur, for his continuing and constructive efforts to find a solution acceptable to all.

The Commission has also made extensive efforts to find a solution to the phthalates' question.

Following discussions about the risks of PVC toys containing phthalates and the opinions of the Scientific Committee on Toxicology, Ecotoxicology and Environment, the Commission took two decisions simultaneously last autumn.

One was a decision providing for an emergency temporary ban, renewable every three months.

Second, the Commission decided to propose a directive to restrict the marketing and use of phthalates in soft PVC toys.

Any interventions here actually concern the first decision, not necessarily this proposal for a directive.

The Commission's proposed directive consists of two elements.

The first element is a ban on the use of six phthalates in toys intended to be put in the mouth of small children.

The ban is based on the opinion of the Scientific Committee that toys containing certain phthalates pose a risk to children's health when held in the mouth for extensive periods of time.

As it cannot be excluded that children can put other toys in their mouths, although not intended for that purpose, the second element of the proposal is a requirement for a warning label on such other toys that could be put into the mouth.

The proposal provides not only for the protection of children's health, it also addresses an internal market issue.

At the present time, the internal market is fragmented, as more than half of the Member States are applying national bans going further than the Commission's emergency ban under the General Product Safety Directive.

Mrs Jackson asked whether Member States have supplied scientific evidence to the Commission, the reply is: Not to my knowledge.

The proposed directive would harmonise the rules of Member States.

I have noted in the discussions today that the Members of Parliament are divided on the Commission's proposal.

Some consider it too strict, while others consider that it is not at all protective enough.

The proposal is based on the various opinions of the Scientific Committee, and it is a considered application of the precautionary principle and consequently a proportionate measure.

It introduces a ban for the products which potentially pose the highest risks, that is for the toys intended to put be in the mouth, and a less stringent measure - labelling - for the products not intended for mouthing but where a risk cannot be excluded.

The Commission is not able to accept those amendments of Parliament which would widen the scope of the proposed ban to cover plasticisers other than the six named phthalates, or to cover other toys than those intended to be put in the mouth.

Nor is the Commission able to accept the amendments which would extend the scope to cover toys destined for older children.

We think that these various proposals cannot be justified on the basis of the risks either defined in the opinions of the Scientific Committee or by the application of the precautionary principle.

Furthermore, the Commission cannot at this moment accept amendments which would introduce migration limits, but the Commission accepts the amendments which provide for this to be reviewed when testing methods have been approved.

The Commission can accept in principle the amendments which would prohibit the use of perfumes in toys for children under three years containing the six phthalates.

It can also accept amendments which would bring forward the review of the directive and widen the scope of that review.

To summarise our point of view, the Commission can accept, at least in principle, Amendment Nos 2, 4, 5, 9, 10, 11, 18, 24 and the Commission rejects Amendment Nos 1, 3, 6, 7, 8, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, revised 17, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23 and 25.

We wish to carry on the dialogue with Parliament and I am convinced that we can agree on a constructive solution.

The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon.

The next item is the recommendation for second reading of the report (A5-0193/2000), on behalf of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, on the Common position adopted by the Council with a view to the adoption of a European Parliament and Council regulation establishing a system for the identification and registration of bovine animals and regarding the labelling of beef and beef products and repealing Council Regulation (EC) No 820/97 (Rapporteur: Mr Papayannakis).

Mr President, on a point of order: as chairman of the Environment Committee I would just point out that the rapporteur's job is to present the report of the committee.

If Mr Papayannakis wants to express a personal opinion, he should have the freedom to do so.

What he cannot do is to confuse the two.

Mr President, I fully concur with what the chairman of our committee has just said.

I have presented the entire discussion and the entire dispute surrounding the regulation.

In the last two lines I expressed my personal opinion, with a great deal of chagrin, so as not to have to take the floor again as a speaker.

For the rest, I should like to assure our chairman that I have a great deal of respect for procedure, perhaps more than many other fellow members, both on this and other matters.

Mr President, this legislation on the labelling of beef has two distinct aspects.

Firstly it ensures traceability of beef products.

Cases of food poisoning related to beef are rare, and more often than not can be attributed to storage and preparation in the home or catering outlet, rather than to the processors.

Occasionally, however, there is a problem such as the E-coli outbreak in Scotland.

In this instance labelling can enable the public to be alerted without inducing panic, and facilitate the tracing back of contaminated beef to the shop, slaughterhouse or farm where the problem started.

Secondly, labelling will identify the country or countries of origin of beef.

This is not to assist xenophobic consumers who wish to reject all things foreign - although there is nothing wrong with the desire to support one's own farmers who are facing unprecedented economic pressures.

The BSE crisis shone a spotlight on the possible health risks associated with beef.

Some countries, like France, have a whole-herd slaughter policy which may reassure consumers, despite its lack of scientific basis and a risk of underreporting.

The United Kingdom, on the other hand, which has a higher level of BSE incidence at the moment, removes all animals over 30 months from the food chain, as well as adopting a whole raft of other measures.

We could argue all day about which beef is the safest, but the fact is that once labelling is in place the consumer will be able to decide.

There can be no justification for the continuation of the illegal French ban on British beef if it is clearly labelled.

In fact those in France who have studied the subject in depth may well decide to buy British as the safest and tastiest option.

I will now comment on the amendments.

The inclusion of category is unnecessary, costly and potentially confusing to consumers.

Most housewives do not know the difference between a heifer and a steer.

A bony Holstein steer would be in the same category as a champion Charolais but that prime animal's twin sister would be in a different category solely because of its sex.

Clearly this is a ridiculous situation.

The listing of category imposes costs on farmers and butchers, and at the same time would give consumers irrelevant or misleading information.

It could also devalue some categories such as young bulls, as supermarkets rationalise the categories they stock.

If France wants to continue with its scheme alone, then I would not want to stand in its way.

The amendment on Article 14 would prevent the confusing situation where minced beef - marketed for example, in Austria, Mr Fischler - which was derived from Polish animals imported live into Austria, could be labelled 'prepared in Austria' .

I am not sure that Austrian farmers would like that to happen.

Without this amendment this potentially misleading suggestion could encourage more live imports, with obvious animal welfare implications.

We are working on a very tight timescale on this legislation, which is due to come into effect on 1 September.

It would, therefore, be irresponsible of Parliament to adopt amendments which could not be accepted by the Council.

There is no time for conciliation.

I do not subscribe to the argument that Parliament should abdicate its constitutional right to improve this proposal because others have failed to initiate the legislative process in time.

We now have a new French presidency - I do not know if anyone is there representing them - but I commend to the Council the amendments adopted by the Committee on the Environment with a large majority.

Could I ask through you, Mr President, that the Council or, failing that, the Commissioner, makes a statement to Parliament?

Do you think that you can secure an agreement, based on the five amendments adopted in committee, which will both respect the views of Parliament and deliver this legislation on time as the first major achievement of the French presidency?

Mr President, this proposal has a long history.

I can understand why the rapporteur and Mr Papayannakis are weary of further controversy.

However, we are almost at the end.

As the rapporteur, he has quite properly had to tell the House that the Environment Committee voted by a substantial majority - I think 33 votes to 13 - in favour of the excision of the provisions relating to category of animal.

We have, on the committee, made a number of compromises, as regards both the timetable and the substance.

The Committee has always kept a clear priority and has insisted upon it both to the Council and to the Commission: namely to have the sharpest, best-defined route of traceability on safety grounds that we can get for mince as well as other forms of beef.

It was for this reason that it threw out at first reading the superfluous requirements about maturation times, much as chefs might have wanted them, and category of animal, which did nothing for traceability, added cost, and increased the disaffection of many Member States and of those who will have to implement this proposal.

As a result of that, we thought the matter was resolved.

Indeed, as Mr Papayannakis has said, there have been counter-concessions from the Commission.

Now, to our amazement, category of animal is back, and once again the Environment Committee has voted to remove it.

It knows we cannot be bullied with threats that our timetable will slip.

We have made concessions including a full month' s delay on the implementation of the second phase of this proposal already.

We have done that with a good grace.

I urge the House to reaffirm its position at first reading and to exclude a form of compulsory category labelling which is entirely optional for Member States, - a form of labelling we should point out which we do not have in detail.

We have to surrender to the secret harmonies of comitology if we are going to leave it to Commission to advance the precise definitions.

We are not prepared to do that.

We want traceability, we want surveillance, we want this proposal and we want it quickly.

We want the best and most economic route to achieve it and Amendments Nos 3 and 5 do that.

The various amendments on mince add to surveillance and traceability in the way we propose.

Conciliation, Mr Papayannakis, does not take very long.

It consists of two words from the Commissioner this afternoon: 'We accept.'

Mr President, there is no need to repeat what my colleagues Mr Goodwill and Mr Whitehead have said regarding the significant agreement that we have reached in the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy.

Allow me nevertheless to say that, after what has happened over the last few days when we have had further cases of BSE in France, it is clear that we still have a long way to go before we have a completely safe market as far as beef is concerned.

There is only one way to regain the consumers' trust and that is by guaranteeing the quality of the products.

If we had an ideal world in the EU we would have had a foodstuffs authority which could have checked and ensured that everyone behaved according to the rules.

Then the quality of the meat would have been to a large extent the same throughout the Union, and it would at least have maintained the EU standard everywhere.

If we had also been able to ensure that everyone followed the rules regarding transportation, we would not need to run the risk of animals suffering during transit.

Now, however, we need a system that involves stating where the animals come from, where they were born, where they were reared and where they were slaughtered.

In this way the consumer is provided with information regarding how the animal may have fared and whether it may have been subjected to long journeys in transit.

Mr President, in conclusion, the most important thing is that we obtain a system which means that by looking at a label on the meat we can see where it comes from, and that it is then possible to trace back through the complete foodstuffs chain to the original producer.

This is where we need to get to.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, my Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance are delighted with the Council' s common position.

In our opinion, it marks a great step forward and an actual victory for this Parliament.

However, I would still like to point out the difference between traceability on the one hand and consumer confidence on the other.

In my opinion, traceability is a technicality which can be identified and demonstrated thanks to the numerical code or bar code, but even consumers cannot possibly decipher or interpret these codes.

What matters is that traceability is effective and efficient, not only to protect the consumer, but also the whole meat chain.

After all, in the event of a crisis or scandal, traceability allows you to identify the problem straight away.

In this way, we can prevent the entire meat industry from going down the drain because of one isolated criminal act or incident of carelessness.

Consumer confidence however, requires more than traceability.

In my view, confidence in a product can be instilled by providing the consumer with reliable, but above all comprehensible information on the quality of the product they intend to buy.

It seems to me that indicating the animal category can most definitely enhance consumer confidence, provided this is done in an understandable manner.

I therefore regret that a large majority of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Protection rejected this component and eventually deleted the category.

At first reading, my Group also called for labelling the breed and region of origin of the animal involved.

It saddens me that our request did not survive this hurdle.

I would, however, urge the meat industry not to adopt a defensive stance in this dossier, but to be proactive instead.

I believe that this will greatly benefit them and can also boost their returns.

Mr President, the rules governing the voluntary labelling system provided for in the 1999 EU regulation expire on 31 August.

The Council regulation before us must be adopted to avoid a legal vacuum arising.

The agreement reached by the EU Agriculture Ministers on a Europe-wide beef labelling system was not such a major achievement.

The work in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development was in fact much more demanding than the result before us.

The content of all the measures approved is to be modified so that proof of meat' s origin is valid as a guarantee in order to apply environmental control procedures and if necessary impose sanctions.

The Community labelling system quite rightly aims to enhance transparency of production and marketing conditions for beef, and in particular to improve certainty as to its origin.

Higher product costs cannot be ruled out, as the cost of applying the system will be passed on to the consumer.

The incalculable risk as regards food quality will not be dramatically reduced in this way, as the information provided is not primarily intended for the consumer.

The last 16 years, since the first outbreak of mad cow disease, have demonstrated the importance of production for consumer confidence.

The most effective measure is to strengthen production in the region of origin, which is more justifiable both environmentally and economically speaking.

Mr President, yesterday we heard Mr Chirac set out his objectives for the French presidency.

In his conclusion he said "Europe will be dynamic if we make it loved by those it serves" .

This is the sweeping rhetoric that occupies the high ground but the detail of the debate today occupies the low ground.

It is precisely this sort of detailed, petty interference that drives the people served by Europe to distraction.

If anything was more calculated to make Europe unloved it is its determination to control every nook and cranny of our lives.

We all, I am sure, have letters saying that these regulations are impracticable, cumbersome, costly and far too complex.

Above all, my correspondents tell me that they are fed up with the EU's mania for bombarding the consumer with information.

Soon labels will no longer suffice.

If we keep going at this rate, shopkeepers will have to issue owners' manuals with every pound of minced beef - not, of course, that we are allowed to use pounds any more.

Perhaps even Macdonald's might be forced to protest.

I know from my short experience here that nothing I say and nothing that involves common sense will have the slightest impact because, like a mad elephant out of control, this legislation will crash on regardless.

When this legislation finally goes through we will hear paeans of self-congratulation.

Everybody involved will tell themselves how jolly hard they worked.

Well, they may be pleased but they certainly will not be loved by the people of Europe.

Mr Chirac is going to be disappointed.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, some of the amendments tabled water down the substance and the objective of the Council' s proposal for a regulation on beef labelling.

The argument being presented, as we have heard, is that we should not ask too much of consumers.

An attempt is being made then to withhold information on the grounds that consumers are ostensibly stupid.

To my mind, that is the wrong approach, and we should assume that consumers have a good grasp of things.

We should provide consumers with information about the origin of the beef, offer them certainty and take consumer protection seriously.

The implementing provisions for this regulation are being enacted under the committee procedure.

That means that tomorrow we will have to vote on a legal text whose precise content is unknown.

Even the Commission cannot tell us exactly what form these implementing provisions will take.

I regard this as a very unfortunate procedure, which demonstrates the democratic deficit in the Community decision-making process.

Mr President, Commissioner, in speaking previously to this House I have pointed out that there is a tension in the proposed regulation between ensuring traceability for public health purposes and providing useful consumer information.

I am grateful for recent assurances from Commissioner Byrne that the new European Food Agency will consider how such information can best be provided.

Making it compulsory to include the category of animal on the label is not justified on public health grounds, nor is it obvious why it should be obligatory for the consumer to have this information.

The Environment Committee's amendment makes it clear that it could be provided under the voluntary scheme where there is a demand.

Further, if the labelling scheme in relation to category were to be implemented, as the Commission has earlier suggested, it could add 8 to 10% to production costs.

In my own country this would mean GBP 45 - 55 or EUR 70 - 90 per animal without any benefit in return and, as Mr Goodwill has already said, the scheme could have the effect of reducing the market price of certain categories of cattle, particularly of young bulls.

I very much hope that Parliament will follow the Environment Committee's lead in removing category from the compulsory scheme and that the Commission and Council too will agree not to impose this additional unnecessary burden on producers and consumers alike.

In previous debates here I have supported the principle of having a clear set of rules for appropriate labelling information on beef and beef products.

My belief is still that our beef production industry, as well as the consumer, has everything to gain from the customer confidence which a sensible compulsory labelling scheme can provide.

Of course, we must have clear information permitting full traceability from farm to plate.

There is no doubt or controversy about that, but controversy has surrounded the proposal that category of animal be included.

In judging the value of label information, I believe that its relevance to food safety must be foremost in our minds.

In a recent exchange of views within our political Group here in Strasbourg, Commissioner Byrne and his cabinet officials stated quite clearly that there was no food safety benefit arising from the categorisation proposal.

In relation to country or Member State of origin, could I ask Commissioner Fischler to clarify whether, apart from the compulsory information that we are discussing here, information regarding the area of origin, such as Scotland or the Orkney Islands for example, can be displayed prominently on a voluntary basis?

Mr President, Commissioner Fischler, ladies and gentlemen, in addition to the many negative effects of mad cow disease, one positive effect is the fact that it has induced the European Union and the Member States to adopt more vigilant, detailed legislation to ensure food safety and protect honest producers in the strategically important beef sector.

It is a pity that it takes scandals such as this or the dioxins in chickens issue to speed up safeguard and prevention initiatives, but better late than never!

It has become apparent that the serious difficulties experienced by the entire sector during the periods of greatest crisis caused by mad cow disease were, apart from the direct effects of the disease, primarily due to the lack of confidence between consumers and beef producers and sellers which ensued. The situation was not improved by the dissemination of false information.

We have learned from this experience that it is essential to promote all initiatives which consolidate a stable relationship of confidence between consumers and producers and those who sell food products in general.

Although the protection of consumer health is by far the most important criterion, it cannot be our sole objective in establishing an efficient system for the identification and registration of bovine animals during the production and fattening stage and a labelling system based on objective criteria during the marketing stage.

It is important to understand that all initiatives which protect honest European Community producers - and they are without a doubt the great majority of producers - need to be promoted.

All the Community producers are calling for well-defined but not oppressive regulations.

In other words, we must guard against suffocating the healthy part of our agricultural sector with bureaucracy, which is frequently much more damaging than any disease.

I will conclude by pointing out that there is no point in adopting stringent legislation if it does not provide an efficient supervision system which rewards honest producers and penalises those whose improper conduct jeopardises the future of an entire sector which is of primary importance for the European economy.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, beef labelling was actually conceived as a quick way of regaining the public' s confidence in beef after a string of crises and scandals.

But it has since turned into an almost unending saga.

Whenever the regulation might cease to apply, Parliament is called upon to act quickly to prevent a legal vacuum arising.

There have been two deadlines, first December 1999 and now the present deadline of 31 August 2000.

Commissioner, given the time periods involved, you cannot seriously call on Parliament not to adopt any amendments.

We want a workable system, and we have always said that.

As the proposal before us does not guarantee that, it is not just our right, it is our duty as Members of the European Parliament to adopt amendments.

When I then hear that in Italy, for example, the technical requirements for this system are not even in place yet, and that the same applies in other countries, then I wonder why there is all this rush if the system has not been implemented anyway.

I would welcome some comments from the Commissioner on that point.

The Commission' s proposal will lead to our having to deal with the system again before long.

The Commission perhaps reacted somewhat hastily in the wake of the BSE crisis, and now we are into brinkmanship again.

I cannot help feeling that the 2003 deadline that was thought up in December 1998 is now occupying the Commission' s thought processes again.

I believe that you can achieve implementation of this regulation by 1 September if you accept our amendments.

You will not achieve it if you still insist on including category of animal, which we have already touched upon several times today.

That has nothing to do with information for the public, it is just a quality issue, and does not belong in this regulation.

Commissioner, please accept the amendments and we will then have something workable in place by 1 September.

Mr President, many aspects of the common position we have here reflect Parliament' s position at first reading, and this demonstrates the Council' s willingness to work with Parliament in order to achieve a positive and rapid outcome in this area, which is so important for European consumers.

I would have liked to simply approve the common position without further ado.

However, I find one point that has already been mentioned several times enormously difficult - category of animal.

This comes under compulsory labelling, where it has no place to be.

Category of animal really does not assist the regulation' s objective of guaranteeing meat traceability.

I therefore support the adoption of Amendments Nos 1, 2, 3 and 5.

The Council will now have to remove the provisions relating to category of animal at its meeting in mid-July if it does not want to risk the regulation not coming into force on 1 September this year.

Secondly, there is Amendment No 4 on minced beef, which relates to the last part of Article 14, first paragraph, beginning "and origin" .

I am afraid I cannot follow this either.

In my view, this amendment lacks precision.

How is 'origin' to be defined here?

Does it refer to where the animal was born or where it was fattened, or both, and who is responsible for labelling here?

Exactly how will origin be indicated?

None of this is clearly worded and I see a risk that the Council will refuse point blank to accept this amendment, so that we will end up with a conciliation procedure, which will in turn further delay the entry into force of the regulation.

This is not in the interests of consumers, and I therefore call on the House to reject Amendments Nos 4 and 6.

Mr President, Commissioner, the Council has adopted the European Parliament' s amendments on the labelling of beef products.

There has been fruitful interinstitutional cooperation, and the codecision procedure has shown its strength.

The result is a victory for consumers, and not just them, but the whole beef sector chain: the producers, the processing industry and the organisations representing the beef trade.

This regulation will make it possible to trace the origin of meat, and even according to a reasonable timetable.

After EU enlargement this sort of system will be vital for consumers and producers.

To tell the truth, we could not have waited any longer for this system to be put into practice.

Now it depends on the Member States whether the practice of labelling is adopted in the hoped for manner.

I also hope consumer organisations will give their strong support to the implementation of the provisions in practice.

Mr President, the introduction of the EU beef labelling is a further step on the road to traceability and in the present climate a prerequisite for consumer protection and public health.

As I have said on many previous occasions in this House, farmers are unfortunately the innocent victims of circumstances beyond their control.

I come from a country which exports over 90% of its entire beef production and quality and consumer satisfaction have always been a priority.

We must take steps to ensure that labelling does not result in a renationalisation of the food sector.

Already there is some evidence that this is happening.

I welcome the Commission's assurance that any distortion of trade which might arise as a result of these labelling measures will be dealt with.

Labelling, however, needs to be sensible.

Over-description would only lead to confusion and is unnecessary.

The consumer must be able to see at a glance the certificate of origin which is the assurance of product safety.

Mr President, that went quicker than I thought.

The BSE crisis, and later on the dioxin crisis, focused our attention on the safety of our food.

In addition, the European consumer has become more critical and outspoken over the past decades.

Politicians need to take this into consideration.

After all, there are huge interests at stake: the certainty and safety of our primary products, and hence consumer confidence.

In the coming months, too, we should therefore be looking carefully at the White Paper on food safety.

Today' s regulations are a direct result of the recommendations of the BSE inquiry at the time, in which integral chain management, i.e. the 'from-stable-to-stable' principle, and with it the ultimate traceability of our primary raw materials, was established.

The Commission proposal within the context of labelling beef follows on from temporary legislation dating back to 1997.

It aims to introduce reliable and transparent identification and registration regulations for beef, as well as labelling for beef.

This should also enhance consumer confidence in the quality of beef and benefit market stability.

Meat should remain traceable, whether at the production or sales stage.

An important idea which the Council has adopted from the EP in its common position is to bring forward the date when the labelling regulation comes into effect.

The label should contain information on the animal' s region of origin, where it is born, fattened up and slaughtered.

What is new is that the Council now also considers it important to mention the animal category from which the meat originates.

I admit that making this compulsory could be considered normal from the point of view of the consumer, but this is not yet the case in the Netherlands, where this suggestion is met with a great deal of protest.

I do not call for compulsory labelling, but for labelling on a voluntary basis. In this context, I am convinced that butchers can meet all the provisions of this proposal in a very simple manner, for example by placing a sign in their shops.

Mr President, with tomorrow' s vote, Parliament will take an initial step towards defining a legislative framework intended to win back consumer confidence in the quality of foodstuffs on the market in the European Union. This goal can only be achieved through a wider strategy such as that outlined in the White Paper on food safety, and we too must make every effort to speed up its practical implementation.

This directive will ensure not only that the meat on our tables can be traced back to its origins but also that the consumer is provided with clear, essential information.

The mandatory labelling to be affixed to packaging will provide consumers with the all the information they need in order to be able to make an informed decision about what to buy: therefore, a limited amount of clear, effective information needs to be included if we are to help consumers and not make their life more complicated.

For this reason and because of the considerable opposition which appears to have arisen to the listing of categories, I have decided to support the amendments put forward by the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy.

In the context of this debate, I feel that I must stress once again the extremely sensitive nature of this proposal, and call upon all the Community institutions to act responsibly in order to make it operative as soon as possible and avoid legal gaps.

Parliament has done its part and will continue to do so. Let the Commission and the Council do theirs!

Mr Whitehead has already pointed them in the right direction.

Mr President, Commissioner, guaranteeing public health is the objective of one of today' s most important areas of legislation.

This is something to which this regulation will contribute, making traceability from farm to plate as effective as possible, as well as compulsory.

At the same time, European consumers have the right to clear and easily understandable information, so that they know where the meat they are eating comes from.

I am certain that the Council and Parliament can reach a good compromise on minced meat, in so far as Parliament adopts Amendments 4 and 6 which guarantee consumers information about where the minced meat comes from and when it was produced.

I would ask all colleagues to vote in favour of Amendment 6 which Karl Erik Olsson and I have tabled with a view to making it compulsory for minced meat to bear a label stating the date when it was produced.

Minced meat involves a much greater bacteriological risk for consumers than larger pieces of beef, so the production date is a very important piece of information.

It is good that categories have been removed.

The Council' s common position, together with Parliament' s six amendments, constitute legislation of benefit to agriculture and consumers in the EU.

Mr President, Commissioner, it is not the label that counts.

We all understand that expression, but what counts here really is the label - and I am not talking about haute couture!

Beef labelling is an important stage in the process of rebuilding consumer confidence.

I note that despite the protracted preliminary discussions not all EU Member States have recorded every last animal on their computers.

Yet the compulsory labelling system is supposed to take force in all Member States as from 1 September 2000, thus finally replacing the voluntary system.

The question for consumers will be this: what information can we expect? Where was the animal born?

In the EU, in a third country, at which farm, in what region? What does country of origin mean, or perhaps even source country?

And then there is the debate about categories.

Should I buy a sucking calf, a normal calf or a heifer today? As I come from a farming background myself and there is nothing I more earnestly want for farmers than stable prices, I believe that we should create legal bases that are underpinned by consensus.

We should not make the legislation unnecessarily complicated.

We are all concerned about public health and consumer protection.

So as from 1 September 2000 we will have labelling, and as from 1 January 2002 it will be extremely comprehensive.

The beef chain from producer to consumer can be very long, and the supply chains in Member States vary widely.

Yet I do not think that cattle headed for the slaughterhouse are really such great tourists.

However, strict criteria must also apply to imports from third countries.

By way of conclusion, let me say that I once learnt that top athletes' nutrition programmes should include meat.

Our top athletes' eating habits have a great impact on health and performance.

I hope that we can rebuild confidence and that people will once more become great meat-eaters.

Mr President, the report by Mr Papayannakis we are discussing is an important tool to improve consumer protection and increase consumer confidence in food in Europe.

The committee took an important decision in rejecting the category of animal labelling proposal.

The category of animal - heifer, cow, bull, bullock, young bull, calf - will not provide the consumer with any extra information, as the differences within categories might be greater than those between them.

On the other hand, the compulsory labelling of category would increase the production costs of fresh meat products by what could be a large percentage figure, which, of course, would be passed on to the consumer.

On this there is agreement between beef producers, the meat processing industry, retailers and consumer organisations.

And now the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy has arrived at the same conclusion.

Category labelling must not be compulsory, but this can happen on a national basis, as, for example, has been the wish in France.

Perhaps in a country the size of France there is so much beef that it is possible to label products rationally.

That is not the case in my country.

Another thorny problem relating to the proposal is labelling showing the origin of the meat.

The proposal is for the labelling system to be introduced in two stages. In the first stage there would just be slaughter information.

In cases where the animal was bred and reared in another country, the information might be totally misleading for the consumer, and in countries where stage two is now in force the situation as it is could only deteriorate.

For example, Finland' s national beef labelling system also now includes information on where the animal was bred and reared.

It is therefore to be hoped that, on the basis of the current defining implementation regulation, the beef sector could be flexible enough to come round to establishing the two-stage labelling system.

The basis of this discussion is consumer protection, especially with regard to the BSE crisis we lived through in Europe.

The matter being discussed is an important tool, but the compulsory labelling of beef products and the gradual switch to labels showing the origin of the meat do not serve this purpose.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I am sure there are still many more questions.

You can of course always revisit everything, but I think that we now need labelling of beef and beef products as a matter of urgency, by which I mean as from September this year and not as from January next year.

We have discussed this at length in committee.

As regards guarantees of origin, great progress has already been made as a result of improved transparency, and it was possible to make a positive impact.

There are many regional programmes, for example in my home region of Rheinland-Pfalz, and these demonstrate that this is feasible and have led the way here.

It is not so long since farmers and meat-processing plants were threatened with annihilation, and it has only been through a combination of comprehensive information and strategically sound and effective marketing measures that it has been possible to rebuild consumer confidence to some extent.

We must not allow this success to be undermined by deferring the introduction of labelling, which would be a step backwards.

Designation of origin is particularly important for consumers.

The preparatory work our farmers have done on labelling has been good and clear.

We have made good progress with beef labelling in Germany.

In this context I would like to ask you, Commissioner, what progress the other Member States have made.

We certainly need to keep an eye on products imported from third countries.

These should be clearly recognisable as such when they are sold.

But what about those sometimes excessively detailed descriptions?

For example, how many consumers know what a heifer is, who would be interested in that, and why is it important?

The Commission has not yet clearly presented its proposals on category here, but I think it will have to adopt a simple and clear approach.

Descriptions such as 'veal' or 'beef' are sufficient, and anyone who wants more information should also be able to obtain it.

Mr President, I fully subscribe to and take as read what has been said so far in relation to the identification and traceability of beef and all beef products.

Yesterday the Committee on the Environment voted by 37 votes to 13 for the five amendments before us today - a clear, decisive vote right across this House from colleagues in all different groups.

I would particularly like to mention the category issue here which I suppose effectively means getting back to the first reading position on this.

I was incensed when, as late as yesterday, the Commission could not advise us as to exactly what would be involved in 'category'.

We are effectively being asked to buy the bovine equivalent of a pig in a poke.

I would say to the Commissioner, please accept our amendments in relation to this area.

There is no need to confuse and mislead the consumers of Europe on a compulsory basis, because the voluntary labelling system which will be driven by competition, pride in product and consumer demand will add anything that a compulsory category label might otherwise require.

I am still confused about the situation in relation to mince.

If we are now going to insist on country of origin for mince, why cannot we have country of origin for the larger pieces of beef from 1 September, or whenever?

I am not quite sure where we stand on that but we will be advised.

Only yesterday the services of the French Prime Minister wrote to every French MEP in this House - all 87 of them across the House - telling them to vote against all the amendments.

What does that tell us about political interference from the top in France?

What is that saying about French beef production and protectionism?

What is it saying about the Anglo-French beef issue?

If the French want to label beef they can do so voluntarily.

At the moment they only label 50% of their beef, yet they want to insist on compulsory labelling under category for all of us.

I do not understand the political interference and the real message from France, and we should get to the bottom of it.

Mr President, Commissioner, this proposed regulation and derogation of Regulation (EC) No 820/97 has a first heading, which nobody is talking about, which provides for a system of identification and registration for beef based on earmarks, passports and computerised support which guarantee its traceability.

The second heading establishes an obligatory system of labelling of meat and two stages for its implementation.

In the voluntary period for application of Regulation (EC) No 820/97, 36 specifications have been approved in Spain in order to put it into practice, and I can assure you that this has given the consumer confidence and contributed to the recuperation of consumption, which dropped considerably as a result of mad cow disease.

I am therefore pleased that this Regulation has been adopted.

However, with regard to the content of the labelling - which let us not forget is directed at the consumer - it must be said that it is frankly excessive and that indications are proposed which provide little in the way of food safety and traceability, since this is guaranteed by the measures proposed in the first heading and, of course, is not what most matters to the consumer.

The indication of categories is not necessary at all.

Furthermore, this indication of categories may lead to confusion and problems, with regard to the age of slaughter of animals and the protected geographical indications, registered in accordance with Regulation (EC) No 2081/92, because in this case it is obligatory to introduce categories, and the definitions do not coincide with those which are proposed now.

Unless an agreement is reached - a consensus - in the management committee on the 14th.

What matters most to consumers, particularly in the light of the recent food crises, is to know where the animal was born and where and how it has been fed throughout its life.

Naturally, the registration number of the slaughterhouse offers them little or nothing in terms of the information they require.

Furthermore, this Regulation lays down obligatory minimum requirements and there is always the possibility of voluntary optional labelling.

Mr President, I would also like to concentrate on this issue of category of animal labelling.

The original proposal called for labelling as steer, heifer or young bull, which would be sexual discrimination.

But recently I was staggered when the Commission - just as Mrs Doyle has said - reported it had not finally decided on the precise terminology!

This effectively means they are asking Parliament to give them a blank cheque to determine what category of animal means after we have voted on whether or not to include it.

This is very sloppy, very amateur and unacceptable as a way to treat this House.

It is not even a food safety issue.

It is extra bureaucracy and red tape - which is probably why my own government in the UK has supported it.

But it is not in the interests of consumers, nor of the industry and, specifically, it is not in the interest of small abattoirs which would have the greatest difficulty in dealing with it.

I therefore ask the House to support the deletion of category of animal as a compulsory labelling requirement, just as it did on the first reading.

If countries wish to include it voluntarily that is a matter for them.

Assuming we vote for deletion, I would ask the Commission to take note that we shall not be moved on this issue.

So they know what they have to do.

Finally I ask the Commission and the Council to take note that we welcome the principle of labelling beef by country of origin and that we call on the French presidency to set an example by making an immediate commitment to accept all beef so labelled from all EU countries and let the consumer decide.

Mr President, Commissioner, can I first of all say I very much welcome this opportunity to follow the debate on this issue, but quite frankly I think it has tried our patience for a long time and most of us would like to see it resolved as soon as possible.

We have to ask ourselves what we are trying to achieve and whose fears we are trying to allay.

There is no doubt that consumers are tremendously concerned and I think we have to be able to allay that concern so that consumers can feel confident that the food they buy, anywhere in the European Union, will be fully traceable and good for whoever purchases it.

For that we need an effective system of traceability and control that will restore confidence.

I come from an agricultural background and it seems to me that what you need to control is the whole life span of the animal from the moment it is born to the time it is slaughtered.

If you can achieve that then you will go a long way to allaying the consumers' fears.

You can put in controls that will be so bureaucratic that they just will not work, so we have to concentrate on what is workable.

Categorising beef as steers, bullocks or heifers will not do anything to allay the fears of the consumer.

This is taking foolishness to the extreme and I ask you to reflect and take on board the views of the committee and the view of this Parliament on this particular point.

Mr President, since the issue of Regulation 820 in 1997, we have been discussing rebuilding a relationship between the consumer and the production world, and I have to say that a great deal has been achieved on both sides.

Much work has been done to ensure that the consumer is in possession of the correct information.

That said, I am briefly going to return to some of the issues raised by my fellow Members, each of which illustrated the situation in their own country.

In Italy, selling unspecified adult cattle on the market would mean suppressing a sensibility which is linked to our cultural and food traditions, and so we would find ourselves in quite a difficult situation.

Apart from anything else, considering that the price per kilogram of a cow carcass is considerably lower than that of a bullock carcass and even lower than that of a heifer, it would be difficult to justify the different sales prices to the consumer, who will naturally buy the unspecified adult meat out of ignorance.

Therefore, we are drawing up a law giving the consumer the right to know what he is buying and at what price, according to principles of transparency, clarity and information.

The work on the traceability of all the information regarding the animal' s country of provenance and country of birth and, in particular, where the animal was fattened, is therefore excellent.

Indeed, we would like the traceability criteria to be extended to minced beef, which is becoming a very popular product.

We feel that a precise reference to the point of slaughter and to the provenance of the minced beef would contribute to maintaining this relationship of trust that we are building between producer and consumer.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the fact that the second reading in this House is taking place so quickly is a clear sign that all of you, and in particular the rapporteur, Mr Papayannakis, regard this subject, a very important one for consumers, as a key priority and that it is indeed your objective that compulsory labelling should come into force on time on 1 September.

I would therefore first of all like to sincerely thank the rapporteur and everyone who cooperated with him for the excellent and rapid progress that has been made with this.

Timing has always been vital in this area, and it still is.

You all know that the introduction of the compulsory labelling system had to be deferred last December because agreement could not be reached within the time frame available.

This deferral expires on 31 August, which in practice means that it runs out at the end of this month, because Parliament does not sit in August and no further sittings can be called.

We must all ensure that the pledge we made to all European beef consumers and also to producers and processors is respected.

In order to avoid further postponement or, even worse, a legal vacuum on labelling, we must therefore come to a final decision this month.

Before I talk about the amendments tabled for tomorrow' s vote, I would like to make a couple of brief comments about the Council common position approved by the Council on 6 June.

As you know, I pressed for an informal trialogue on the issue of the legal basis.

This took place on 3 May.

The Members participating in that meeting also asked for appropriate explanations regarding the draft of the Council common position.

Once a number of further changes to the text requested by Parliament had been made, it was possible to reach an agreement based on which the following Agriculture Council approved the Council common position.

This was then formally transmitted to Parliament in mid-June together with the Commission' s communication.

This goes to show how well the codecision process could actually function on agricultural matters.Despite the shortage of time, the Council produced what I regard as a workable compromise taking account of the amendments you adopted at first reading. This reconciled the consumer' s right to guaranteed origin with the need for a practical system.

Like Parliament, the Council also recognised that compulsory labelling needed to be introduced earlier than stipulated in the original proposal.

Furthermore, the Council even complied with Parliament' s request to delete all references to EU origin.

Lastly, the Council also took on board the request for stricter labelling requirements for minced beef, and tightened up the wording of the rules proposed by the Commission.

It was only possible to achieve all these joint solutions between the Council and Parliament because the Member States agreed that no more national beef labelling schemes would apply after 2002.

The greatest achievement was reaching agreement on a uniform Community-wide labelling scheme for beef.

We should not therefore jeopardise this common interest and this move towards integration again.

As we have now heard from the Committee on the Environment, we are not yet out of the woods, politically speaking.

There are now amendments to be considered in plenary sitting, and approving some of these amendments would have far-reaching consequences, above all in terms of timing and as regards the adoption of the regulation.

For example, as several speakers have noted, two amendments on labelling minced beef have been tabled.

This issue has been scrutinised in great detail both here in Parliament and also by the Council.

You will see that the Council has taken your comments on board and has tightened up the wording of the rules, and has in fact made them even stricter than stipulated in the original Commission proposal.

One of the two new amendments reiterates the view that producers of minced beef should give precise details of the origin of the beef they have processed.

Ladies and gentlemen, given the industrial conditions under which minced beef is produced nowadays, this would quite obviously be asking too much.

Although the industry agrees with watertight guarantees of origin, it is already having great difficulties in giving details about the point of slaughter and of preparation for minced beef products.

This demonstrates that the regulation will also have a similar impact.

So it will certainly not be possible to put the new proposal into practice.

If the worst came to the worst, it could even lead to some companies, especially in the smaller Member States, going bankrupt and the market for minced beef being completely renationalised.

That is the effect it would have.

And you cannot convince me that a Polish cow imported into Austria would be a problem for Austrian consumers.

Because I can tell the honourable Member that if a consumer buys minced beef in a butcher' s shop in Austria, he has the piece of meat minced in front of his own eyes, and in that case there are no problems either with origin or anything else.

What we are talking about here is really industrial processing of minced beef to make burgers and similar products, and nowadays that is a continuous industrial process.

If you start interfering in that, then companies like this will use products originating solely in their own country and nothing else.

And that would result in the opposite of what we are trying to achieve.

The other amendment proposes making it compulsory to give the date minced beef was produced, and this is not the first time we have debated this idea.

However, the label already features a more direct and clearer way of giving the consumer such vital information - the use-by date, which shows how long the minced beef can be used for.

I do not therefore believe that this new proposal would improve or add to information for consumers.

The common position also provides for such information to be given under the 'simplified procedure' if anyone requires this.

I therefore suggest that we should stick to the provisions on minced beef as laid down in the common position.

I am sure that if you take a closer look at the text you will see that the rules stipulated in it are strict enough and that our objective of improving transparency has been achieved.

I would now like to turn to the much discussed issue of category.

As you know, this formed part of the original Commission proposal, and I think there is a lot to be said for giving this information.

It leads to greater transparency and I believe it is important for consumers.

I can only tell you that where I come from, you pay 50% more for veal than for beef.

So as a consumer, I would like to know what I am paying 50% more for.

There is also a price difference of about one third depending on whether I am buying beef from a cow or beef from a young bull.

In that case it is surely in the interest of consumers to know what they are paying more for and to be given a guarantee that when they pay a higher price, they are actually getting what they paid for.

Let me explain now what we are actually proposing here.

Categories have already been compulsory in the Community for 20 years as far as whole carcasses are concerned.

The existing categories are: calves, young bulls, bullocks, heifers, cows and older bulls.

This is also intended as the basis for introducing categories in this case.

We simply want the labelling already applying to whole carcasses to apply to individual cuts as well.

We are also willing to make distinctions for meat prepared in different ways.

For example, it is not necessary to make a precise distinction for casserole meat, since as I see it is enough to know if you are buying veal or beef casserole meat.

That is what this is about, and that alone!

If you say that the Commission does not even know what form the final system will take, then I have to reply that this is a typical chicken-and-egg situation.

We cannot lay down Commission rules and implementing provisions until a Council regulation is in force.

The category detail is a matter for the implementing provisions.

So you cannot demand guarantees from the Commission as to exactly how the whole system will operate, because we will have to discuss this with the Member States in the Management Committee first.

What you are calling for here is not legally possible, unless you want to make the whole system part of the Council regulation itself.

But that would be another kettle of fish.

That is why I think that the procedure proposed here is correct.

But I can give you one assurance, if you wish: the Commission will be backing the categories that I have mentioned, but not anything more complicated.

We have to be clear about one thing: if we do not introduce these categories, the result will be a return to national labelling systems in this area too.

That can surely not be in Europe' s interest.

Of course, politically speaking there is more than one way of looking at this issue.

Although the Commission, and I think I have made this clear, does not agree with those who think that providing this information is impracticable, pointless or prohibitively expensive, I cannot say that a system without this kind of provision is out of the question.

But what the Commission wanted to avoid at all costs was a return to national schemes, which in practice would lead to a total renationalisation of markets, thus undermining the common market.

Surely that is not the idea.

So I believe that we should adhere to the common position in this respect as well.

I would now like to make two brief points.

Mr Hudghton asked if it would be possible to display information regarding the area of origin, such as the Orkney Islands for example, on a voluntary basis.

Such voluntary information on area of origin is possible, as long as protected designations of origin are not involved, because it logically follows that protected designations of origin must be protected as such.

That brings me to the last argument put forward by various Members, that is to say the failure to introduce technical requirements.

If we were to gear our decision-making to when it occurs to the last Member State that it is now ready to establish technical requirements, then we would be gearing the process to those who are dragging their feet on compulsory beef labelling.

We cannot accept that, it would be counterproductive.

The market will in fact penalise those who were not prepared to establish the technical requirements for beef labelling promptly.

I would therefore ask you to bear these considerations in mind when you vote tomorrow.

I can also assure you that this system will not be as complicated in practice as many of you here imagine.

This is a mock-up of how one of these labels will look in future.

And there is still room for the price and any other information consumers specifically require anyway.

Commissioner, this debate is going to go on until we have completed the conciliation process.

Colleagues, I recognise there is a difficulty.

You should corner Mr Fischler individually if you wish to speak to him.

I have been involved in the meat industry for a number of years myself.

The matter is not yet satisfactorily resolved.

Mrs Jackson, do you have a point of order?

I am simply pointing out that the Commissioner should not give the impression that there is no room for conciliation on this.

We have room for conciliation and the advantage, if we adopt these amendments tomorrow, is that Parliament would be openly engaged in the final form of this proposal, which otherwise we will not be.

The matter of raising conciliation will be after the vote tomorrow.

The vote will be taken tomorrow at noon.

Proposal for a regulation on a Community patent

The next item is the Commission communication on the proposal for a regulation on a Community patent.

Mr President, I am very grateful for this opportunity to inform Parliament about a decision which was taken by the Commission this morning relating to a proposal for a regulation to create a Community patent.

That is in line with a request from the Lisbon European Council, which called for such a Community patent to be in place by the year 2001.

Parliament explicitly supported this initiative in its contributions to the extensive consultation process which the Commission launched through its Green Paper on Innovation in Europe in 1997.

We need a Community patent in order to stimulate innovation, which is a key factor for growth, competitiveness and job creation in Europe.

Our industry, as well as our research and scientific community, have stressed for some time now the need for a patent which is affordable, valid throughout the Community and which offers legal security.

Our proposal meets this ambitious goal as it aims at creating just such a patent.

The Community patent will co-exist with, and complement, existing systems by offering a more attractive alternative for those businesses, both big and small, operating within the internal market.

Our proposal builds extensively on the existing European patent system which governs the rules and procedures leading to the grant of European patents, and this approach requires that the Community should adhere to the European patent convention.

By virtue of the Community patent regulation, patents delivered by the European Patent Office in Munich may become Community patents.

The Community patent as proposed by the Commission will have the following characteristics: a Community patent will have a unitary character, it will be valid throughout the Community and it will be the subject of a single set of rules.

This will reduce the uncertainty linked to fifteen different national legislations and, of course, after enlargement, many more.

Legal certainty will be considerably reinforced by the creation of a centralized judicial system which will guarantee the quality and coherence of case law relating to Community patents.

The creation of such a centralised jurisdiction requires a change to the EC Treaty.

We now have a window of opportunity with the ongoing Intergovernmental Conference.

We must not miss that opportunity and I should like to count on the vigorous support of Members of this Parliament in order to ensure that the IGC takes up this issue in all earnest.

Finally, our proposal will help to reduce considerably the costs of patents in Europe by not requiring supplementary translations of the patent once it has been delivered in one of the three languages of the European Patent Office.

May I insist on the need for an ambitious approach.

Previous attempts to create a Community patent, in particular through the Luxembourg convention of 1989, failed because of a lack of ambition on the two key issues: firstly, the cost and secondly, the litigation.

We must convince Member States of the need to change the Treaty to create a centralised jurisdiction for Community patent litigation.

When looking at our proposal, one should also anticipate the consequences of enlargement on the costs and litigation in this respect.

If we are anything less than ambitious in this field, we shall simply not provide our industry, our research and development experts with the modern patent which they need.

I am very happy to hear that the Commission has decided to limit the number of languages that can be used for the Community patent.

At the moment translation costs are the biggest problem when we try to reduce the costs and speed up the process.

I warmly welcome the proposal and hope that the IGC is ready to make the necessary changes to the Treaties.

But I would like to ask a specific question concerning the process in EPO.

I was under the impression that the process itself would remain more or less the same in the new system.

Why is it that at the moment the EPO uses the system of many experts instead of the system of one expert, which is in use in Japan and the United States?

There the patent is granted when one expert has given their opinion.

That is also a factor in making the process in Europe more costly and slower than that of our competitors.

Mr President, I would like firstly to congratulate the Commissioner.

I believe that this is a great achievement.

As he has said, this is probably the most ambitious internal market project we are currently dealing with and I am happy to say this on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market, and as rapporteur on this issue.

It is ambitious, Commissioner, because, in addition to what you have said, there is a fundamental reason, based on the principles of the internal market, for having a Community patent.

If we want our internal market really to be a domestic market for companies and consumers, the current fragmentation suffered by patents, resulting from national borders, makes no sense.

Having said this, it is an ambitious and difficult project, because, as you have mentioned, it requires a change to the Treaty and to the constitutions of at least four or six Member States.

Therefore, Commissioner, I pray that there will be excellent cooperation between us, which we are going to need, and the capacity for negotiation so that this project can be taken to its conclusion.

Mr President, thank you for giving me the opportunity to reply to the remarks that have just been made.

May I start by thanking Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi for the broad support that she has given the decision by the Commission to promote the Community patent.

As far as Mrs Kauppi is concerned, may I say that the reason that the European Patent Office in Munich uses not just one but a number of experts is that it wants to ensure that the quality of the patent which is granted by the European Patent Office is of the highest quality.

Without wishing to be unduly eurocentric, patents granted in other parts of the world, in particular one part which is across the water, if I may put it that way, are not of the same quality as the patents granted by the European Patent Office in Munich.

So in this case I am afraid that we must continue to place security and quality above purely financial considerations.

That is the reason why the European Patent Office uses more than one expert.

On the first question, the Commission is aware of the concerns that have been raised in France and elsewhere about the directive and in particular about possible inconsistencies between two paragraphs of Article 5 of the directive.

The President of France, Mr Jacques Chirac, has written to President Prodi on this question.

May I stress that in my opinion there is no contradiction between the first two paragraphs of that article, the wording of which I believe relies heavily on suggestions made by this Parliament.

The first paragraph provides that the human body at various stages of its formation and development and the simple discovery of one of its elements, including the sequence or partial sequence of a gene, cannot constitute patentable inventions.

This paragraph is clearly in line with the basic principle that discoveries are not patentable.

However the second paragraph of Article 5 states that an element isolated from the human body or otherwise produced by means of a technical process, including the sequence or the partial sequence of a gene, may constitute a patentable invention, even if the structure of that element is identical to that of a natural element.

Here the invention arises from the isolation of a particular gene from its natural surroundings or by its production by means of a technical process.

Of course to be patentable, that invention would still need to satisfy the criteria of novelty, inventiveness and industrial applicability.

In respect of this last requirement, industrial applicability, the directive makes it clear that the industrial application of the gene must be specified in the patent application.

A note setting out the Commission's position on this issue has been placed on our website.

Needless to say the Commission will reply to President Chirac's letter and take a position on the issues he has raised.

Our proposal on a Community patent, which is the subject of the discussion this afternoon, does not affect the existing regime, which is governed by the directive of 1998.

That directive is due to be implemented by the end of this month and it should also bind the European Patent Office.

Mr President, Commissioner, it is important that you emphasised the coexistence of the national patents, European patents and Community patents.

I still wonder, however, how decentralised the research regime will be with regard to the Community patents.

It was expressly mentioned in the reply from Parliament in the Green Paper that you mentioned.

I am also pleased that we will achieve legal certainty.

I think, however, that it could have been achieved in a different way and without creating a Community patent.

One question that is important to deal with here in Parliament, and that will definitely be something that affects the linguistic diversity within the EU, is also whether we will guarantee equality between small and medium-sized enterprises that operate in all parts of our Union.

I also think it is important that in all parts of the Union we are able to retain the knowledge that is associated with research patents.

When we recently discussed the research White Paper, we all took the view that it was vital to move forward on this topic because it was important not only to do very good research in Europe, but also to optimise the conditions for its industrial exploitation.

So on that account I welcome Commissioner Bolkenstein's statement.

The word 'centralisation' is unfortunate in this context because it suggests a single centre of what is already a polycentric community.

I take it his real meaning is that there will be one court for the whole Community, not that it will necessarily be in a place which will be geographically central.

Finally, I gather that it is proposed that software might be patented.

My Group would be very unhappy about such a proposal.

It seems to us that copyright is the right way to protect software and that introducing patents in this sphere would be unhelpful and contrary to good legal principle.

We welcome the fact that this is going to be a great spur to innovation and development and the competitiveness of European industry in the future if it does get through the IGC and onto the statute book.

Following up Mrs Fraisse's question and your response to that, the borderline must be established as to what is acceptable for patenting and what is not.

In the biotechnology area there is still this grey area.

You purported to have reached an absolute decision on this.

Is there any room for manoeuvre or is that the absolutely determined and settled position of the Commission as you said in your earlier answer?

- May I explain that the Commission's proposal, if accepted by Parliament and by the Council, does not take away any possibilities that at present exist.

So if the Commission's proposal is accepted there will be three ways of getting patents.

First of all there will be the national patents which will be delivered in the national language and will be granted by the national office for the granting of patents.

That exists now and will continue to exist.

The second possibility that will continue to exist is the European patent granted by the European Patent Office.

The European patent is not to be confused with the Community patent.

The European patent is a basket of national patents, so an inventor would apply for a patent, for example, for Benelux, France and Germany, five countries out of 15.

If the application is approved he would get a patent for those five countries, and jurisdiction would be spread over the courts of those five countries.

That possibility - that is the reality at the moment - will continue to exist.

The third possibility we are now discussing is one patent of unitary character, in other words it is granted and then it applies to the whole Community.

That is why it is called the Community patent.

May I stress that this is an option inventors have, they can go either for a national patent or for a European patent or for a Community patent.

The Commission does not intend to take away any possibilities that exist at present.

Let me address Mrs Thors who asked about decentralisation in this field.

We cannot have it both ways.

We cannot have our cake and eat it.

In other words, if we want a Community patent, granted at a single place, namely Munich, which at one go applies to the whole Community, we must have a central jurisdiction to judge litigation for patents.

That is why the Commission has proposed that a tribunal to judge litigation in the case of intellectual property be set up, and the logical place for that tribunal to exist is in Luxembourg.

That is also what I would like to say to Mr MacCormick.

We are not concerned here with any geographical centrality - although I must admit I do not know whether Luxembourg is or is not in the centre of the European Union.

Certainly with the enlargement of the European Union the geographic centre of the Union would shift eastwards.

We have chosen the place where the European Court of Justice is located for the Community's tribunal on intellectual property.

May I come back to Mrs Thors and say that as far as small and medium-sized enterprises are concerned, the Commission proposal does not take away any possibilities for small and medium-sized enterprises to partake of inventions published by the European Patent Office.

75% of patents are delivered in English, and the current language in the world of intellectual property, in the world of patents, is English.

Secondly there are national patent offices.

Let them use their capacity to enlighten small and medium enterprises about what is going on in Munich and what has been published in English, French or German.

In that way they can stimulate and help the small and medium enterprises existing in those respective countries.

Lastly, on the matter of patents for biotechnological inventions, which was raised both in the previous round of questions and just now again, may I stress that the decision taken by the Commission this morning does not change anything in the area that was alluded to by both speakers.

The question then arises: does the Commission have room for manoeuvre in this respect?

Only those people who have no ideas never change their ideas, so it would be bizarre if the Commission had no room for manoeuvre.

We are considering that, we have received the letter from the President of the French Republic, we shall answer that letter obviously, there is already a note which is available on our website and we shall do our best to steer a course which is the most sensible one.

Mr President, I would like to follow up Mrs Kauppi' s question, in relation to the strategy on the level of invention.

A high level of invention has the advantage that it is easy to defend in court, because revocation proceedings are of course a huge problem.

A low level of invention has the advantage that many companies and inventors can submit their inventions and obtain a patent very quickly.

That is why I believe that the strategic level Europe is to adopt is a vital issue, because the Japanese, for instance, have now adopted the principle of a low level of invention and accordingly have a flood of applications.

Europe and the European Patent Office in fact have a very high level of inventiveness.

I believe that this is enormously significant as an instrument of economic policy.

Mr President, Commissioner, I too would like to congratulate you on presenting this proposal.

Indeed we all hope that in the interests of the competitiveness of the European Union, this unending Community patent saga will now have a happy ending.

That is why it was right - and I would like to specifically support you here - not to overburden this proposal with sensitive issues such as patent protection for biotechnology products.

I also entreat my fellow Members not to raise issues of principle on language matters.

This is a special field subject to special arrangements.

Commissioner, with regard to jurisdiction, you just mentioned in passing that the relevant jurisdiction would of course be in Luxembourg.

I hope that was not a reference to a possible location for the European Patent Court.

It would possibly make more sense for it to be located in Munich together with the European Patent Office, because all the necessary expertise is available there, which would facilitate cooperation.

Mr President, I would like to congratulate Commissioner Bolkestein warmly on the initiative he has shown, the energy he has displayed and the success he has achieved in respect of the European Community patent.

I would like to ask him four questions.

As I understand it, some Commissioners, as well as people other than Commissioners, have problems with the proposed language system.

I am not fanatical about languages, but I do wonder why there should be three languages and not five, as is the case in the Community Trademark Office.

Would this cause a real problem?

Secondly, the decision to convert the office in Munich into an EU agency has to be approved unanimously by fifteen governments.

Thirdly, on the position of the European Parliament, we do not really have much of a say.

Does this mean that the European Parliament, which has worked harder than anyone else to achieve a European Community patent, will not be involved, or at least be updated in good time and on a regular basis?

Finally, what is the latest on the future expansion of the Community patent?

Six questions have been put by three Members of your assembly.

Perhaps I may deal with them one by one.

Firstly, on the matter of thresholds, the only threshold I am aware of is a threshold of quality and we must continue to provide patents which satisfy definite criteria of quality.

Earlier this afternoon I replied to a question by Mrs Kauppi where she asked why the European Patent Office did not satisfy itself with just one expert and the reason I gave is that we need the highest quality patents and therefore it is sometimes necessary to use more than one expert.

I do not think we should adulterate the quality of the patents delivered by the European Patent Office and therefore we should maintain the threshold as it is.

The same Member of Parliament asked about jurisdiction.

Once again, a Community patent needs a Community jurisdiction and it seems to us that this court which will consist of specialised judges but which of course forms part of the whole court system of the European Union would be best placed in Luxembourg, but that is purely a matter of the location of the court.

On competitiveness, may I say that is one of the prime considerations why we engaged in this whole exercise.

Business and the research community want a single patent available at one go for the whole Community and one that is cheap.

The average cost of European patents is three times the cost of an average Japanese patent and five times the cost of an average American patent.

Obviously this is to the detriment of European competitiveness.

As far as the languages are concerned, and here I come to a question put by Mr De Clercq, if we followed the Luxembourg Convention of 1989, which meant that all patents had to be translated into 11 languages, the cost of that translation alone would be EUR 17,000 on average, whereas the system the Commission is now proposing will cost EUR 2,000.

That is also the reason why the Luxembourg convention was never operative.

It was concluded but it was not ratified in the Member States required and therefore it never became operative and that is because we were not ambitious enough either in the jurisdiction or in the costs.

Mr De Clercq says why can we not have five languages.

The reason is that the construction of the Community patent is such that the European Patent Office grants a patent for the whole Community and therefore we will leave the whole process up to the granting of the patent as it is now.

After that it becomes valid throughout the Community and then there is a court to sit on litigation, but up to the granting of the patent itself the European Patent Office will continue to work as it does now.

May I point out that the European Patent Office is not a Community agency.

There is a European Patent Convention and 15 Member States have signed the Convention but a number of other states have also signed it so the Commission cannot tell the European Patent Office what its language arrangements should be.

Therefore when Mr De Clercq says why could the European Patent Office not become an agency of the European Union my answer is that the European Union must sign up to the European Patent Convention and should negotiate that but it is no longer realistic to expect the European Patent Office to become a Union agency.

The penultimate point, raised by Mr De Clercq, was about the codecision procedure.

That will remain as it normally is and therefore Parliament will play its normal role in considering the mandates and the aims of the Commission when these issues are decided in full this autumn.

Lastly, when enlargement takes place the Union will become bigger, obviously, and the Community patent will then apply to the countries that have acceded to the European Union.

There is no other way of keeping and maintaining a Community patent.

Once again, the two other possibilities will continue to exist, so there will continue to be a Polish National Patent and there will also continue to be a European Patent which may if the applicant wishes, include Poland.

Let us hope that most European businesses and most European research experts will promote the shift from the European Patent to the Community Patent so that the competitiveness of the European Union is improved as much as possible.

Thank you very much for your replies, Mr Bolkestein.

That concludes the Commission' s statement and the subsequent debate.

The next item is Question Time (B5-0532/00).

We will examine questions to the Commission.

Subject: Cybercrime Work is in progress to tackle cybercrime (Council of Europe, the G7' s Lyon Group).

In addition, the Commission has recently made proposals and is now considering taking new measures at Community level to combat crime.

Apparently the Commission is discussing a paper with the Member States without even informing Parliament that it is doing so.

One of the measures under consideration is a requirement for service-providers to gather and store traffic data and, upon request, supply it to the authorities.

Does the Commission realise that such a measure could present enormous risks to personal data protection and the protection of sensitive commercial data and would facilitate industrial and economic espionage?

Does the Commission realise that such a measure might destroy users' confidence in the Internet?

Does the Commission realise that such a measure would be inconsistent with the Commission' s recent eEurope initiative, the aim of which was to encourage the use of the Internet both by private individuals and by businesses?

Mr President, Mrs Cederschiöld, Members of Parliament, since December 1999 the Commission has undertaken informal consultations with representatives from Member States' law enforcement and personal data protection authorities and from European industry, mostly Internet service providers and telecommunications operators, with a view to drafting the communication announced in its annual work programme on possible options for further action by the European Union against computer-related crime.

The Commission considers that any solution to the complex issue of preservation of traffic data should achieve a fair balance between the different needs and interests of those involved, while fully ensuring fundamental human rights with regard to privacy and personal data protection.

There are quite different, important concerns to be taken into account.

On the one hand, privacy protection authorities have considered that the most effective means of reducing unacceptable risks to privacy, while recognising the need for effective law enforcement, is that traffic data should in principle not be kept only for law enforcement purposes.

On the other hand, law enforcement authorities have stated that they consider the preservation of a minimum amount of traffic data for a minimum period of time necessary to facilitate criminal investigations.

Adequate security of any preserved traffic data will have to be ensured.

Industry should be helped in the fight against crimes like hacking and computer fraud, but not be confronted with measures that are unreasonably costly.

Furthermore, industry will have a key role to play in contributing on a voluntary basis to the process of creating a safer information society.

Users should have confidence in the safety of the information society and feel protected from crime and from infringements of their privacy.

The e-Europe draft Action Plan, prepared by the Commission and very recently adopted by the Santa Maria da Feira Summit of the European Council, includes the establishment of a coordinated and coherent approach to cyber-crime by the end of 2002 in order to ensure greater cooperation on these key issues.

In the same context of the e-Europe initiative, as well as in the multiannual action plan on safer use of the Internet, the Commission plans to support a number of actions aimed at stimulating the use of the Internet and promoting security and confidence among the users.

I would like to say thank you very much for a nice reply, which, however, did not quite answer my questions.

We perhaps, therefore, need to discuss this in the future in order to get a complete answer.

We all want to combat cyber crime.

It is important that it is crime that is curbed and not the new economy.

To this end, all parties concerned must be involved in this consultation and present their views in good time.

This not only applies to the EU institutions and Member States, but also to the consumer and industry, so that we do not find ourselves in a situation of inconsistency in which one hand is doing something relating to the eEurope initiative, while at the same time we are doing something else in connection with crime.

It is a question of creating confidence in development if e-commerce is to work.

Therefore, the work cannot be carried out in secret.

Rather, it is important that we obtain analyses in this area of the consequences of the proposals.

In Feira it is precisely consumer confidence that is being identified as a key factor for the development of e-commerce.

I would like to conclude with a follow-up question: when will we get an assessment of the consequences for consumers, industry and economic espionage, which may otherwise be in danger of developing?

I share the view of the honourable Member in the sense that we cannot conduct this exercise in a secret way.

It is not the intention of the Commission to do anything in secret generally and more specifically, in this area.

On the contrary, we are trying to promote broad consultation on this issue, which is a very difficult one.

Nobody has yet found the right answer.

We have to follow the discussions that are going on in several international fora, for example the special convention the Council of Europe is preparing on cybercrime and the discussion on OECD.

We also need to follow very closely the evolution of the legislative amendments that are being introduced in several Member States, dealing with the very sensitive question of retaining traffic data for the purpose of law enforcement.

As I have said to Mrs Cederschiöld, the e-initiative action plan will also include a list of actions aimed at reinforcing security for the users of the Internet and also on the specific question of e-commerce.

According to the timetable fixed by the Summit of Santa Maria Da Feira these actions will be implemented in the next few months and we will get the assessment that the honourable Member mentioned in her question.

I was impressed by the Commissioner's balanced response to this question but it does not fit particularly well with the UK Government's proposal that the secret services - MI5 and MI6 - should perform surveillance of all Internet traffic.

They intend to demand the surrender of encryption codes and to penalise those who fail to surrender them even if the codes have been lost and are unobtainable.

Does the Commission consider that this proposal is, firstly, consistent with civil rights, as enunciated for the Community, and, secondly, in the interests of the development of Internet use in the European Union, as rhetorically advocated by everyone, including in particular the British Prime Minister?

I share your view that the question of having a strategy for encryption at European level is a key tool in enhancing security in the use of the Internet.

But as you can imagine, in this new field we have to address the need to reinforce security on the basis of the subsidiarity principle, in the sense that we have to recognise that each Member State is entitled to adopt its own national legislation to guarantee law enforcement at national level.

What we in the Commission do is to coordinate efforts at European level to guarantee law enforcement.

Our approach is to guarantee minimum common levels of law enforcement at European level, which does not prevent Member States introducing more stringent or national legislation.

Nevertheless a comparison of national legislations would be an important factor when we adopt common rules at European level.

I cannot give you a broad picture at the moment because in several Member States, such as the UK, legislation is still under preparation and has not yet been fully adopted by the national parliaments.

Question No 26 by Mr Watts will not be replied to since it is included in the agenda of the current part-session.

Subject: Non-allied status of certain EU Member States At the Feira European Council discussions are being held on the EU' s defence dimension, and the matter is also up for discussion at the IGC.

Some EU Member States do not belong to the NATO military alliance.

What is the Commission' s view of the position of these Member States in any future EU defence cooperation?

The European Union has made remarkable progress in shaping a European security and defence policy over the past year.

From Cologne via Helsinki to Feira we have gone from an ambitious vision to concrete targets, first military and now also civilian headline goals and the establishment of new specific structures.

This very welcome development has given substance to the objectives of the 'Petersberg principles' as set out in the Amsterdam Treaty. Like their incorporation into the Treaty a few years ago this has only been possible with the full and active support of all Member States.

It is too early to say whether any further Treaty change in this area is required at this stage.

There has been no formal discussion of the European Union's defence dimension in the IGC framework so far.

The presidency report to Feira indicated that the conclusions of Cologne and Helsinki could be implemented without it being legally necessary to amend the Treaty unless the Council's decision-making powers were to be altered or the Treaty's provisions regarding the WEU needed to be amended.

The presidency has suggested that the issue of a revision of the ESDP provisions in the Treaty should remain open to examination as required before the Nice European Council.

As for the specific question of the position in any future defence cooperation of EU Member States that do not belong to Nato, this is first and foremost an issue to be addressed by the Member States concerned.

What is clear is that the military headline goal agreed at the Helsinki European Council will require a concerted and coordinated effort by all Member States.

As to the shape of individual national military contributions, these will be discussed at the pledging conference to be held in the autumn under the French presidency.

Again, how non-Nato EU states view their role and what their contribution to the defence dimension of the European Union should be is rightfully for these Member States to say.

But it may be helpful to distinguish between two component parts of the overall European security and defence equation, the Petersberg tasks of peace-keeping and peace enforcement on the one hand and territorial defence on the other.

The European Union's stated aim is to be ready to support action within the framework of Petersberg tasks.

All EU Member States have agreed this and are ready to contribute to it.

The excellent record of the European neutrals in the field of peacekeeping and crisis management operations has come very much to the fore in the new European security context.

All four Member States which are not also members of Nato are contributing actively and constructively to the development of CFSB in general and to the European security and defence policy in particular.

Their contribution to the last IGC was indeed crucial to the inclusion of the Petersberg tasks in the new Treaty.

Finally, I have no doubt that their contribution in this area - materially as well as in the ongoing discussions shaping the new structures of cooperation will continue to be both active and ambitious, be it in the military or non-military dimensions of conflict prevention, conflict resolution and crisis management.

Mr President, Commissioner, I thank you for your full reply.

I would still like to have a more specific idea of those principles that were decided upon at the Feira meeting.

There the concept of flexibility was adopted for the intergovernmental conference.

I would ask you whether it is your interpretation that this concept has now been extended to Pillar II issues.

As I said, I do not think it is necessary to have any treaty change.

That is my personal view, but I am sure that will be considered by Member States during the course of the next few months.

One issue which, of course, bears directly on the flexibility under Pillar II to which the honourable gentlemen referred is the whole question of Article 5 of the WEU, which is not being transferred to the EU, and this may of course have been behind the question.

What is being transferred is the Petersberg tasks alone, with of course the institutional and administrative mechanisms which are at the disposal of the European Union.

There are various possibilities about what will happen to the collective defence clause but it is not, given my responsibilities, really a question for me.

Pillar II issues have to be addressed to the Member States but, given our related responsibilities under Pillar I, we take an interest.

Subject: International Criminal Court The Commission, and particularly the Commissioner for humanitarian aid, played an important role in the setting-up of the new, permanent International Criminal Court (ICC) in June 1998.

The adoption of the Rome Statute - on which the ICC is founded - was an important step in breaking the tendency towards the systematic use of rape as a strategy of war.

The Statute is the first international accord to stipulate that rape, sexual slavery and forced pregnancy may be treated as crimes against humanity and war crimes.

However, to become a reality, the Rome Statute must be ratified by 60 States.

Although all the EU Member States have signed the Statute, only Italy, unfortunately, has ratified it..

What initiatives does the Commission intend to take to ensure that this important Statute is ratified?

The Commission is aware that so far two Member States, Italy and France, have ratified the ICC Convention.

However most Member States will ratify the Convention during this year, including some already this summer such as Germany, Austria and the Netherlands.

Other Member States will shortly present legislation to their parliaments.

The Commission supports NGO initiatives that promote the establishment of the ICC.

In 1999 about EUR 1.5 million was allocated to such activities in line with the budgetary comments for budget line B7706 of Chapter B77.

Mr President, it is, of course, gratifying that several EU countries are about to ratify this agreement. It is in fact two years since we adopted the agreement.

At the same time it only needs a fifth of the 60 countries to ratify it in order for the treaty to come into effect.

It is, of course, very doubtful whether it will be done in time for December this year.

It is, however, extremely important, because the treaty from the Rome Conference is the first international agreement that establishes that rape and forced pregnancy can be treated as war crimes and crimes against humanity.

Experience from those courts we have set up, namely the war crimes tribunals for Rwanda and Yugoslavia, clearly show that the present system is inadequate for dealing with the type of crimes I have just mentioned.

However, in order for the ICC to be able to work, broad international support is necessary.

My question to the Commission is therefore: Have you any plans at all to try to persuade important countries such as the United States, Russia and Japan to also sign the agreement from the Rome Conference?

First of all I wholly endorse what the honourable Member has said about the importance of the statute's inclusion of crimes of sexual violence as crimes against humanity when, as has been the case, they are committed as part of a widespread or systematic attack directed against any civilian population.

What we have seen in that context and in other criminal activities is of course the most powerful argument for us getting ahead with ratification of the convention by as many countries as possible.

I think I am right in saying that 160 nations decided to establish the international criminal court and the statute of the court was approved by about 120 states, so there should be no problem in moving from the 50 who have ratified to the 60 figure which we require in order to move things forward.

We have certainly pursued the importance of ratification with the United States.

We do not, as the honourable Member will know, accept the US position on the ICC.

We continue to argue our case with them and we will argue it with Russia and Japan and other countries as well.

It comes up fairly regularly in our bilateral contacts and I would make sure that it did if that were not the case.

We think this is potentially an extremely important institution, particularly in view of some of the appalling things that have happened in the last few years.

The sooner the court can sit, the better for everyone.

Mr President, does the Commission think it possible that the European Community will be associated with the Rome Convention?

If it is, what would be the relation between the Court of Justice of the European Communities and the ICC?

There are questions of our judicial personality or lack of judicial personality which have a direct bearing on that.

What we are concerned about at present, and this is very much where the Commission comes in - is encouraging all our Member States to ratify and encouraging some of our partners and colleagues in the international community to do so as well.

That has to be our objective in order to make sure that the provisions that were so widely supported in Rome actually lead to the establishment of a functioning court as soon as possible.

The Commission is fully aware of the environmental problems in the Alpine corridors, but points out that it must act in a balanced way in order to take account of the different interests at play in this kind of situation.

The Brenner is one of the crucial transit routes via the Alps and is therefore a good example of the need to act in a balanced way, with regard to both railways and roads, in order to protect the environment and, at the same time, guarantee the free movement of goods.

As regards the railways, the Commission - as the honourable Members know - supports the measures adopted by the Member States to develop and implement the Brenner railway project.

The Brenner high speed railway line has been included on the list of maximum priority Community projects and has received considerable Community funding via the Trans-European Networks.

With regard to the roads, we must stress that an increase in road traffic in no way automatically implies more pollution.

For example, the Eco-point system has shown that the emissions of polluting gases from lorries in transit through Austria have dropped despite the increase in the number of journeys made.

In general, the Commission will continue to seek solutions to the environmental problems caused by traffic.

In this respect you should be aware that the Commission has committed itself, in this year' s working programme, to producing a communication on traffic in the sensitive regions of the European Union, which include the Alpine region.

The result of this communication will have an influence on the future actions envisaged which, according to the initial guidelines, will include a coherent package of supplementary measures to reduce the effect of traffic in sensitive areas: technical standards to improve environmental and safety requirements, instruments for setting tariffs in order to adjust the levels relating to transport to the real cost of transport in all its forms, and an increase in the efficiency of transport, especially by improving intermodality, and increasing the competitivity of rail transport.

Mr President, I would like to thank the Commissioner for her comments and for her willingness, which she expressed several times before this House, to take into due consideration the environmental impact on an alpine area which is made particularly vulnerable by its altitude and its geographical location.

We have proposed new solutions in draft form, which have also recently been put forward to the Commissioner. I consider that this proposal could be a pilot solution for the new projects and the concept of European Union transport as a whole.

I hope that the willingness hitherto displayed by the Commissioner will be mirrored throughout the rest of the Commission and that her intentions will receive majority backing from the European Commission as well.

(ES) Mr President, I simply wish to thank the Member for this intervention and say that, of course, we are going to go ahead with the Brenner project, although, given its technical difficulties, it is not a project which can be carried out overnight.

However, I hope that, before concluding the period set for the 14 Essen projects, the Brenner project will be under way.

Mr President, we all know that there is an atmosphere of crisis on the Brenner, and I think that it is imperative to discuss plans for extending it and to look at pricing again, because we simply have to get a hold on the situation.

My question is this: do you have any actual plans - we have already had the Green Paper - to put efficient transport pricing, particularly on the Brenner model, into practice?

Subject: The use of Community funds by Turkey The 22 January 2000 edition of the Turkish 'Hürriyet' newspaper reported that some of the funds provided by the European Union to assist the victims of the earthquake which occurred last year were used to purchase 35 automobiles to a value of TRL 500 billion to facilitate travel by Turkish MPs.

Can the Commission state what was the total amount of funding granted by the European Union to Turkey following the disastrous earthquake last year and what measures were taken to ensure that the Community funds were properly used? What is the Commission' s position concerning the above allegation contained in the 'Hürriyet' , a Turkish newspaper with a very wide circulation?

More specifically, will the Commission demand the return of those funds which were used for purposes other than that for which they were intended, in flagrant violation of Community rules, in order to satisfy consumerist requirements of Turkish MPs rather than providing assistance to the victims of the tragic earthquake?

First let me pass on the information that the European Commission via the Humanitarian Aid Office, ECHO, allocated a total amount of EUR 30 million to aid the victims of the earthquakes in Turkey last year.

The programmes were started in August and are still ongoing.

As to the specific question relating to an article in a Turkish newspaper on the 22 January, I can say that there is no Community funding involved in what this article relates to.

We have received assurances on this from two different sources.

Written confirmation has been received from the Commission's representation office in Ankara that the article in question makes no reference to European Union or any external source of funds.

Also there has been confirmation from ECHO's office in Istanbul that the Turkish Parliament Foundation is a private organisation established by, and financed by, the parliament members individually.

The way the money is being used is decided by the council of the parliament after being voted by the members.

The background for the newspaper article was that a unilateral decision was made by the head of the Turkish parliament to allocate funds to the earthquake area.

These funds had earlier been earmarked for the purchase of 35 cars for members of the parliamentary council and the council members objected to this reallocation considering that the original decision to buy new cars should be reinstated in the interest of cost-effectiveness.

The funds in question actually belong to the Turkish Parliament Foundation and this is financed by the members of parliament in Turkey.

So we have absolutely nothing to do with this matter and for that reason I cannot promise any kind of follow-up action either.

My warmest thanks to the Commissioner for his detailed reply to my question and for his reassurance that the funds provided by the European Union were not used to buy cars for use by certain Turkish MPs.

What bothers me is the fact that the Hürriyet, which is, I believe, the most widely read Turkish newspaper, did not meet with any denial on the part of the Turkish Government and, as we all know, freedom of the press is something of a problem in Turkey.

Journalists who go off the straight and narrow and report this sort of information are not just reprimanded, they are usually thrown in jail and sometimes even killed.

But I do want to believe that the reply given by the Commissioner following a thorough investigation by the European Union authorities in Turkey paints the right picture.

If indeed no such thing has happened, allow me to make a little joke by saying that, in that case, instead of giving these cars to Turkish MPs, they should give them to the MEPs in the regions, who are unable to use their cars and travel by public transport.

I would ask Members to limit themselves to new questions or supplementary questions.

I understand the importance of your assessments, but we must abide by the Rules of Procedure.

Subject: Developing countries and farm animal welfare What steps is the Commission taking, both through the Community' s development programme and its influence on the world stage, to encourage developing countries not to adopt industrial animal husbandry systems, as these pose serious threats to poverty alleviation, the environment, human health and animal welfare in developing countries?

The question reads 'Does the Commission coordinate with EU Member States and other international institutions on the problem of industrialisation of animal husbandry' and the answer is yes.

The Commission participates actively in the Livestock Environment and Development initiative.

The members of the steering committee here are Denmark, France, Germany, Switzerland, Sweden, the UK, the USA, Costa Rica, EFAT, the World Bank, the FAO, Senegal, India, China and Kenya.

The initiative's targets are the protection and enhancement of natural resources as affected by livestock production while alleviating poverty.

Earlier work under this initiative has identified on a global scale the consequences of increased pressure on grazing and mixing farming systems, and the dangers of the shift to industrial modes of production.

It has highlighted the close and complex interaction between government policies and the environmental impact of livestock production, and identified a large number of technologies which are available to mitigate the negative effects in all different production modes, provided the appropriate policy framework is in place.

So this is something we are giving quite some attention to.

The problem is that it is very big and it will probably be growing, but we are participating actively in the best international efforts to do something meaningful.

I thank the Commissioner for that helpful answer and I am very pleased to hear that these issues are being taken seriously.

I wonder though if the Commissioner would say whether or not he would agree that intensive agriculture is not likely to be the way forward for north or south when we consider that the world population at the end of this century will be 10 billion.

If they were all to aspire to eat a US diet we would need four planets the size of earth to produce the extra 9 billion tonnes of grain required.

And, in particular, would he agree, or disagree with the FAO when they say that the trend of further intensification of demand in production is inescapable?

I find that a very worrying statement coming out of the Food and Agriculture authority and would like to know very much whether or not the Commissioner agrees that such intensification is inevitable or would he agree that there are other alternatives and that those are alternatives that all of us ought to be promoting and pursuing?

The problem is that, as groups of people in even quite poor countries earn a better way of living, their diet changes.

This is a very clear pattern and demand for more protein is also increasing.

These statistics, the extrapolation if you will, should be taken quite seriously.

On the other hand, many projections have been made about where we would be today, which are definitely not being fulfilled.

We adopted in the Community already in 1989 a directive on the protection of animals kept for farming purposes.

In addition, a protocol annexed to the Treaty of Amsterdam relates to the protection and welfare of animals, and these policies and ideas are of course taken into account in the Community's development aid in the livestock sector.

We have never supported any husbandry industrialisation project, but we have been supportive of an intensification of traditional farming systems of benefit to smallholders, and environmental conservation has always been taken carefully into account.

We are using and taking seriously environmental analyses of the consequences of these activities wherever we are supporting agriculture.

Mr President, what exactly does the Commission consider to be defined, and I quote from the question, as 'industrial animal-husbandry systems'.

Would it not be unreasonable to discourage developing countries from employing modern, efficient, cost-effective and humane systems of animal husbandry?

The distinction is as difficult to make in a developing country environment as it is in Europe.

However, the poverty dimension in what we are trying to support and promote means that more intensified small-scale production is what we are supporting.

As to the problems related to genuinely industrial-scale activities in this sector, we are working with the group of other donors and countries involved whom I mentioned, in order to do this as sustainably and acceptably as possible.

Subject: Mr Gavin Howard and the Programme de Développement de la Région Nord (PDRN II) EEC (DG VIII) In a letter dated 2 February 2000 to Commissioner Nielson, I asked the Commission to resolve the compensation problems of a UK national, Mr Gavin Howard, who had previously worked as a technical adviser on an EU-sponsored project in the Central African Republic in 1996.

As a result of events well beyond his control, much of his equipment and many of his belongings were ransacked while he was working on the project.

Since 1996, he has sought compensation for the losses that he suffered whilst working for the EU, since he maintains that he was covered by EU insurance.

Full details of this case have been previously forwarded to Mr Nielson's private office.

Will the Commission agree to compensate Mr Howard for his losses?

The mutiny which took place in 1996 in the Central African Republic caused considerable hardship and personal danger to a number of people working there.

Mr Howard was under contract to an association of consultants.

It is for Mr Howard's employer to consider any payment to him which might be possible or provided for under the terms of the contract.

Compensation for the loss of personal belongings out of EDF funds is not justifiable in a situation of force majeure.

Mr Howard was not directly contracted as a staff member by us but was working for a company.

I regret the delay in providing the honourable Member with the information requested.

The answer I have given today will be confirmed in writing shortly.

Well that did not hurt, did it?

I have been waiting for that reply since 2 February and I simply cannot understand why it has taken the Commission so long to come up with that negative.

I accept the negative, but the fact of the matter is that I am a Member of the European Parliament.

I have been waiting five months for that reply.

My reaction to this is that I cannot understand it either but from the moment I was directly informed about this we started reacting.

I would unfortunately have to put this one in the category of cases showing what some of the problems are between the services in the Commission.

Subject: Humanitarian aid for the Chechen people How much humanitarian aid has the Commission sent to date to the civilian population in Chechnya - including expellees in neighbouring countries - and how has it sent it, and what is the programme for the remainder of the year?

- Since the beginning of the present conflict the European Commission, via its humanitarian aid office, has allocated a total of EUR 12.6 million in humanitarian aid to the victims of this on-going emergency.

This total amount is composed of two decisions taken in the autumn of 1999, one of them relating to EUR 2.4 million, the other for EUR 10.2 million allocated under the 2000 budget.

A little more than EUR 10 million are currently under implementation.

ECHO is constantly monitoring the further development of the situation and a contingency of EUR 4.8 million for the northern Caucusus has been set aside within ECHO's annual budget, so financially we are prepared to do more.

If the evolution of the situation should require, these additional funds then can be mobilised.

Among ECHO's implementing partners are the UNHCR, the ICRC and several European NGOs.

During the first months of the crisis, humanitarian operations mainly focused on the important concentrations of internally displaced persons in Ingushetia and to some extent on the limited number of victims who have found refuge in Georgia and Daghestan.

More recently operations have increasingly been focusing on Chechnya itself.

Unfortunately humanitarian aid work in some areas of Chechnya strongly affected by the hostilities is still not possible, as lack of security makes these areas inaccessible.

ECHO programmes in the northern Caucusus cover a broad range of aid sectors, for example, food, medical aid, shelter, water, sanitation, essential relief items and psycho-social assistance.

Planning of future assistance has to take into account the volatility of the situation on the ground.

In order to facilitate programming, ECHO carried out a technical assessment mission in Chechnya in May.

Pending a positive evolution of the general working environment, a further increase in operations inside Chechnya itself will be a major priority.

Bearing in mind that a quick return of all the displaced persons currently residing in Ingushetia becomes more and more unlikely, it will also be necessary to duly take into consideration an adequate follow-up to the on-going operations in this area.

Commissioner, thank you very much for your detailed reply.

I would like to ask a supplementary question: what is the position on funds already spent? What proportion went direct to the Chechens affected and what proportion was channelled via Russian institutions, authorities and organisations?

- It all went to the people who were supposed to be the beneficiaries, in spite of the fact that I was very careful to announce to Parliament that this would have to be what we call a remote-controlled operation because of the situation there.

We have been able to do it in a fashion which we are quite happy with.

We have not been using Russian organisations in a way that gives any concern.

What we are not pleased with has been the lack of more direct access into Chechnya.

Thank you very much, Mr Nielson.

Since the time allotted to Questions to the Commissioner has elapsed, Question No 34 will be replied to in writing.

Madam President, Commissioner Barnier, I would like to thank you for your proposal.

As you will understand, my question - based as it was on the moral conviction that many States, including, I am quite sure, Spain, are not observing the principle of additionality - was in part a rhetorical one designed to elicit a response from you.

In any case, as it is obvious that failure to observe the principle of additionality has very serious adverse effects in countries which are less economically developed and have higher levels of unemployment, I would like to ask if you are willing to put in place new and much needed conceptual policy administration instruments which would genuinely, and with the full force of the law, prevent a practice which makes a mockery of the use of Community funds and the very objectives of social and territorial cohesion within the European Union for which you are responsible as a member of the Commission.

The problem may also be that even where a state formally complies the idea of the structural funds does not make the difference that it should.

Mr Barnier has said that from 2000 to 2006 there will definitely be an increase in expenditure but nothing guarantees that the state increase in expenditure will be focused on the areas which the Community has taken as targets for structural funding.

Indeed, Mr Barnier has made it absolutely plain that the Community does not and cannot inquire into that point.

So it seems to me a little bizarre that we spend ages trying to build up exactly correct structural maps in the full knowledge that nothing under the additionality principle actually guarantees that the Member State will increase expenditure in the region in question.

That does seem to me to be a radical fault in the concept of additionality and one that needs to be reformed.

Subject: New Structural Fund programmes and biodiversity The Commission is negotiating the new 2000-2006 Structural Fund programmes.

On 16 March 2000 it issued a note on biodiversity and the Structural Funds in the light of the fact that Directive 92/43 and Directive 79/409 have been only partially transposed by the EU Member States and that Structural Fund investment could therefore threaten biodiversity.

How can the Commission guarantee that biodiversity and the Natura 2000 network are protected and not threatened?

Which Member States have caused difficulties in the implementation of what the Commission has requested?

What powers does the Commission intend to use in order to ensure that biodiversity is not threatened when the new programmes are implemented?

I am totally dissatisfied with the response because it was not out of idle curiosity that I wanted to know which Member States had caused difficulties but in order to get an idea of the extent of the failure to indicate the areas of biodiversity.

However, the response was satisfactory in the sense that if, out of all the possible measures, that of suspending the money flow is actually implemented, it will be the most effective step that can possibly be imagined.

A person's wallet is the most sensitive part of their anatomy.

Mr President, Commissioner, I have before me the development plan for 2000-2006 sent to you by the Ministry of the National Economy last autumn.

On page 1-119 it says that if the 2nd Community Support Framework had been completed between 1994 and 1999 in accordance with the relevant plan, this would have increased the average annual rate of growth in the Gross National Product for the 1994-1999 period by 0.6%.

This would have meant additional GNP in the order of GRD 1.6 trillion over and above what we actually had.

The government accepts this and, between the lines, I think that you accept that there are problems with the public administration in Greece.

More importantly, I think that you will have problems with the management committees and I should like you to tell me specifically what you intend to do with the Management Organisation Unit and relations with the Ministry of the National Economy, which could be better?

What is to be done about outsourcing the external employees whom we need?

Will there be incentives and penalties from now on in order to ensure that the Community Support Framework is applied correctly to those who need it?

More importantly, what is to be done about the gaping wound in the Social Fund in Greece which, in my view, is no more than a black hole which just swallows up Community funds?

Mr President, despite Commissioner Barnier's highly specific and detailed reply and the acknowledgement of the shortcomings of Greek public administration, an acknowledgement which is a common ground and which everyone accepts, including the government, there is another problem: decentralised local authorities administer these funds and it is hard for the central public administration to intervene, resulting in inaction and wastage or in funds being used for the wrong purpose.

Is Mr Barnier aware of this problem?

What can he do in this direction? Of course he would need to make representations mainly to the government and focus his efforts on the extent to which the government is able to influence regional local authorities.

Thank you very much for your cooperation, Mr Barnier.

Question Nos 38, 39 and 40 will be replied to in writing.

We will proceed, late, to the last 20 minutes of questions to Commissioner Wallström.

As the author is not present, Question No 41 lapses.

Subject: Reclamation work in Dublin Bay Reclamation work is taking place in Dublin Bay in an area submitted for designation as an SPA last July under the Wild Birds Directive.

The boundaries of this extended SPA were altered, following representations by the Dublin Port Company to Duchas, so as to enable the company to carry out its proposal to infill 52 acres of Dublin Bay in order to expand the port, chiefly on economic grounds.

However, according to documents secured by an NGO, Dublin Bay Watch, following a request under the Freedom of Information Act, it emerged that objections made by a local authority were rejected by Duchas on the grounds that 'the proposals to designate an extension would proceed unless a scientific case was made' .

Final designation and submission to the Commission of the altered SPA occurred last February.

Dublin Bay Watch has complained to the Commission and provided extensive evidence.

In the light of this information, will the Commission initiate legal proceedings against the Irish Government for altering the boundaries of an SPA, and will it urge the Government to redesignate the entire SPA as it was first advertised in July 1999?

Does the Commission intend to withdraw EU funding of such a project and prohibit any work which would seriously affect an SPA?

Does it believe that the public consultation process was adequate in this instance and in line with the EIA Directive?

As a result of several complaints the Commission is aware of the controversy surrounding this reclamation project for Dublin port.

In particular, it knows of the concerns about the exclusion of an area of about 20 hectares from the 1999 extension to the Sandymount Strand and Tolka estuary special protection area in Dublin Bay classified under the Community's Wild Birds directive.

While included in the 1999 proposal for extension of the SPA, the area in question was omitted when the extension was finally adopted at the end of 1999.

By way of background: the 1999 proposal for extension followed a Commission request to the Irish authorities to enlarge the SPA.

It was particularly concerned to ensure that major Community investment in sewage treatment for Dublin would take place within the legal framework provided by SPA status.

The legal deadline for completing Irish SPAs expired in 1981 and the Commission has for some time been concerned that the Irish SPA network remains incomplete.

In April this year the Commission notified a letter of formal notice to Ireland under Article 226 of the EC Treaty in which it drew attention to the general failure to complete the Irish SPA network.

Dublin Bay was mentioned as a partially classified important bird area.

The Commission is not aware of any intention to use Community funds in relation to the port reclamation project.

As regards public consultation under the environmental impact assessment for the port reclamation project, the Commission would prefer not to comment pending the investigation of the complaints it has received.

I can understand that you do not want to comment until you have investigated the complaints but I would urge you to put pressure on the Irish government.

For decades they have ignored their obligations under EU directives.

As regards the special protection areas they have completely ignored their obligations.

In this case they have basically done what they want.

They change the boundaries whenever they feel like it.

The public consultation, in my mind and in the mind of many of the local people in the Community, is completely and totally inadequate.

This is just one more example of the way that the Irish government is behaving in relation to its obligations under EU directives.

I would like to ask you, Commissioner, are you going to push much further with the Irish government and explore every possible avenue.

I welcome the recent decision on fining Greece and I would like to see the same thing happen with the Irish government if they fail to comply with directives.

It seems the only thing they are willing to listen to is the threat of fines.

Unfortunately the taxpayer will have to pay the fines but real pressure has to be put on the government at this stage because they have got away with it for far too long.

As you know the Commission has taken the first step in a general legal action that includes Dublin Bay.

I would like to mention that two qualifications need to be made.

First the 1999 extension to the Sandymount Strand and Tolka estuary SPA clearly includes most of the important areas not included in the original SPA.

Secondly, while the Commission has until now treated Dublin Bay as still partially classified on the basis of evidence that qualifying inter-tidal areas may still have been omitted it will need to consider any evidence offered by Ireland that the site is sufficiently classified.

Of course, we will do everything possible to help the Irish or to put pressure on them to live up to the rules and regulations concerning this.

I am sure that we will have to continue the legal proceedings against Ireland.

Subject: Management of toxic waste Environmental organisations in Greece have alleged that toxic and hazardous waste is being buried without any controls.

Of the 264 571 tonnes of hazardous waste produced in 1999, a mere 0.12% was shipped abroad for incineration.

There are no controls on the disposal of waste produced by the lead-acid accumulator recycling plants.

Greek Electricity Board (DEI) condensers with substantial amounts of Clophen have been abandoned at Aspropyrgos.

In Attica there is only one incinerator with a capacity of 0.5 tonnes of hospital waste a day, even though some 20 tonnes of such waste is produced a day.

As regards PCBs, Greece has no processing facilities and it is unknown what happens to them.

Over the last ten years no substantial steps have been taken to ensure the proper management of this waste.

Article 16 of Directive 78/319/EEC states: 'Every three years, and for the first time three years following the notification of this Directive, Member States shall draw up a situation report on the disposal of toxic and dangerous waste in their respective countries and shall forward it to the Commission'.

Will the Commission say how many such reports has Greece forwarded so far on the basis of the above directive, and what do these reports say?

What stage have the relevant Greek authorities reached in implementing Directives 75/442/EEC, 78/319/EEC, 94/67/EEC, 91/157/EEC and 94/62/EEC?

Does it intend to impose fines in the event of violations?

As the Commission does not have the means to inspect Greek waste management facilities the most important tools for the Commission to check the practical implementation are reports, plans and programmes requested in the different waste directives.

The Commission has very little information on waste management in Greece.

Greece did not report on the implementation of waste management legislation between 1989 and 1997.

However at the end of last year Greece answered four questionnaires regarding the implementation of four waste directives.

According to that answer 280 000 tonnes of hazardous waste were generated in Greece - the year is not indicated - of which 95 760 tonnes were recycled, though Greece indicated that it has no installation for the processing or disposal of hazardous waste.

The hazardous wastes are reported to be either temporarily stored or exported for final disposal in other countries.

The Commission is of the opinion that a number of Community requirements are not being complied with by Greece and has taken action under Article 226.

The most important aspects concern the absence of management plans according to Article 7 of Directive 75/442 on waste, Article 6 of Directive 91/689 on hazardous waste and Article 14 of Directive 94/62 on packaging and packaging waste, the failure to transpose Directive 94/62 and transmit data according to Article 12 concerning the packaging waste industry, the absence of a programme according to Article 6 of Directive 91/157 on batteries and accumulators containing certain substances and non-compliance with Articles 4 and 11 of Directive 96/59 on the disposal of PCBs and PCTs.

A first report according to Directive 94/67 on the incineration of hazardous waste has to be provided for the period 1998 to 2000 by the end of September 2001.

Despite the fact that you did not reply to me in Greek, which I imagine is a bit harder, thank you very much for passing on your findings.

Is there absolutely no way of establishing where these huge quantities of waste go?

You yourself referred to some 115 000 or 175 000 tonnes - I cannot find the figures - the final destination of which is unknown.

Secondly, having identified all these infringements, do you intend to refer this to the Court which, unfortunately for my country - gave us a recent example by finding Greece guilty of another, older infringement?

I remind you what action the Commission has taken to address the failure of Greece to correctly transpose and apply Community waste legislation.

There are two codecisions, one dated 8 July 1999 and one dated 13 April 2000.

There is an application before the Court.

There is an additional recent opinion sent on 11 August last year and there is a letter of formal notice sent on 10 April this year for failure to apply a number of articles properly.

This is a general problem in Greece, the implementation of Community waste legislation.

Of course we would also like to know where this waste has gone but we can only ask Greece for those statistics.

Unfortunately Greece has not done this properly.

First I should like to say that I have submitted a written question along the same lines as that put by my fellow member Mihail Papayannakis.

Secondly, I should like to say in all honesty that, as a Greek citizen, I am shocked by what you have said.

In other words, that we do not know and the Greek Government does not know, no-one knows what has happened to over half our toxic waste.

From what you have said, I think that my fellow countrymen in Greece should be worried, and with good cause.

I should like to put two questions to you.

The first is: what sanctions will be imposed on Greece?

Do you think it is sufficient merely to take recourse to the Court, which could take three or four years to reach a verdict?

In the meantime, what about public health in Greece?

Toxic waste is an extremely important issue.

My second question is this: assuming that Greece is convicted for the waste, for the waste management in Hania in Crete, can you tell us, in general terms, where you think the problem with the application of environmental legislation in Greece lies?

Which specific areas of Community legislation are causing problems?

Because I know, for example, that there are also problems with the management of nitric compounds.

Mr President there is reason to be worried because we know there are problems in some of the Member States with illegal trading and illegal disposal of hazardous wastes.

Of course the Greek Government and maybe also the local authorities should be asked how this has been handled.

From the Commission side we can continue the legal proceedings and the legal procedures as they are set out for the Commission, but I think what is most effective in cases like this is open debate in the European Parliament.

Of course we will keep an eye on this and keep up the pressure on Greece to report to us because that is the instrument we have available.

Subject: Polluted land Heavily polluted, former industrial land has created a number of severe problems.

Water spreads the pollution into other parts of the natural environment and, in order to construct housing or other buildings on the land, it must be decontaminated at great expense.

Does the Commission have any plans for dealing with this problem and is it prepared to put forward a strategy for doing so?

(SV) The pollution of industrial land is a big problem in Europe.

According to the report from the European Environment Agency on the state of the environment, the Topic Centre on Land Cover 1998 estimated that there are 750 000 polluted or potentially polluted places within the EU.

Current EU legislation, like that which is proposed, focuses on the prevention of pollution.

Directive 96/61 concerning integrated pollution prevention and control, the IPPC Directive, states that Member States must take all necessary measures that are required in order to restore industrial land that is no longer in use.

Such measures must already form a part of the operational situation.

This directive must be enforced completely before November 2007.

Another instrument which may help to prevent future pollution of land is the directive that we are currently working on in relation to environmental liability.

To deal with pollution that occurred in the past, certain Member States have developed special financial instruments - there are taxes or different funds that have been set up for this purpose.

It is already clear that this type of clean-up costs, or will cost, Member States very large sums of money.

At EU level, the European Regional Development Fund can contribute a certain amount of support.

I might also add that I can see how big a problem this is in the candidate countries.

The Commission is, however, not as yet planning any form of global or European clean-up strategy.

As far as the past pollution of land is concerned, the proximity principle ought to be applied, because national, regional or local authorities are in the best position to deal with these issues.

Also, this type of pollution is not a transnational issue, and the problem is not first and foremost an administrative one, but a financial one.

I would like to thank Commissioner Wallström for her reply.

It could of course be said in actual fact that this type of pollution can be transnational, because we know that water carries pollutants along with it, particularly chemicals and heavy metals.

The countries, particularly in the central parts of Europe, are so close to each other that it is difficult to say where the pollutants originate from.

I think that a common strategy would be needed to deal with these issues.

That is actually what I was after in the question that I raised.

In her reply, Mrs Wallström has now said that there will not be a strategy in this area.

The question is now whether the Commission is prepared to support research, further experiments and development in the respective Member States in order for us to cope with these problems, which are immense.

(SV) Of course, it is important for the respective Member States to make a list of the existing industrial land that is polluted and the best way to tackle this problem.

As I have already said, we see this as a very great concern also from an economic point of view for many of the candidate countries, where this is often mentioned as an immense problem.

Up to now we have mainly regarded this as a local and national issue.

In order to be able to clean up in the best way possible, we need to consider what sort of pollution is involved and what the local conditions are like.

We have nothing against creating a strategy, if the Member States also want that, but in that case we must also get hold of the resources to deal with it.

As it looks so far, this has not been something that we have given the highest priority to, but naturally I think that it is very important for a proper inventory to be made and for a plan to be drawn up by the Member States, and why not also research and development in the area in order to find the best methods for cleaning up polluted industrial land.

Mr President, the Commissioner has already partly answered a question that has been on my mind, but perhaps I will ask an additional question on the matter.

This same problem concerns former landfill sites that are later used for housing.

The Commission may have information on the extent of the problem in the Member States.

Does the Commission think it possible that some kind of strategy could be found regarding these built-up areas?

(SV) I can only repeat that the Commission is, of course, prepared to take on such a task, but in the present situation, I do not perhaps think it is something that we can do with existing resources and in a sufficiently radical way, because it requires considerable resources.

It is very evidently a problem that must be dealt with at national, regional and local levels.

However, if the Member States should so desire, we obviously have nothing against taking on this task.

I think that we are already doing this when we see that there is great necessity for doing something.

For example, in connection with the follow-up of the disaster in Baia Mare, we are trying to identify where the hot spots are and to see if we can identify dangerous places where we really need to keep our eyes open to ensure that no new disasters happen.

When it comes to the pure clean-up work, I certainly think that the proximity principle ought to be applied.

Subject: Fireworks factories On 2 June 2000 an explosion occurred at the Liborio Fernandes fireworks factory in the Portuguese village of Lanhelas. Nine people were injured, and the village was badly damaged.

A similar explosion has just occurred at the Pyroma de Feugueyrolles factory in France.

These two explosions, which occurred only a few days after the tragic incident near Amsterdam, not to speak of the persistent explosions in Spain, are a reminder of the danger posed by these factories when they are located in residential areas.

The manufacture of fireworks has become all the more dangerous since the old craft methods gave way to industrial methods. This means both the stockpiling of more explosive substances and greater reactivity.

What measures does the Commission intend to propose in order to impose or strengthen safety standards aimed at eliminating the risk of explosion in these firms, to prohibit the location of such firms in residential areas, to prevent the transport of explosives from posing a threat both to the transporters and to the inhabitants of the areas through which they pass?

The Commission is most concerned about the recent accidents in fireworks storage and production facilities.

The manufacture and storage of pyrotechnic substances is covered by Council Directive 96/82 of 9 December 1996 on the control of major accident hazards involving dangerous substances, the so-called Seveso II directive.

This directive obliges operators of establishments having dangerous substances within certain threshold limits to establish a major accident prevention policy.

It also obliges them to set up safety management systems and emergency plans and to demonstrate this to the public inspection authorities by submitting a safety report.

Moreover, the Seveso II directive contains the new provision recognising that the implications of major accident hazards should be taken into account in the land use planning policies of the Member States.

These are obliged to pursue the aim of the directive, that is, the prevention of major accidents and the limitation of their consequences for man and the environment.

This has to be done through controls on the siting of new establishments, modifications to existing establishments and new developments such as transport links, locations frequented by the public and residential areas in the vicinity of existing establishments.

In the long term land use planning policies shall ensure that appropriate distances between hazardous establishments and residential areas are maintained.

Member States shall also ensure that all competent authorities and planning authorities responsible for decisions set up appropriate consultation procedures.

The inclusion of this provision can be regarded as a major step forward in the process of major accident mitigation.

A review of the Seveso II directive is already under way.

After a full investigation of the accidents that occurred, the Commission will evaluate the threshold limits assigned to pyrotechnics substances as part of the review.

A proposal for amendments to the Seveso II directive should be ready by the beginning of next year, that is 2001.

This can only be done when we have evaluated the experiences following the accident in Enschede as well as the accident in Romania.

This process will be carried out in close cooperation with the Member States, the European Parliament and other interested parties.

The transport of explosive materials is covered by Directive 94/55 on the transport of dangerous goods by road.

This directive makes obligatory the provisions of Annex A and B of the European agreement concerning the international carriage of dangerous goods by road for road transport within or between Member States.

Annex A contains the provisions concerning the packaging and labelling of dangerous goods and Annex B contains the provisions concerning the construction equipment and operation of the vehicle as well as the minimum training requirements for the driver.

The application of this legislation guarantees a high level of safety for the transport of dangerous goods including explosives.

Yes, of course, Mr President, we are also extremely worried about what has happened and that is why we are looking at the Seveso II directive in order to see if it is necessary to complement it with new rules to cover establishments like the plants involved in the recent accidents.

And, of course, we also have to look at the land use planning because the establishments in question were not covered by the Seveso II directive because the thresholds were not the right ones.

We will be looking at this as soon as we have evaluated all the information about these accidents.

We will not sit on our hands.

Since the time allotted to Questions to the Commission has elapsed, Questions Nos 46 to 78 will be replied to in writing.

(The sitting was suspended at 8.05 p.m. and resumed at 9.00 p.m.).

The next item is the recommendation for second reading (A5­0165/2000) from Mr García-Orcoyen Tormo, on behalf of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, concerning the common position of the Council with a view to the adoption of a European Parliament and Council Regulation on the voluntary participation of organisations in a Community Eco-Management and Audit Scheme(EMAS).

Mr President, Commissioner Wallström, we thank you for being here at this time in the evening.

The Community Eco-management and Audit Scheme is not exactly the most popular of the environmental issues but, nevertheless, it is a fantastic instrument for making progress in the field of integrating economic activities and the preservation of the environment.

By adopting a system of environmental management, companies - whether they be industrial or service companies - learn to integrate environmental considerations into the normal management of the company, discovering the many and significant advantages, not only environmental but also economic, which this offers them, amongst other things, because they improve their competitive position.

It therefore seems to me very significant that this regulation is currently being reviewed and that new elements are being incorporated into it which are extremely useful for the environmental improvement of processes, services and products.

The creation of more incentives for European companies to have access to the system, the participation of interested parties - especially workers -, the strengthening of reliability vis-à-vis third parties and an increase in the transparency of information are the main objectives of the amendments which I took up on first reading in Parliament and which were approved unanimously in the Environment Committee.

Nevertheless, the committee also approved certain amendments which were contrary to the opinion of the rapporteur, and I have continued to disagree with them. In this respect, I wish to refer to Amendments Nos 5, 6, 10 and 17, on the controversial issue of the use of the best available technology, as an instrument for environmental improvement, being obligatory for countries which wish to be included in the EMAS register.

Let us remember that EMAS is a voluntary market instrument. Let us remember also that one of the main objectives of the current revision of the regulations is to make the system more accessible to small and medium-sized businesses and also the service sector.

Let us add that until now the initiative has been relatively successful when compared to the other alternative formula, the ISO 14.001 standard, which is more flexible in many ways than EMAS. Let us bear in mind that the best available technology, as defined by the Directive on Integrated Pollution Prevention and Control, is only applicable to large industrial plants and not to the service sector or to small and medium-sized businesses.

In this light, I believe that you will agree with me when I say that, although I am absolutely in favour of development and progress with regard to the Directive on Integrated Pollution Prevention and Control (IPPC), this is not the time, and EMAS is not the right instrument, to demand that companies who want to join the scheme adopt the best available technologies.

In fact, the large plants, as stipulated in the IPPC Directive, will continue to be obliged to be included in the EMAS register, since they will have to abide by the environmental legislation in force - Amendment No 12 - which obviously includes compliance with the IPPC Directive in the cases where companies are affected.

I would also like to insist on Amendments Nos 41 and 50, which my Group would be prepared to accept as long as it is made clear that the word 'representatives' refers to people chosen as such within each company and in no event to organisations, whose participation would hinder and delay the process of adopting the system.

I hope that tomorrow other groups will offer oral amendments in this respect.

There are two other amendments which I would like to comment on: Amendment No 19, for which I have requested a separate vote up to the paragraph which reads "public structures and public contracts" , up to this point leaving the Commission' s text intact.

I believe that the Commission is preparing - and in this sense I would be grateful for a comment from Mrs Wallström - a proposal on the inclusion of the environmental principle as a necessary consideration when awarding public contracts, and I therefore think it appropriate to await the approval of that proposal.

With regard to Amendment No 22, on the incorporation of the Commission, the Council and Parliament, within a period of four years, into the EMAS system, I have consulted the Commission in writing and I would like the Commissioner to reply to it.

Lastly, Amendment No 25 refers to the harmonisation of EMAS with the ISO standard, which is very important to the dissemination of each instrument, and we are very happy with the harmonisation agreement relating to them.

Mr President, our experience of the Community eco-audit scheme has been very mixed.

In Germany and Austria a great number of businesses have taken part in it, whereas the uptake from businesses in other Member States has been very low.

The aim of the present revision must therefore be to make the eco-audit scheme more attractive.

For that reason it is important that there should be scope to involve companies from the service sector and to support small and medium-sized enterprises.

All that, however, is not enough, in my view.

More needs to be done, particularly in terms of reducing the administrative burden and establishing ways of projecting the public profile of the service.

From discussions at various company headquarters it has emerged that EMAS has an internal impact and that workforces are playing a far greater part in protecting the environment, but the time has now come to improve the external impact of the system.

In all the reflections on how to improve EMAS, one thing has to be remembered, namely that EMAS is a voluntary system which companies can join.

It must not therefore be encumbered with concepts such as best available technology.

These are binding specifications which set excessively difficult targets.

All we shall achieve by adopting them is to make businesses quit the system.

That surely serves no purpose at all. The system has proved useful so far, and we should build on the valuable experience that has been amassed.

If we cherish certain environmental ideals, I am certainly willing to pursue them too, but that will take us down the road of directives and regulations.

We cannot realise such ideals by opting for a voluntary system like EMAS.

One last point that seems important to me if the eco-audit is to be a practicable mechanism is the frequency of its validation.

The proposal envisages renewal of the validation at yearly intervals.

That, to my mind, is far too frequent.

Companies have to spend nine months on the preparation of an environmental report.

They cannot do that if annual validation is required.

I therefore propose an interval of two to three years, and I hope you will support this proposal.

Mr President, EMAS is to be revised, and my Group and I are very much in favour of its scope being extended.

I do believe, however, that the examples of Austria and Germany to which the previous speaker, Mr Schnellhardt, has already referred, show that it is no coincidence that the countries where participation levels are highest are among the proponents of the tabled position, in which adherence to the existing environmental provisions and the use of the best available technology are seen as key instruments for improving companies' efficiency in the use of natural resources and their protection of the environment.

Accordingly, I should like to give my wholehearted support to those amendments that call for the use of the best available technology as well as to canvass your support for Amendment No 12, which lays special emphasis on compliance with existing environmental provisions.

I am well aware, of course, that there must be incentives to encourage wider participation in this scheme.

For all that, I believe that the credibility of this eco-audit scheme can only be guaranteed if we set our own high standards rather than pursuing the opposite strategy of alignment with the ISO standard.

My Group also attaches particular importance to the participation of employees and their representatives.

I accept the rapporteur's proposal - we came to an agreement on this today - that an oral amendment be moved tomorrow in order to make it clear that we also accept the compromise on the involvement of employees and their representatives, in other words the reduction of such involvement to the works level.

In my view, this will represent a major step forward in the implementation of EMAS, not only in terms of its democratic credentials but also from a managerial point of view.

I shall waive the remainder of my speaking time, which should certainly put me in the President's good books!

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, Commissioner, the intention behind EMAS is an excellent one: encouraging companies to have more respect for the environment.

Seven years after its creation, however, EMAS is a success only in some countries.

There is still a long way to go, and today we need to identify the reason for this limited result.

The regulation imposes heavy constraints on those companies which do agree, voluntarily, to participate.

This complexity is such as to discourage SMEs, which, as we all know, are bending under the weight of bureaucracy.

Yet they are the engine of Europe' s economy.

We should be making them our number one priority, hence the importance of the incentives our rapporteur was just talking about.

In the same spirit, I would also say that some amendments are in danger of erring through excess of ambition.

I mean Amendments Nos 5, 10 and 17 on the best available technologies, the BATs.

A requirement like that would mean sometimes insoluble problems for SMEs, which cannot always adapt to these BATs. In any case their very definition is already a problem for some economic sectors.

So the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party will be voting against.

On the other hand, in the spirit of compromise, we are ready to support Amendments Nos 43, 44 and 45, which link these best available technologies, from the environmental viewpoint, with conditions that are economically and technically viable for businesses.

Finally, there is the question of workers' participation, which we naturally value highly and which the common position entirely authorises.

On the other hand, we reject Amendments Nos 41 and 50, because more restrictive measures here again threaten to discourage a large number of candidate firms.

Finally, I will simply say that quantity must not drive out quality.

The system is voluntary, so it must be attractive in order to survive. Otherwise EMAS will be no more than a litany of good intentions likely to be impracticable for businesses and therefore completely useless.

Mr President, a number of speakers tonight have mentioned the issue of the best available technology.

I cannot understand the reluctance to accept this.

It really is an essential instrument.

If we are genuine about wanting to encourage firms to improve environmental policy and environmental performance, then it is necessary that the best available technology should be encouraged.

It makes no sense to me whatsoever to be reluctant to promote that.

If the best available technology is there, then the firm should be encouraged to use it.

We are never going to make any advances otherwise.

This is a voluntary scheme, but if firms genuinely want to improve their environmental policy and their environmental performance then any encouragement in that direction should be welcomed.

So far as the arguments against the best available technology are concerned, they do not stand up to scrutiny.

It is essential that this element, and the amendments in relation to best available technology, be supported by Parliament.

I would urge the Commission, too, to take this on board.

If we are serious about trying to encourage firms in the right direction then we have to encourage the best available technology.

Mr President, Madam Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I believe the regulation must be effective because it is a voluntary instrument.

To that extent, it is only right and fitting that we should try to guarantee the manageability of the system, which is why we have taken pains to reach the present agreement between the two major groups, Mrs Scheele, so that the validation is not limited to one year but can be organised in a pragmatic manner, particularly for small and medium-sized businesses.

It goes without saying that they cannot be expected to do a validation every year - that would be absurd.

We must find an effective and manageable solution to that problem.

But I also believe that we need a rational approach to the question of the best available technology, because it is surely unacceptable that two companies producing at entirely different levels - one to a low technological standard and the other to a high standard - should both be able to operate the eco-management and audit system and should both be certificated.

That is patently absurd and will ultimately mislead those who are liable to buy products advertised as EMAS-compliant.

For that reason we need to set a standard.

Perhaps the amendments we adopted in the Environment Committee go too far.

For that reason I am pleased that Amendments 43, 44 and 45 have been proposed as a means of covering the available forms of technology in a similar way to another directive and of limiting the initial scope of the regulation to industrial activity, since it is undoubtedly far harder to legislate for the service sector in this domain.

Accordingly, I would suggest that if we can reach agreement on the frequency of validation, we ought perhaps to be able to reach agreement on this aspect as well.

So the first thing to do is to establish the verification procedure; the application of that procedure will perhaps reveal various ways in which the system can be improved.

Mr President, I believe that tomorrow's vote will truly be a litmus test of whether we regard EMAS as an instrument of ecological progress or as a mere sham.

It must be made clear that EMAS accreditation is intended as a reward for those companies which are the real engines of ecological progress.

BAT - the best available technology - is the fundamental prerequisite of EMAS, because it would be downright absurd for a company to be regarded as an environmental trailblazer if it did not use the best available technology, and it is surely plain to see that anything else boils down to ISO 14000, in other words to our simply selling EMAS down the river, because it would then be ISO in another guise.

In that case we could forget the directive altogether, because it would correspond to ISO.

For that reason I fail to understand the misgivings that have been voiced, particularly with regard to small and medium-sized businesses, because it is precisely those firms which have the least onerous obligations in this respect.

Conversely, we have seen time and again that many small and medium-sized enterprises are far more innovative than their larger counterparts.

EMAS is an important voluntary instrument for companies, but paramount importance attaches to its coordination with environmental programmes. Studies in Germany have shown that, unfortunately, EMAS organisations have not yet recognised protection of the climate, for example, as a major goal.

From that point of view I believe that we should not sell ourselves short here by putting EMAS on a par with ISO.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I want to begin by thanking the rapporteur, Mrs García-Orcoyen Tormo, for her work on the Commission' s proposal concerning EMAS.

Before discussing the individual amendments, I want to touch upon three key issues, namely best available technology, the frequency with which the environmental statement is to be validated and the link between participation in EMAS and compliance with the requirements of compulsory environmental legislation.

The changes proposed by the European Parliament where best available technology is concerned should mean that all organisations which participate in EMAS should be forced to apply best available technology.

The Commission agrees with the principle that all organisations registered to EMAS ought to try to apply best practice within their areas of activity and work as effectively as possible on issues of technology, materials and organisation.

The concept of best available technology, which is expressly defined in the directive relating to coordinated measures for preventing and limiting pollution, is nonetheless only relevant to industry.

This has also been noted by the European Parliament in some of its amendments.

In view of the fact that EMAS is now being opened to all economic sectors, the requirement that best available technology must be used is likely to mean in practice that many sectors will be prevented from participating in EMAS.

For example, the European Parliament itself would not be able to participate because best available technology is not a concept which can be applied to public institutions.

A requirement of this kind would also be a major obstacle for small and medium-sized companies, which are not covered by the directive relating to coordinated measures for preventing and limiting pollution.

If the attempt were made to circumvent this derogation by means of EMAS, which is a voluntary system, this would probably mean that small and medium-sized companies would refrain from participating in EMAS.

When it comes to those amendments in which best available technology is confined to the area of application of the directive relating to coordinated measures for preventing and limiting pollution, it ought to be pointed out that it is not EMAS' s task to be an alternative way of ensuring that compulsory legislation is applied.

We all agree that it is important for organisations to comply with that environmental legislation which affects them.

It might be said that it is a minimum requirement that environmental legislation should be respected.

The purpose of EMAS is to help organisations to perform better and to exceed that minimum.

The objective is not, however, to provide supervisory authorities with absolute proofs that an organisation which is EMAS-registered is complying with all current legislation in all situations.

In view of EMAS' s systematic structure, organisations will clearly be well placed to comply with the environmental legislation.

EMAS is, however, a voluntary system.

If the European Parliament maintains its amendments, the basis of which is that compliance with environmental legislation must be guaranteed, EMAS' s role will be in danger of changing.

EMAS will instead become a replacement for environmental verifications carried out by the Member States' competent authorities.

I am convinced that that is not the European Parliament' s intention.

How frequently is the environmental statement to be validated?

The environmental statement is, of course, the visible public result of EMAS being implemented within an organisation.

That report must therefore correspond to the expectations of those in the surrounding area.

One such expectation is that the environmental statement should be reliable.

The simplest way of building up confidence in the conclusions of the statement is to carry out regular, impartial verifications.

An annual verification of the statement would therefore be more appropriate than a verification every third year, as in the majority of cases.

I would emphasise that the common position is flexible in this respect.

Account can, therefore, already be taken of special cases or special problems.

I am therefore afraid that, by dispensing with the principle of annual reporting in its amendments, the European Parliament may damage EMAS' s credibility, which is a prerequisite if the new EMAS is to be successful.

Allow me to turn now to the individual amendments.

The Commission has carefully examined the 50 amendments which have been tabled and is able to approve 11 of these.

How credible EMAS is and how attractive it is to companies are two crucial considerations if EMAS is to function.

The Commission is therefore delighted to be able to approve Amendments 1, 2 and 19 (3).

Another important question of which the Commission is also aware is that of how it may be ensured that EMAS is rolled out in the candidate States at an early stage.

The Commission is therefore able to approve Amendment 3 in principle, provided that the wording is made clearer.

The Commission is also very pleased to be able to approve Amendment 4 in principle, because it will help ensure that employees are more involved, something which has already been taken into account in the review of EMAS.

The wording ought, however, to be changed to avoid extra demands being placed upon companies, particularly upon small and medium-sized companies.

There seems to be a general concern about small and medium-sized companies, which also manifests itself in EMAS.

The Commission is therefore able to approve Amendment 19 (4) in principle, provided that it does not lead to the EMAS rules' being watered down for small and medium-sized companies.

Because EMAS is a voluntary system, it is important that there should be information about it.

The Commission is therefore able to approve Amendment 16 in principle, if it is extended to include all information and not only data.

The Commission is very pleased to see that the European Parliament itself is committed to applying EMAS and urges the other European institutions to do the same.

However, EMAS' s area of application extends to include more than physical assets, something which must be clearly shown in Amendment 22, which the Commission is able to approve in principle.

Amendment 25 will contribute considerably to making the EMAS requirements clearer, and the Commission approves this change.

A small addendum is required, however, so that the Commission is able, in a legally correct manner, to comply with the contractual conditions in the agreement that has been entered into with the European Standardisation Organisation.

Unanimity and openness are also important principles for EMAS.

The Commission is able to approve Amendments 30 (1 and 3), 32 and 33 (2).

Where the other changes are concerned, I want briefly to explain why the Commission was unable to approve them.

An important aspect of the proposal is the extension of EMAS' s area of application to include all sectors of trade and industry.

Those amendments which relate only to the industrial sector cannot, therefore, be approved.

These are Amendments 5, 6, 10, 17, 43, 44 and 45, according to which organisations must apply best available technology.

The Commission also considers it important that EMAS should be logically structured, easy to understand and sufficiently flexible to be able to be adapted for the various sectors affected.

The Commission cannot, therefore, approve Amendments 7, 8, 9, 11, 12, 14, 15, 19, 21, 23, 26, 27, 28, 29, 31, 33 (1), 34, 35, 37, 41, 42, 47, 48, 49 and 50.

The additional benefits to the environment entailed by EMAS, compared with ISO14001, are a crucial aspect of the proposal.

The Commission is unable, therefore, to support Amendments 13, 30 (2), 36, 38 and 46.

Due to the introduction of longer intervals between verifications of the statements, these amendments would make it more difficult to obtain sight of, and to verify, the information concerning environmental performance.

Nor can the Commission accept Amendments 39 and 40, because the EMAS logo must be a sign of excellence for organisations, at the same time as it must not lead to confusion on the part of the public.

Given the way the directives relating to public purchasing look today, Amendment 19 (1) cannot be approved.

The Commission is pleased to supply information to the European Parliament upon request, but is unable to approve Amendments 18 and 20 because there is a lack of resources for this purpose.

Finally, the Commission is unable to approve Amendment 24 relating to committee procedures because of the legal changes implemented following the decision on committee procedures, according to which a prescriptive committee is required.

The Commission is convinced that the European Parliament' s amendments have, in both readings, contributed greatly to this review and increased EMAS' s potential for helping improve the environmental performance of trade and industry throughout the Union.

May I depart from normal practice by asking you to pay greater attention to the allocated time slots.

Your colleague Mrs Reding is the very last speaker today.

She will no doubt be annoyed with me if she has to stay here until one in the morning.

Would you please therefore be so kind as to keep your remarks somewhat briefer on future occasions.

The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon.

Limit values for benzene and carbon monoxide

The next item is the report (A5-0166/2000) by Mrs Breyer, on behalf of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to the adoption of a European Parliament and Council directive relating to limit values for benzene and carbon monoxide in ambient air.

Ladies and gentlemen, Madam Commissioner, I shall try to be brief, because I do not believe that much of the substance of this directive is contentious within this Parliament.

The directive before us is the second offshoot of the Directive on ambient air quality assessment and management, and the proposal is part of an integrated package of measures designed to combat atmospheric pollution.

The essential feature of this second offshoot of the air-quality Directive is that it establishes benzene and carbon monoxide limit values for the first time in the European Union.

This is a very important step; I would even call it a milestone in the history of air-quality legislation, because it is the first limit value to be imposed for a carcinogenic substance, namely benzene, which can, of course, cause leukaemia.

We know that petrol and oil are sources of benzene, and in the European Union 80 to 85% of benzene emissions result from petrol combustion in road vehicles.

There has never been a safety threshold, and so benzene emissions have always posed a health risk.

The precautionary principle that is enshrined in the EU Treaty, however, makes it imperative to establish a limit value at which the health risk is extremely low.

It therefore stands to reason that we are particularly supportive of the proposal for a limit value of five micrograms per cubic metre of air.

The common position is a definite improvement on the Commission's proposal.

I also very much welcome the fact that it incorporates many of the amendments adopted by this House.

One amendment in particular was absolutely essential and central in our view, for the Commission had proposed that Member States could be granted derogations almost at will.

It was effectively a blank cheque that could have been renewed over and over again, and by dropping this provision we have managed to achieve a compromise to which we too can subscribe.

In the implementation of the directive it will also be important, of course, to respond to the problems faced by the countries of the South and to arrive at an appropriate compromise.

The proposal also corresponds to the suggestion made by Mrs Schleicher at the first reading in the Environment Committee, namely that a single exception may be made, that it must be duly substantiated, that it need not be restricted to countries but can also apply to particular regions or geographical areas and that a concentration in excess of ten micrograms may not be authorised under any circumstances.

It is also very important in the light of our forthcoming enlargement to the East that we should emphasise that the European Union does not operate a two-speed environmental policy and that those Member States to which exceptions apply must make every effort to move towards compliance with EU requirements and must furnish proof of progress in this direction.

The Environment Committee has also tabled a number of other amendments, but these should not be contentious either, because they relate primarily to the obligation to provide information.

In these we have clearly emphasised that the new instrument of the Internet must be used as a means of improving the flow of information.

I have no doubt that these amendments will also have answered the question as to how information is to be communicated. Moreover, we have also drawn attention to the fact that indoor pollution is also a major problem which should be addressed by EU research programmes.

We cannot present a credible case for the improvement of outside air quality unless we demonstrate a clear commitment to improving the quality of indoor air.

In addition, we have underlined very clearly that the Member States will also have to compile better documentation.

Another very important point is that the governments of those Member States to which derogations apply should also inform the public of this special dispensation and of the efforts that are being made to achieve our goal of five micrograms by the year 2010.

I shall close there - my time is up in any case.

What is important is that this directive should be swiftly implemented, and I believe we have worked hard towards that aim and that we are unlikely to encounter any problems in achieving it.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, as Mrs Breyer has just indicated, we are dealing today with the second individual directive deriving from the framework Directive of 1996 on the assessment and management of ambient air quality.

The main aim of the proposed legislation is to establish limit values for atmospheric concentrations of benzene and carbon monoxide in order to improve the quality of our air and to avoid, prevent and reduce the adverse effects of these substances on human health and the environment.

It is true that the main source of emissions of both pollutants is road traffic.

Other major sources of benzene emissions are fuel distribution, oil refineries and the chemical industry, while all combustion processes emit carbon monoxide.

This directive is a very important contribution to the maintenance of clean air and to the global climate strategy.

The proposal was presented by the European Commission in December 1998.

The Finnish presidency made a determined effort to use the new legal scope offered by the Treaty of Amsterdam in order to have this proposed directive enter into force back in December 1999 after the first reading, with the amendments adopted by the European Parliament.

Our Group would have warmly welcomed that.

I need hardly say that our Group supported the amendments which emphasise the danger to certain sections of the population and which regard the proposed environmental measures as surpassable minimum standards.

The provisions on a single extension of the deadline and on compliance with the limit values that are required for climatic reasons in our southern Member States, provisions which are now contained in the common position, were introduced by ourselves at the time of the first reading, as was the maximum benzene concentration of 10 micrograms per cubic metre.

Mrs Breyer, of course, has already given some indication of the subsequent harmonious development of the common position.

This now contains the very wording that we wanted on this point, and its other provisions are consistent and provide for practicable measures to improve air quality in Europe.

Our Group accepts this common position and can support it as it stands.

This new regime guarantees that public health will be afforded a high level of protection, and it is flexible enough to be adapted at any time in response to technological progress.

Mrs Breyer has taken a great deal of trouble and has achieved much of what Parliament wanted at the negotiating table.

I must say, however, that in our view the amendments which have been reintroduced are superfluous; while they are justifiable, it is not worth putting the directive on ice again for the sake of these amendments, which would only delay the adoption process.

We consider it far more important - as you yourself said, Mrs Breyer - that, after a delay of half a year, this instrument should now enter into force as quickly as possible, so that it can play its part in improving the quality of the air we breathe in Europe.

For that reason, our Group does not support the amendments, because we hope that, by withholding our support, we can expedite the process of adopting this directive.

Mr President, first of all I should like to thank the rapporteur for this highly gratifying report and for her successful work behind the scenes; at the same time, of course, I wish to thank everyone else involved for their fruitful cooperation.

I am aware of the significance of this directive in terms of the development and enhancement of European environment policy.

It will be the first legal instrument to set a limit on concentrations of a carcinogenic substance.

Its significance lies not only in the fact that it is important to have a limit value for this particular carcinogenic substance but also in the fact that it sets a precedent for the future regulation of other carcinogens.

The main political aim at the first reading was to limit the scope for derogations from the prescribed limit values as far as possible, to make the rules as restrictive as possible, and I believe that we can be more than pleased with this solution, which was the fruit of our joint efforts.

My Group is also interested, of course, in the rapid implementation of this directive, and we wish to avoid a conciliation procedure.

I am also aware that the debate on this directive is not the right place to discuss indoor pollution.

Nevertheless, I do believe that it is appropriate to highlight the dangers of indoor pollution and to call for initiatives in that domain, such as additional research.

After all, there is evidence that people are exposed to hazardous substances, especially the carcinogen benzene, as a result of indoor pollution too.

This is why we support the amendments that have been tabled, and we trust that we shall nevertheless be able to avoid a conciliation procedure.

Mr President, the three previous speakers have already articulated the significance of these proposals.

We should also like to congratulate the rapporteur.

She has done extremely well with the lion' s share of her amendments and the amendments which have been adopted by the Commission and Parliament at first reading.

The question which remains is whether or not we want to go further than what has been accepted in the common position.

In our opinion, the rapporteur' s arguments are convincing and we will give them our seal of approval.

In the discussions we have had on this directive, a subject came up which could in fact have come up in other environmental issues as well, but it is important in my view to bring it to the fore in this context.

The question we always need to ask ourselves as European institutions is: why is this one of our concerns?

Why is it the case that a problem which can be very localised - this is, in fact, one of the very problems we are discussing at the moment - why is this something which we need to decide on in Brussels or Strasbourg and cannot delegate to national level?

I am not talking about the legal dimension, because, legally, we are bound to deal with this.

Eventually, it became clear to us that in this case, it would be useful if we, as European citizens, were to deal with this on the basis of a kind of equality before the law, offering the same level of protection to the same citizens.

But I can imagine that other people would argue against this, saying: no, it is important to be involved in this as a Union.

I would find it useful if the Commissioner, time-permitting, could comment on this briefly.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, first of all, I want to thank the rapporteur and the committee for their good work.

Mrs Breyer' s report went a long way towards further improving the Commission' s proposal at first reading, which took place in December of last year.

The limit values which have been set for benzene and carbon monoxide in ambient air are based upon the World Health Organisation' s latest recommendations and are aimed at achieving a high level of protection of people' s health throughout the Union.

Adoption of this directive would mean that the Union would take the lead internationally where limit values for benzene and carbon monoxide are concerned.

I want to begin by explaining the Commission' s views on Amendments 2 and 3.

These concern the issue of providing information to the public, something which is of the greatest importance.

As you perhaps know, the Commission has now, in the course of the week, adopted a new directive which will further improve access to environmental information.

The Commission approves Amendment 2, which expressly mentions the Internet.

Amendment 3 (1) refers to the fact that the Member States should make a special effort to inform those who are affected by the extensions to the time limits within which the limit values for benzene are to be complied with.

The Commission agrees in principle with this requirement, but the common position expressed in Article 8.3 of Directive 96/62/EC, that is to say the framework directive on air quality, already obliges the Member States to compile this information and make it available to the public.

In order for the Commission to be able to approve Amendment 3 (1), the latter must therefore be substantially reworded.

Amendment 3 (2) contains a demand for free public access to the Member States' documentation concerning the selection of places from which to take samples.

In spite of the fact that the Member States already have this obligation under the Århus Convention, the Commission approves the Amendment.

I turn now to Amendments 1 and 4 which both concern the Commission' s review of the Directive in 2004.

The review will form part of the first report on the new integrated programme for clean air, which the Commission is in the process of drawing up.

The common position already states that the purpose of the review is to study the latest results and, if need be, further improve protection.

Because indoor air pollution can cause significant health problems, the Commission will take account of this issue in the review.

Amendment 1 may therefore be approved in principle, but must be reworded.

I turn finally to Amendment 4, which concerns an important issue.

The most difficult point in the negotiations in the Council was the limit value for benzene and the time limit for achieving this.

Against the background of the results of a current investigation into benzene, mainly the southern Member States considered that they were uncertain of being able to achieve the limit value of 5 g/m3 by 2010.

Despite this, Article 3.2 of the common position offers only one possibility for extending the time limit by five years under certain conditions.

Moreover, a concentration of 10 g/m3 must not be exceeded during that period.

I would emphasise that this is in line with Amendment 22, tabled at Parliament' s first reading.

Only through an addendum to Article 7.3, in which it is expressly stated that the Commission can propose further extensions in the light of the results of the 2004 review, was it possible for this agreement to come about.

From a purely legal point of view, this clause does not lead to the Commission' s right of initiative being limited or otherwise affected, but may be seen as an important part of the final compromise in the Council.

According to Amendment 4, the clause ought not to be there, something which could jeopardise the agreement with the Council.

The Commission considers that the compromise to which this could lead would involve unnecessary delay in adopting this important directive in which, for the first time ever, limit values are established for benzene and carbon monoxide in ambient air.

The Commission is therefore unable to approve Amendment 4.

Finally, I want to say that I believe the common position constitutes a valuable compromise to which I hope that the whole Parliament will agree, without the need for major changes.

The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon.

The next item is the recommendation for second reading (A5-0164/2000) by Mrs Jackson, on behalf of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, concerning the common position of the Council with a view to the adoption of a European Parliament and Council Recommendation providing for minimum criteria for environmental inspections in the Member States.

Mr President, the idea that is fundamental to the report that I am bringing forward is that the proposal from the European Commission for a recommendation on this subject should be changed to become a directive and, as you will see from my report, this secured near unanimous backing in the Environment Committee.

The members of the committee agreed with me that a recommendation is far too weak an instrument in this instance.

I suppose a recommendation is really rather the equivalent of us all moving down into the centre of Strasbourg and attending the cathedral in order to make an act of collective prayer.

That really is all that a recommendation is.

There is no way in which the European Commission can go back to Member States and say that they have not complied with a recommendation because a recommendation merely says that they may do something, it does not say that they must do something.

The Commission is very worried about this report because it recognises that if we persist in insisting on a directive rather than a recommendation, the whole thing may founder in the Council.

I did faithfully try in the Environment Committee to get the members to agree to a recommendation rather than a directive.

I got a very rude answer from them which I will not repeat to you but which is basically reflected in my report.

They want a directive and not a recommendation.

And, indeed, if the guidelines on environmental inspection which the Commission is so keen to see survive were incorporated in a recommendation, my committee feels that they will simply be ignored.

We want to see a directive which definitely commits the Member States to introduce environmental inspections operating on broadly similar lines.

I must underline that what we do not want to see, in case anybody hangs this round my neck, is a supra-national European environment inspectorate: lots of little men and women in blue uniforms with gold stars rushing round the Member States, reporting back to Brussels saying this is wrong or indeed, in the case of Germany, this is right.

We do not need that kind of supra-national inspectorate.

I believe, and my committee agrees with me, that the primary responsibility for enforcing European Union environment legislation should be firmly lodged where it belongs, with the Member States.

We cannot understand the Commission's readiness to propose only the minimum possible.

Neglect of European Union environment law forms an alarming background to this proposal.

Yesterday was a historic day in the history of the European Union, not, I hasten to add only because of the visit of President Chirac to Strasbourg, but because it was the day of the first report of a fine levied by the European Court of Justice, an actual fine of EUR 20 000 a day on Greece for failure to comply with a European Union environment directive.

But it is interesting to note that that case was actually launched thirteen years ago and relates to a directive which dates back even further.

At the moment there are currently nine other environment cases which have come back to the Court of Justice for a second time because countries have ignored earlier judgments.

There are no less than 157 cases still pending and I regret to have to say that in many cases the European Commission has not been able to act, to bring cases to the Court of Justice, because it does not know what is happening in Member States as the countries concerned have not reported back to Brussels on what they are doing about legislation.

One of the reasons that they have not reported is that the countries themselves do not know.

Because they do not have systems of environmental inspection which form the essential raft on which the whole edifice of compliance with European environment law is built.

We need the kind of directive that the Environment Committee would like to see.

A recommendation will do no good.

I hope that the European Commission has the courage, and I mean courage, to accept the European Parliament amendments.

I hope that the European Commission has the courage to go into the conciliation process arm in arm with the Parliament against, and it will be against, the Council.

I think some members of the Council are really quite wobbly in the direction of a directive rather than a recommendation.

The tiny concessions so far offered by the Council lodged in the preamble to this proposal are simply not enough.

Mr President, those of us who survived the conciliation procedure for the water framework directive must be delighted that here we have an issue which is entirely clear-cut and easily understandable.

The first issue is that we want equal and effective enforcement of environmental legislation across the European Union and we must all agree to that principle.

The question obviously is why we have not had that before.

Why have the Commissioner's predecessors not brought forward proposals before now and why are the proposals now introduced so miserably weak?

There is also a question for Member States. What have they been doing signing up to environmental legislation if in reality they do not have the means to check properly that it has been carried out and have no intention of ensuring that it is properly enforced?

I have chemical companies in my constituency in the north-west of England.

Some of them, I am sorry to say, discharge polluting materials into air and water.

They are forced to clean up their act.

They pay the price for that.

But they are competing with chemical companies elsewhere in this European Union which are not having to carry out those checks, which are not having to pay the price and they are not able to compete therefore on a level playing field.

The second issue is the clear conflict here between the Parliament and the Council.

Any student who wants to understand conciliation procedure or codecision procedure has a nice straightforward case study here.

We have codecision powers but we have the threat from the Council that if we do not fall into line then they will abandon the whole legislation.

Well, they might as well, as Mrs Jackson has said.

The message for the French Presidency is that we want tangible progress.

We do not want to see this abandoned.

There is room for compromise, presumably over the implementation date.

All the institutions in the European Union want the laws enforced properly.

It is time to give these warm but rather woolly sentiments some real meaning and action.

Mr President, may I first of all thank the rapporteur, Mrs Jackson, and the Committee on the Environment for its work on this proposal on environmental inspections.

I cannot resist the temptation to point out to Mrs Jackson that she reminds me of my promise to the Committee on the Environment not to propose new directives all the time, but rather to concentrate on implementation.

The bad implementation of environmental rules has nothing to do with the lack of such rules and directives.

We have a lot of these and we really want to achieve something.

So we came straight to the key issue: was it to be a recommendation or a directive?

It will not be a surprise to you that the Commission cannot agree to the proposed change to a directive, for the following reasons. The Commission's 1996 communication on implementing Community environmental law noted a disparity between Member States' inspection systems and recognised the necessity of ensuring that minimum inspection tasks were performed.

Maybe it is not such a bad idea to have those people in blue uniforms with gold stars to check on what is happening!

It recommended that guidelines should be established, leaving to the Member States the choice of structures and mechanisms, fitting in where appropriate with their existing systems.

Some Member States already have well-developed inspectorates or agencies, and the guidelines will ensure that they operate them in accordance with common standards without necessarily having to change their systems that much.

For those Member States which do not, the recommendation will be helpful to enable them in the first instance, with the possibility of Community funding for eligible Member States, to develop their infrastructure and capacity.

A directive might mean that some Member States will have great difficulty complying with it in its entirety from its coming into force, and this was not deemed to be practically or psychologically desirable by the Commission.

I am convinced that the 'carrot' rather than the 'stick' approach will achieve a better result at the present state of development of national inspectorates.

We have already achieved some progress in the area with the IMPEL inspectors' exchange programme and the other work that IMPEL has done on inspections, monitoring frequency of inspections etc.

This proposal should therefore be viewed as the first step in an ongoing programme, and the experience gained in this operation will help us to consider at subsequent stages how to broaden the nature, scope and application of the minimum requirements.

The proposal requires Member States to report back on the operation, and I will take a personal interest in this.

If it transpires that Member States are not applying it in practice then we will not shrink from bringing forward a proposal for a directive.

The attitude in the Council of the Member States, even those with well-developed inspectorates, was unanimously in favour of non-binding legislation at this stage.

Being realistic, if Parliament insists on asking for a directive we will end up with no instrument at all.

In that case we will have failed those Member States most in need of assistance and guidance, and the consequence will be no change in the status quo and no improvement in those Member States' implementation.

For these reasons the Commission cannot accept any of the proposed amendments relating to changing the form of the proposal from a recommendation to a directive.

The Commission cannot accept the following amendments of substance: Amendment No 5 to help Member States distinguish between national - for example non-EU derived - law and EU law. Amendments Nos 6 and 11 which try to change voluntary reporting and advice schemes to mandatory ones.

Amendment No 12, second part, because it does not add anything.

The proposal already refers to reports being in a readily accessible database.

Amendment No 13, second part, relating to reports of site visits being available within two months of inspection because the common position's wording "as soon as possible" is preferable. And Amendment No 14 which seeks to limit to brief data the compliance information in reports to the Commission, which is not sufficient for the Commission's purposes.

However, if the proposal is to remain in the form of a recommendation, the Commission can accept in principle Amendments Nos 2, 10, second part, and 15, second part, in relation to point 9.1.

They all concern the involvement of the EEA and/or IMPEL in certain activities relating to inspections.

These were accepted by the Commission at the first reading stage and included in the Commission's revised proposal.

The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon.

The next item is the report (A5-0152/2000) by Mrs Redondo Jiménez, on behalf of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, on the following:

I. proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation amending Regulation (EEC) No 3258/86 on the protection of the Community's forests against atmospheric pollution [COM(1999) 379 - C5-0076/1999 - 1999/0159(COD)], and

II. proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation amending Regulation (EEC) No 2158/92 on the protection of the Community's forests against fire [COM(1999) 379 - C5-0077/1999 - 1999/0160(COD)].

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, the Council has presented the amendment of two regulations, Regulation (EC) No 3528/86 on the protection of the Community' s forests against atmospheric pollution and Regulation (EC) No 2158/92 on the protection of the Community' s forests against fire, by means of two regulations, 307 and 308 of 1997, on the basis of Article 43 of the former Treaty.

Parliament queried the regulations with the European Court of Justice on 30 April 1997, and this was resolved on 25 April 1999.

The judgement of the Court (joint cases C-164/97 and C-165/97) repealed both Regulations and stated that the Council should have used the former Article 130s, now Article 175 of the Treaty as the sole legal basis, but the effects of the repeal were suspended to enable the Council to adopt new Regulations with the same aim within a reasonable time period.

The European Commission and the Member States committed themselves, on an international level, at the Ministerial Conferences on the protection of the forests in Helsinki, in 1993, and Strasbourg, in 1990, to the continuous monitoring of the damage suffered by the forests.

Everybody is aware of the important role played by the forests in all respects, both economic as well as ecological and social, and of their role in relation to soil protection, climate, water and flora and fauna, creating balances which are essential to the development of sustainable agriculture and for the management of rural areas.

The Member States have established networks of systematic monitoring and observation posts for intensive and continuous monitoring of the forest ecosystems.

These studies require long periods of implementation and their results depend, according to the improvements in the knowledge of the cause-effect relationships between the changes suffered by forest ecosystems and the factors which affect them, on carrying out this work of monitoring, prevention and study over a longer period.

With regard to fires, work is underway into their causes, prevention measures and the monitoring of the forests.

As for pollution, work is being done on the establishment of observation networks, on carrying out a periodic inventory of the damage by means of a single methodology, intensive and continuous monitoring of the forest ecosystems and the implementation, by means of pilot projects, of methods of conservation and restoration of the forests affected.

Furthermore, the Member States must carry out a periodic assessment.

In the proposal approved unanimously in the Environment Committee, minor amendments are introduced which I would ask the Commission to take into account, since this would prevent us from extending the procedure.

This proposal asks that the Commission be assisted by a standing committee on forests, as it is in many other areas; that it present an analysis of the application of this regulation with regard to its ecological, economic and social aspects, as well as a cost-benefit evaluation; that an amendment be included on the Mediterranean forests as a specific ecosystem for the southern countries and because of its importance in combating desertification and erosion.

With regard to the budget for implementation, I have a reasonable doubt: for the previous period of these regulations, the Commission proposed EUR 40 million to fight pollution, for the five years, and EUR 70 million for fire prevention.

Now, for the next five years, the Commission proposes 34 million to fight pollution and 50 for fire prevention.

It has just reduced the amount by 6 million for the fight against pollution and 20 million for the prevention of fires, without taking account of the rise in the cost of living index or the incorporation of new countries, Austria, Sweden and Finland, which almost double the area of forest in the Union.

Therefore, our proposal would be to increase that budget to 44 million and 77 million for pollution and fires respectively.

I would ask the President, since Mr Cunha is not present, to allow me to use his two minutes, as he told me previously.

Here we have a proposal by the Committee on Budgets.

The Committee on Budgets is once again presenting amendments in which it wants no kind of notification to appear with regard to the budget for implementation.

I believe that the Committee on Budgets is trying to evade the codecision procedure, and I would propose to this House, and also to the Commission, that their amendments not be taken into account...

(The President cut the speaker off)

Mrs Redondo, I have to tell you that Mr Cunha has just come in.

Mrs Redondo almost hijacked your speaking time, Mr Cunha!

Mr President, the importance of forests in the European Union is clearly illustrated by the fact that they cover 36% of our territory and employ 2.2 million people.

In several areas of the European Union, the forests are often the only viable economic option, because of poor soil or the lack of other natural resources. It is also clear that the importance of forests is by no means limited to economic factors.

They encompass many other dimensions of social and environmental interest, such as the protection of the soil, the fight against erosion, the preservation of water resources, biodiversity, climatic stability etc. Despite all of this, the forests have been a kind of 'poor relation' amongst Community policies.

It was only after many years, in 1998, with the efforts of the European Parliament, that the European Union finally managed to approve a strategy for the preservation and development of forests.

However, given forestry' s unquestionable interrelationship with agriculture and its territorial impact, it is extraordinary that the Commission has not been more ambitious in its proposals and that the Council has historically been so short-sighted.

Despite the fact that the European Union' s forestry strategy is a step forward in terms of ideas, it is yet to have any practical expression.

On the contrary, in some ways it has moved backwards, as demonstrated by this Community regulation on the protection of forests.

With regard in particular to the aspect which is of great concern to my country - the regulation on combating fires - it is regrettable that whereas in the period 1992-1996 the European Union benefited from an annual sum of EUR 14 million, this annual sum is now to be reduced to EUR 10 million, that is, by 40%.

Therefore, Mr President, I would like to suggest to the Council and the Commission that they increase this amount and, if possible, create a Community system for information on forest fires.

Ladies and gentlemen, I must ask for your cooperation.

We have calculated that, if we let every speaker overrun for just 20 seconds, we should still be sitting here at one o'clock in the morning.

We have a lengthy agenda, so I hope you will understand why I must be even stricter than I might otherwise have been on the question of speaking time.

Thank you very much, Mr President.

Mrs Redondo is presenting, under the general heading of forest protection, a report on two proposed regulations.

One refers to atmospheric pollution affecting forests, and the other refers to the prevention of fires.

I would like to tell Mrs Redondo that the delegation of Spanish Socialists is going to support her amendments.

We are going to support them because we agree with all the arguments which Mrs Redondo has put forward, and for other reasons which she has not had time to explain.

The basic regulations date from 1986 and 1992, and now the budget for implementation is lower, despite the fact that, since the accession of the Nordic countries to the European Union, the area of forest is greater.

Furthermore, however, atmospheric pollution has worsened as a result of acid rain, and of greater concentrations of dangerous products in the atmosphere.

We are also in a much worse situation in terms of fire prevention, because of climate change and the drought which we are suffering in many parts of Europe.

I would like to give just two recent examples.

This week there has been a Mediterranean forest fire on the border between France and Italy, a fire in the Ostia pine forest, near Rome, a fire in the Region of Valencia, where I live, and furthermore there has been one death, of a farmer who was trying to put out one of the numerous fires which have occurred this week as a result of drought and heat.

All of these arguments more than justify Mrs Redondo' s amendments, and our support for them.

I wish to tell the Commission - and I am sorry that Mrs Wällstrom is not here at the moment - that one of the European Union' s priorities with regard to the environment should not only be the fight against pollution and fires, but also, above all, a policy of caring for the forests.

That is why we are going to support her.

Mr President, Commissioner, I live in the middle of the Nordic forests, which form part of the enormous area of Europe covered by forests.

In the Nordic countries, we obviously do not have the same problems as in the Mediterranean area.

It is therefore incorrect to talk in this context about the forests of Europe.

The forests of Europe are very, very different from one another.

I could spend all night and all of tomorrow talking about the history of the forests and about the enormous importance Europe' s forest areas are going to have in a future sustainable Europe.

However, this report concerns the threats to our forests.

For the forests in northern and central Europe, the greatest threats are from airborne forms of pollution.

Unfortunately, we cannot prevent pollution by means of forest policy but only by means of environmental, traffic and agricultural policy, in short through general environmental policy.

Because most forests are damaged by discharges which come from a long way away, responsibility for the air and climate is global and European.

Fires do not constitute a problem for the Nordic forests. On the contrary.

To obtain environmental certification, the owners of the forests have to burn down a certain area of them each year.

We set fires for ecological reasons.

In the Nordic forests, there are a great many species of plant which have waxed seeds.

They have to be warmed up by a fire in order to grow.

In the Nordic countries, there are also insects which need burning ant hills in order to breed.

I believe that we should support the southern countries' need to fight fires, but that not all forests can be lumped together by talking in this context about European forests.

Mr President, it is indeed gratifying to note the steady increase in the attention devoted to forests and to the state of their health.

I do not believe, however, that it will suffice to allocate huge sums of money in the future - huge sums in relation to previous expenditure, but still less than is actually needed.

The most important thing, to my mind, is the need to change people's perceptions, not simply with a view to loosening purse strings but also with a view to engendering the level of voluntarism that is essential to the protection of our forests.

In the Alpine regions, for example, the institution of voluntary fire brigades is taken for granted.

Efforts should also be made to establish such bodies in the Mediterranean Member States, not only as a means of fighting forest fires at their source and creating protective infrastructures but also as a means of fostering public willingness to provide neighbourly assistance and voluntary service.

In this respect, I believe that people's mentalities will have to change, because money alone is not the answer.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, forests play an essential role in preserving the balance of our ecology and are a sustainable resource, albeit in the long term.

Forests are, furthermore, an imaginary, mythological and symbolic asset, which we should not forget.

Although there has been a certain recuperation of the area dedicated to forests in the European Union, every year thousands and thousands of hectares fall victim to acidification.

Year after year, huge areas of forest burn in Europe, annually destroying, on average, around 1% of the total forested area.

Biodiversity is also affected, and the situation of various plant species is worrying.

Therefore, the importance of these two regulations is unquestionable, despite the fact that the Community appropriations involved are very modest.

As has already been pointed out, the regulation establishing an action framework for the prevention of forest fires and the reduction of the area burnt is undoubtedly of particular importance to the south of Europe.

This regulation is specifically aimed at the cofinancing of systems for the prevention, monitoring and provision of information about fires, as well as for identifying their causes.

The most southerly part of Mediterranean Europe is threatened by a process of physical desertification, in the literal sense of the word.

The climatic phenomenon which originated in the Sahara desert has not stopped at the Mediterranean Sea and is spreading to the Iberian, Italian and Balkan peninsulas.

Mediterranean woodlands, which act as a curtain, reducing the impact of this phenomenon, are being mercilessly destroyed by these fires.

This issue of forests does not only concern the countries of the south, whose territories are affected, in the same way, of course, that the defence of the Nordic forests is not only of exclusive interest to the Nordic countries.

The countries of the south, more than any other part of Europe, urgently need a policy for the protection of forests.

I wish to congratulate the rapporteur on her work and say that I support her proposals and her objectives.

Mr President, the content of the regulation being discussed here is based on the situation that existed at the end of the 1980s, but since then things have changed greatly.

More attention must be paid in the protection of forests to the effect of climate change.

We have succeeded in bringing traditional forms of air pollution under control in the last ten years, thanks also to EU directives, but at the same time, the risk of changes to global weather patterns getting out of hand has grown.

This development must also be looked at when reviewing the way the forests of the Union are monitored.

The regulation on the subject of the Community' s forests must be reformed, but Parliament cannot undertake financial commitments until the present regulation expires in 2001.

In this situation the suggestion that there should be an increase of tens of millions of euros for just a little over a year is not reasonable.

It is not sufficiently justified by the fact that the Union' s forest area has grown since the last round of enlargement.

The situation is so different between the north and the south.

For example, in Finland and Sweden we long ago reached the stage where the forest is used as it grows.

Here at Union level at the moment we are discussing many genuine legislative proposals concerning forests, including a common position on the emissions ceiling directive and on the directive relating to large incineration plants.

They must be supported, so that they are as successful as possible and so that we can do more to protect the forests as a result.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, as you know, the Commission has presented two proposals for the amendment of the Regulations on the protection of the Community's forests against atmospheric pollution and against fire.

The purpose of these proposals is to adjust both Regulations in the light of the judgment of 25 February 1999 in which the European Court of Justice declared that Article 130s of the EC Treaty - which has now been renumbered 175 - was the proper legal basis for these instruments.

I should firstly like to say thank you very much to the three rapporteurs - Mrs Redondo Jiménez, Mrs Auroi and Mrs Sbarbati - who have been examining the Commission proposals that are under discussion today for their cooperation as well as for the amendments they have put forward.

This new legal basis automatically means that the codecision procedure under Article 252 applies and that the financial framework laid down in this Regulation becomes binding.

It was also necessary to bring the annual budgetary framework for these two initiatives into line with the amount of funds actually allocated by the budgetary authority in the period from 1997 to 2000 and with the amounts already earmarked in the preliminary draft budget for the year 2001.

That is why it is impossible for the Commission to accept Amendments Nos 6 and 12, which would involve an increase in the financial framework.

Nor can the Commission subscribe to Amendments Nos 5 and 11, which relate to the comitology and provide for the use of the consultation procedure in the case of both Regulations.

The Commission takes the view that this procedure would be inconsistent with the decision of 28 June 1999 on the comitology.

The Commission believes that the substance of the relevant amendments should be discussed again in connection with the revision of both Regulations, which is due to take place in 2001.

The Commission will present its proposals for their revision before the end of this year.

It has no problems, however, with Amendments Nos 1, 2, 3, 4, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12, 13, 14, 15 and 16.

You are the first Commissioner today who has not taken up his full allocation of speaking time.

The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon.

The next item is the report (A5-0186/2000) by Mrs Hieronymi, on behalf of the Committee on Culture, Youth, Education, the Media and Sport, concerning the following:

I. proposal for a Decision of the European Parliament and the Council on the implementation of a training programme for professionals in the European audiovisual programme industry (MEDIA - Training, 2001-2005) [COM(1999) 658 - C5-0059/2000 - 1999/0275(COD)], and

II. proposal for a Council Decision on the implementation of a programme to encourage the development, distribution and promotion of European audiovisual works (MEDIA Plus - Development, Distribution and Promotion, 2001-2005 [COM(1999) 658 - C5-0119/2000 - 1999/0276(CNS)].

Mr President, I should like to begin by expressing my thanks to the Commission, to Commissioner Reding and to the members of all the relevant parliamentary committees for their wholehearted cooperation, and also to the Council under the Portuguese and now the French presidency for their cooperation during this stage of the legislative process.

We all share a common commitment to the MEDIA programme and its twin aims of strengthening the European film industry and creating sustainable jobs through the audiovisual growth engine.

That is why it is important to realise that European companies have hitherto been totally underequipped with the audiovisual material that would have enabled them to keep pace with this development.

The cross-border distribution of European films remains too limited.

In the cinema industry, American films have cornered some 80% of the European market, while only 7% of the cinema films shown in the countries of Europe have been made in other European countries.

About 74% of imported television feature films and series are from America, as against 14% from European countries.

Against this background the MEDIA programme, following on from its predecessors, MEDIA I and MEDIA II, is expressly designed to address this deficit in the circulation of European works and has three main support targets: the training of professionals in the audiovisual programme industry through MEDIA-Training and the development and marketing of audiovisual works through the MEDIA Plus programme.

What is new about the present programme phase is that it takes account of the online dimension of all audiovisual production and that it has introduced pilot projects on the use of digital technology.

To that extent, Commissioner, I can speak for all the participating committees and, I hope, for the whole House when I say that we support the proposals you have presented and hope that they all come to fruition.

I do wish to point out, however, that in some areas we have proposed amendments which we consider to be extremely important.

The first of these, as so often, concerns the budget.

The Commission is proposing EUR 400 million for a five-year programme in the audiovisual domain.

Four hundred million was the budget proposed by the Commission back in 1995, and unfortunately the Council rejected that proposal.

Whoever wants to grasp the opportunities offered by the digital revolution must be prepared to make the requisite investment.

That is why the figure of 400 million is too low.

The increase we are proposing is actually moderate; it would take the total budget to 550 million - 480 million for MEDIA Plus and 70 million for MEDIA- Training.

This increase alone, however, will not bring spectacular success.

The first is linkage with other EU programmes, and the second is scope to inject venture capital into the private market; this is done as a matter of course in the United States, and we appeal to the Council and the Commission to work with us to ensure that it finally becomes reality in Europe too.

The mobilisation of private capital is perhaps our key demand along with the pilot project relating to the European Investment Bank.

The second area is the question of the legal basis.

We know that this is a difficult question for the Commission, but it is our wish that the audiovisual programme should be based not only on Article 157 of the EC Treaty, the article concerning industry, but also on Article 151, which is devoted to culture.

This should also be made clear in the programme and be reflected in the legal basis.

Finally, let me just list some other important requirements.

The transparency and efficiency of the programmes should be promoted, funds should be concentrated on SMEs, independent producers and the Member States with limited audiovisual production capacities, and they should benefit the smaller linguistic areas.

Finally, my appeal to the Council and Commission is this: work with Parliament, so that together we can create a resolute lobby for European films.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, we are discussing a very important report here today.

I should like to begin by saying that this is an exceptionally good maiden report by our new colleague Mrs Hieronymi, who also did a truly first-class job in hammering out compromises in committee with our Socialist colleagues and with the Greens and Liberals.

So I believe we have cooperated well, even with the representatives of the European United Left.

Together with the Commission, we have also managed to make a good Commission proposal even better.

We do, of course, have a good general idea of what MEDIA I and MEDIA II have achieved.

MEDIA Plus, of course, will surely be even better - the mere addition of the word 'Plus' must tell us that.

I believe that, at a time when we have been talking about tremendously important educational issues in both Lisbon and Feira, we cannot make cuts in areas in which the products of the education system are supposed to find work.

That is why I consider it very important that we really do create opportunities in this field, and to that end we must invest more money in the audiovisual industry, especially in the training of professionals.

What is on offer here is therefore insufficient.

This is always the case; there is never enough money for culture or for education.

But at the end of the day we shall always be answerable to those people to whom we have promised the earth in our fine speeches.

What we find here is not enough to enable us to respond to the audiovisual revolution.

It will not enable us to develop a genuine European audiovisual policy to challenge the American hegemony in this domain.

Nor can it really serve to unlock the full potential of the audiovisual industry to create jobs and, of course, to produce a critical mass of cultural content.

I believe we have a duty to keep emphasising this fact.

To put it bluntly, a European audiovisual policy has yet to materialise.

That is why we must make an all-out effort here.

I believe that, as Mrs Hieronymi has said, we could impart a considerable amount of momentum with a little more money. In the sphere of communications in particular, we can make a great deal of progress, including the creation of new jobs.

At the same time, I should like to reemphasise that the primary concern of every one of us is of course European culture in all its diversity, as is the need to make it visible beyond our national borders and to portray it universally.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, Madam Commissioner, first of all may I thank Mrs Ruth Hieronymi for the marvellous manner in which she has cooperated with our committee and for the outstanding degree of cooperation in all the committees and across the political spectrum.

We have concentrated on the key points.

Everyone has made compromises in order to try and improve still further a programme which was already very good from the outset.

I speak now for the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs and wish to focus on two aspects of the programme.

Like the Committee on Culture, Youth, Education, the Media and Sport, with which we reached agreement on these points, we also call for an increase in these limited budgetary resources and an addition to the legal basis - not a change, but an addition!

Why do I, or my colleagues in the Legal Affairs Committee, see a connection between these things?

I believe that everything is global, that art and culture, like everything else, are subject to these laws.

One reason why there has to be a European cultural policy is that the nation states are no longer able to pursue their cultural policies alone.

Where the European Union can intervene, as it is already doing in MEDIA Plus, it should be able to continue doing so with a greater volume of financial resources.

The Council should be called to account here.

I believe, Commissioner, that Parliament is actually playing into the hands of the Commission when we say that we want more money in order to be able to guarantee the pursuit of a European cultural policy, and that is also the reason why we should like an addition to the legal basis.

To prevent any misunderstanding, let me say that our aim here is not to subsidise the film industry but rather to ensure that more European films can be watched in Europe.

First of all, we have to win over this European territory in its entirety so that we can continue to operate efficiently.

I do not think that I need speak for my full two minutes if I can focus on these two points.

We should like more money, and we should like this addition to the legal basis.

No doubt you will be able to echo these sentiments, Madam Commissioner.

Ladies and gentlemen, Mr President, I associate myself entirely with the words of praise that have been showered on this report and shall come to the point without further ado.

We are now entering the third round of support programmes for European films, and this support remains absolutely vital, for the European audiovisual industry has undoubtedly been in crisis for quite a long time.

The following evidence may be added to what we have already heard.

About one in three of the films made in the EU is never shown in a cinema, and a large percentage of those that do make it into the cinema are watched by a total audience of fewer than 130 000.

A film will not normally start to yield a return on the initial investment until a million cinemagoers have paid to watch it.

Only one-fifth of European films ever leave their home country; of those that do, nine-tenths go no further than neighbouring European countries.

One of the strengths of the European film industry also accounts for its structural weakness.

Low-budget productions in the tradition of the film d'auteur often cannot be made without the aid of national support funds and frequently appeal to a limited audience of young intellectuals.

During production and afterwards, an adequate promotion and marketing budget is generally lacking.

Cultural and linguistic diversity are matchless assets but sadly often stand in the way of widespread distribution.

Great though the dream of conquering the U.S. film market may be, let us keep our feet on the European ground!

We must not neglect to strengthen our national markets, and we need to do more to develop the European market more effectively.

If some laurels can be reaped along the way, so much the better!

Competitiveness and marketability are commendable aims of MEDIA Plus.

The programme draws on the lessons learned from the experience of the preceding programmes, but although the Council and the Commission are well aware of the present situation, they are still afraid to take the plunge.

One of the lessons that has been learned is that capping production costs as a condition of support is an obstacle to the creation of good films.

The funding of support programmes is not the only issue here.

There is also the question of allowing the provision of venture capital.

Here we are confronted with a sorry state of affairs.

European companies and banks do invest considerable sums of money in the programme industry, but they tend to invest in America rather than Europe.

That is why, back in 1995, the Green Paper on strategy options to strengthen the European programme industry in the context of the audiovisual policy of the European Union proposed the establishment of a European guarantee fund, which the Council stubbornly rejected - the German Government, sad to say, being the foremost opponent of the scheme - without offering an alternative solution.

This report therefore marks a new attempt to put this financial instrument on the agenda as an accompanying measure.

In Germany there is a new Government, which will not necessarily feel that it would lose face by reversing the rejectionist stance of its predecessor, so perhaps we can now hope for a more conciliatory response.

Last but not least, we must not forget the television companies, which act as the driving force of the programme industry by investing large sums of money in audiovisual productions and by providing opportunities for the transmission of audiovisual works.

A key role attaches to the public corporations in particular.

They possess a wealth of human and material resources, which are often the prerequisite for successful productions.

Mr President, the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party thinks that MEDIA Plus is an extremely commendable and important programme which can help strengthen cultural and linguistic diversity within the EU.

European film production is an important part of the EU' s cultural and media policy, and the Liberal Group considers that it is important to support the European film industry which is exposed to a very great deal of competition, especially from the American film industry.

A special effort must be made on behalf of the European film industry, and that is something the Liberal Group supports.

On one important point, however, we shall be voting against the rapporteur' s recommendation, and that is the budget for the programme.

We are opposed to increasing the amounts proposed by the Commission, as recommended by the rapporteur.

It is the European Parliament' s and the EU' s task to establish the correct framework and conditions for a cultural policy of this kind, but it is not a proper part of our remit to spend an exorbitant amount of taxpayers' money on cultural policy.

We therefore think that the Commission' s proposal for a total overall budget of EUR 400 million over the five years is both realistic and appropriate.

It is similarly with certain reservations that we shall be voting tomorrow in favour of the proposals to set up a European Guarantee Fund and to broaden the financing options through cooperation with the European Investment Bank.

If we are still voting in favour of the proposals, it is because they do not automatically mean more expense for European taxpayers.

Unlike previous media programmes, the MEDIA Plus programme also involves the radio industry and, because we really cannot find any good, sensible reason for this, we have a reservation regarding this area, too.

The media programmes were previously administered by the Commission in cooperation with the Media Committee as the advisory committee.

The rapporteur wishes to change the status of the Media Committee from that of an advisory to that of a competent body, but this is something for which we have never obtained a really good explanation.

I fear that this change will make it still a little more difficult to administer the MEDIA Plus programme, so it is also with a reservation that we shall be voting in favour of the proposals tomorrow.

In spite of all these reservations, I think we have an extremely good program before us to enable us to strengthen the European film industry. We should very much like to thank the rapporteur, Mrs Hieronymi, for the impressive work she has done.

Commissioner, Mr President, I have good news and bad news about the MEDIA Plus programme.

The good news is that Mrs Hieronymi has, of course, carried out sterling work and the cooperation which culminated in unanimity within the committee which handled this report was more than excellent.

In fact, projects which preceded this plan have already proved that this type of plan meets a real need.

We of the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance have called for attention to be given to the smaller countries, to the difficulties which smaller producers encounter in smaller countries or in countries which belong to a smaller linguistic group, and we particularly appreciated this being taken into account in the adopted amendments.

Needless to say, we fully back what the rapporteur has stated with regard to the need for a legal basis.

Unfortunately I have to give you the bad news too. This is not so much related to the Media Plan as it is to the media policy as a whole, as proposed by the European Union.

Indeed, we may well ask ourselves what Europe' s ambition is.

I was interested to hear Mr Andreasen' s criticism on the budgetary aspect here, but I read in the press that Europe spends EUR 1 billion per annum on helping and encouraging tobacco growers.

I cannot help but ask myself questions then or, as Mr Perry rightly pointed out: why is it seemingly easier to obtain EU funding in Europe if you manufacture olive oil?

The huge EU budgets which are channelled into agriculture are not really discussed much, rightly so, in fact.

But I do wonder why it is so difficult to adopt European policy or industrial policy which can match Hollywood.

In my opinion, all Hollywood wants is a worthy opponent.

Unfortunately, we are forced to note that this programme cannot even start to offer anything that remotely resembles an opponent.

This programme does not even take production into account.

It mentions very important areas, such as distribution or the preliminary stages of production, but when it comes to production, mum is the word.

Naturally, the intention is not to squander subsidies. Indeed not.

As the rapporteur rightly stated, it is vital for the European Union to set up a Guarantee Fund at long last, in tandem with the European Investment Bank, and to offer European producers who dare compete with Hollywood the necessary guarantees, so that we can offer those people who really want to invest in European cinema the opportunity to do this.

And I would like to ask the Commissioner to roll up her sleeves and get stuck in.

This is not just to safeguard our culture, but it is also an enormous challenge for this new century, because everyone knows that this will be the age of the content industry, and it would be extremely regrettable if we at European level were to hand this over completely to the American content industry.

Mr President, I would like to congratulate Mrs Hyeronymi on the excellent work of the Committee on Culture, Youth, Education and the Media, and I would also like to stress the extremely high level of agreement and synergy between the Committees, to the extent - and this is proof - that the main body of the report and those expressing the opinions of the different committees were all approved unanimously.

From a structural point of view, greater investment was necessary in the audiovisual sector to create fresh job opportunities for young unemployed Europeans and to stem the European Union brain drain to third countries, particularly the United States of America, where greater investment leads not only to better working conditions but also greater job opportunities.

The issues worked on: we considered it necessary to alter the eligibility arrangements applying to the programme by reducing the number of partners from three to two; we considered it necessary to ensure that the training programmes set out in the proposal include support measures geared to the need to develop innovative content for the production of audiovisual formats other than drama and documentaries; we considered that it was important to change the legal basis to ensure that the component relating to support for the development, distribution, and promotion of European audiovisual works can likewise be brought within the scope of codecision, thus enabling Parliament to wield greater influence on implementation of the programme and its aim of fostering European culture.

Finally, considering development of investment in the European cinema industry to be extremely important, the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy calls upon the Member States to pursue a policy of making sums reinvested for the creation of new jobs tax-deductible, and stresses the importance of establishing a guarantee fund as one of the measures necessary for the development of the independent audiovisual industry which encourages new talent and develops a cultural content of European tradition.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, in a Europe of economic and monetary union, it could have been an advantage for the MEDIA/MEDIA Plus programme to have Article 157 (industry) of the Treaty as its legal basis.

Audiovisual media would, of course, be at the heart of European policy, and also of our work.

Now, reading the preview of this part-session produced by Parliament' s press department, I note that the MEDIA Plus programme is not one of this week' s highlights.

And I have been really surprised at the low level of interest aroused by one of this year' s most important reports from the Committee on Culture, Youth, Education, the Media and Sport - or rather, to tell you the truth, I have not been surprised at all.

Culture is not paid much attention in this Parliament, as in all the European Institutions.

It is not just the audiovisual industry or, I should rather say, the audiovisual sector.

Like others Members who have spoken on this subject, I hope Article 151, on culture, can also be a legal basis for this audiovisual programme.

I would like to take this opportunity to thank Mrs Hieronymi wholeheartedly for her determination to broaden the basis and the aim, and to develop the resources for this programme, not to mention all the energy she has put into our joint work.

Audiovisual creation does not account for the whole industry, but creation is indeed involved and the purpose of this programme is to make cultural diversity effective and concrete.

Cultural diversity is not a slogan. It is a cultural and economic necessity.

We urgently need to have audiovisual works distributed in every country in Europe.

Grants to cinemas showing non-national European films should be increased.

Emphasising the cultural importance of the programme does not mean neglecting its economic importance, of course.

By 2005, the audiovisual sector should have been responsible for creating over 300 000 highly qualified jobs.

How can people have so little interest in a market likely to grow so rapidly?

It seems that neither cultural necessity nor economic objectives carry any weight in favour of implementing this ambitious programme.

As always when culture is involved, the budget is minimal, not to mention the fact that it is always gone ten in the evening by the time we get round to culture here.

People may say the budget has been increased compared with the two previous programmes, MEDIA 1 and MEDIA 2.

EUR 250 million for twelve countries and EUR 310 million for sixteen countries is no less than the EUR 400 million now proposed for some thirty countries.

Why is such a derisory budget, with no real increase, allocated to a programme which can combine the two objectives Europe so badly needs - the objective of Europe' s identity and Europe' s own diversified culture, and dynamic economic development?

We are told the digital age promises a revolution in the development of content and the distribution of images, and the MEDIA Plus programme devotes space to pilot projects, such as the digital transposition of our audiovisual heritage. Under the circumstances, would it really be responsible not to take the MEDIA Plus programme seriously?

Mr President, the MEDIA programmes are designed to strengthen European industry and the audiovisual content through measures providing financial support to specific sectors such as development, the preparation stage of projects, the distribution and marketing of audiovisual works, the promotion of European works and programmes with the aim of facilitating access to European and international markets, and training aimed at improving occupational preparation.

The adoption of the Media Plus and Training programmes is important; the autonomous role of the promotion sector is important; the significant role of distribution is important for an increasingly wide distribution of works; the complementarity between Media Plus and Media Training should be increased as much as possible.

The Commission should take Parliament's contribution to heart and accept all the amendments - both those to the training part, which is subject to codecision, and those to the development, distribution and promotion part, which is merely subject to the consultation procedure and which, moreover, receives the greatest share of the budget.

The amendments are the result of some very clever work, Mrs Hyeronymi, and, as Chairman, I would like to compliment you and reiterate that you have won the unanimous support of the Committee on Culture, Youth, Education, the Media, Education and Sport and the committees which expressed opinions.

The latter Committees - the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market and the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy - have done something significant in approving the proposal to change the legal basis of Media Plus, inserting Article 157 (industry) and Article 151 (culture) in order to give equal value to industry and the audiovisual sector.

The Commission has already indicated through press agencies that it opposes this amendment.

I am sorry but we are not satisfied with the response and we would have preferred to have heard the Commission's position in this debate and not through press statements.

In any case, we call for an increase in the budget and we hope that Parliament and the Commission will be able to achieve unanimity and an agreement on this issue as well.

Mr President, I thank Mrs Hieronymi for the work she has put into this report.

It is important to stress at the outset that this is not just any old report.

It is something that is very dear not only to the members of this committee and the House but also to members of the industry right across the Union.

But in putting this before the House we have to ask ourselves two very important questions.

Firstly, why do we need this programme?

Secondly, what is the added value that it is going to bring us?

Only by answering those questions as a House can we go forward to the Council and the Commission with a very strong case.

We are at the very beginning of an explosion of this industry on this continent.

We have to put ourselves in the position of being able to compete in the international arena.

I believe we are able to do that.

I also believe that this industry will be the spearhead of this century, in the same way as coal, steel and the infrastructure of railways were the impetus for the development of the revolution in the 19th century.

It is absolutely vital that we do not miss the train on this one.

It is absolutely vital that we get in there as a series of institutions committed to building this industry.

The second reason is that we have to, in this increasingly homogenised era of global audio-visual content, get into the area of freedom of speech, freedom of expression and freedom of diversity.

That is where we in this House have an exemplary responsibility in performing our role in the development of this particular sector.

My own Group is very committed to the budget that has been laid out in the report.

We are also very committed to diversifying and looking at different sources of funding as befits our new entrepreneurial era.

Finally, it is very important to reiterate what Mrs Pack said about having a long term strategy for the audio-visual sector in the European Union, a long term coordinated and integrated strategy that allows us to benefit from each other's strengths in every Member State.

Madam Commissioner, on a certain occasion in September, you said that we should declare war on Hollywood in order to strengthen the European film industry.

The only problem there is that our best warriors emigrate to Hollywood.

Commissioner, malicious gossip has it that you could be open to challenge, in purely legal terms, for awarding the European Film Prize in Cannes on behalf of MEDIA Plus, since the prize may have been funded from the MEDIA II budget.

Be that as it may, we shall not criticise you.

On the contrary, we are grateful for the tremendous vigour with which you have been tackling the entire cultural agenda.

I have read in the press that we in the European Parliament could possibly upset the timetable because we are pressing for parliamentary codecision.

I do not think this is the case.

We have the political will to see that this programme begins on time.

As directly elected representatives of the people, we also have a legal and moral right to be part of the decision-making process in the field of cultural policy.

Madam Commissioner, we make an earnest appeal for a constructive dialogue with you and with the Council on this specific issue.

Mr President, I would like to say that I am pleased with the MEDIA Plus document.

I believe that it has been very much improved by Parliament.

Mrs Hieronymi, furthermore, has been very open to all suggestions and it seems to me that, in relation to other programmes, it contains an innovation which the Commission has also contributed to, that is, support for marketing and distribution.

Nevertheless, I would like a further step to be taken because, in my view, the MEDIA Plus document follows a principle which is rather like that of arts cinema: it supports in particular the script and the production when these days we know that post-production accounts for 60%, 70% or 80% of good films.

Furthermore, postproduction is the field in which the new technologies are working.

It is much cheaper to produce special effects by computer than in reality.

If we do not support post-production, editing, training in editing and the establishment of studios for dubbing, editing and creating sound tracks, in which post-production can be properly carried out, our cinema will lag behind.

We have European directors who have worked with American companies, who have made fantastic films. We have the knowledge, but we do not have the support for the industry to allow us to compete in post-production, because to speak now of script-led cinema is to speak of times past, it is to speak of the theatre-cinema in which the camera follows the actor around.

We should support this new industry in which, furthermore, there are new vocations, new forms of creativity, a creativity of images, pure cinema, the new cinema for the era we are living in. I would therefore ask that, when offering grants, these aspects should be taken into account and the industry should be opened up to the world.

In the conciliation we should now finally be talking of a cultural industry.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, technological progress over the last decade has indeed revolutionised the audiovisual sector.

In any society that respects man and functions to satisfy his diverse material, spiritual and cultural needs, such progress encourages artistic creation to flourish and new forms of expression to develop, making art accessible to all and helping to create a deeper understanding between people from all walks of life.

In capitalist societies, however, in both the audiovisual and in other sectors, the beneficial consequences of technological progress are being stifled by the forces controlling it; to wit, by monopolies making profits not by improving the quality of artistic creation, but by controlling the markets, subjecting people to misleading advertising, dictating ideological beliefs and creating specific consumer standards, even for culture.

The problem, honourable members, is not just whether films produced in the US or films produced in Europe dominate the European market; the main problem lies with the content and quality of the films that we and our children watch.

The European Union treats culture in general and audiovisual media in particular as a commodity, as yet another commercial activity for big business and as a competitive market where the only winners are those who are best equipped to turn the market mechanisms to their advantage, rather than those who have something new or something of a higher quality to offer.

This approach is quite evident in the proposal for the MEDIA Plus/MEDIA training programme, from the very first paragraph of the introduction and from Article 1 of the proposal for a decision, which aims to allow professionals in the industry to take full advantage of the European and international dimension of the market.

The whole structure has absolutely nothing to do with the needs of the people of the European Union or with culture; on the contrary it serves those interests which benefit from the commercialisation of culture.

Mr President, I congratulate the rapporteur on the work that she has done.

There are two simple points I want to make.

There are some things that the public sector cannot do and some things the market cannot do.

Certainly the public sector cannot make good films.

I do not believe it can do much of a job of judging what is a good film.

Whenever we try it in the United Kingdom, any support from the government tends to mean that the film is going to be a flop.

We need to very careful about that.

Similarly, the market does not have adequate resources or adequate ability to ensure that we have sufficiently skilled and trained people.

That certainly is an area that is proposed in this report and is a responsibility at a European level.

I must pay tribute to organisations like, in Britain, the National Film School in Beaconsfield, which needs help to do its work.

I was pleased to see there are some references to digital radio in this report, but not enough.

We should not forget the radio sector in audio-visual.

I hope that will not be forgotten as this report goes through.

Finally, it is very easy to write a long speech.

It is much harder to give a short speech.

It is easy to spend a large budget, but difficult to spend a small budget.

We look to the Commission to spend the money that they have efficiently and effectively.

Mr President, I shall not have the last word; that is the Commissioner's prerogative.

I wish to subscribe to the thanks that have been expressed to the rapporteur and to emphasise that I have heard from insiders that the programme has so far been an unqualified success.

I believe that one reason for this has been the way in which the support has been accompanied by intensive consultancy and local networking.

The MEDIA desk and the local MEDIA branches have proved to be very useful instruments.

It is vital for these accompanying institutional measures to be retained.

The MEDIA branch offices help to minimise the obstacles to European cooperation, for example.

On the one hand, MEDIA is about culture and common European cultural traditions in the audiovisual domain.

This is still a rather tender sapling which needs our undivided attention.

Moreover, as other speakers have already pointed out, it is also an economic asset that is judged by its success.

One key criterion of the success of the new MEDIA programme will be its support for the development, marketing and promotion of films that the public wants to see.

I make no attempt to conceal my own personal view on this matter.

Hollywood cannot be beaten, in my opinion, by money and quotas but only by quality.

Recent years have shown that people are interested in many different types of film.

Europe must not shy away from this window of opportunity.

We must continue to foster this encouraging development, and to that end the budgetary increase requested in Mrs Hieronymi's report is a logical move.

Finally, I should like to mention that many of the roots of our European culture lie in Central and Eastern Europe.

A higher budget will also make it possible to involve the Central and Eastern European countries to a greater extent in these programmes.

The last word on an increased budget may not yet have been spoken, and we shall perhaps be discussing further increases over the next few years.

Mr President, first of all, I want to thank you for agreeing to put MEDIA Plus on your already very full agenda, despite the fact that we so often get there late at night.

But late in the evening is often the time for cultural activities, so we are not really doing anything unusual.

I also want to thank the Members of Parliament who have worked so intensively on the draft: the members of the Committee on Culture, Youth, Education, the Media and Sport, of course, but also the various committees the report was referred to for an opinion, and I want to mention the draftsmen, Mrs Echerer, Mr Fiori, Mr Rocard and Mr Wynn.

Above all, I would like to add my voice to all those who have highlighted the contribution of the rapporteur, Ruth Hieronymi.

We usually do congratulate the rapporteur.

It is traditional. But this time I think we can say Mrs Hieronymi' s work has been more than exceptional.

She has been a great rapporteur and it is thanks to her that the draft Parliament is submitting to us today is a draft which improves the Commission' s text.

We appreciate the rapporteur' s negotiating talent and her personal commitment.

Thank you very much, Mrs Hieronymi.

Mr President, as you know, the Commission sets great store by the European Parliament' s opinion, especially with the Culture Council coming up on 20-21 July, because it is my job to let the ministers know the views of the European Parliament.

In this way, discussions between the Commission and the Council can progress usefully, not just on the basis of the Commission' s proposal, but also on the basis of the position expressed by Parliament.

Do not expect me to launch into a speech on the importance of European cinema.

I have done that many times, in many places.

You know my views on the subject; I share yours, but we are here this evening to produce the best possible draft.

I have taken note of the 116 amendments presented today with great interest: 48 of them relate to the proposal for a decision on vocational training and 68 to development, distribution and promotion.

All the amendments bear witness to a broad consensus in Parliament about the way the Commission has approached the MEDIA programme.

There are many practical proposals for the implementation of the programme and some of Parliament' s concerns shine through these amendments. I must say the Commission broadly shares them, just as I share most of the views expressed this evening, here in the House.

The first consideration is the acknowledged importance of the audiovisual content sector in Europe' s economy and society, now and in the future, and the need to take account of the new opportunities available, especially thanks to the new technologies, including digital technology. That challenge means that MEDIA Plus must take greater account of the new technologies.

That is not, however, enough. We must also follow up the Lisbon Summit, by opening up other Community initiatives.

As you are right to point out, we cannot afford to invest in production.

Producing a single major film would swallow up the entire MEDIA budget.

That is why we have tried to use MEDIA to complement what the Member States should be and are doing, but that is not enough either, and some speakers have justifiably mentioned the abortive experiment with a guarantee fund in the past.

We are working to recreate such a fund.

Indeed, I have been in touch with the president of the European Investment Bank. We both agreed that, in order to develop the content industry in Europe, risk capital needs to be made more available and instruments established to aid investment in audiovisual content.

My officers and those of the European Investment Bank are negotiating along these lines, to establish such an investment fund as soon as possible, in the spirit of eEurope as recommended in Lisbon and confirmed in Feira.

When things start to move along I will certainly come to this House to keep you informed of progress, Mr President.

I also agree that Community policy on audiovisual media should have a wider scope but should be developed as a complement to national and regional policies in this field, and synergistically with these.

Secondly, one of the acknowledged successes of the MEDIA programme is its adaptation to the needs of businesses in the sector, especially SMEs, through financial and training support mechanisms suited to their practices and strategies.

These mechanisms must seek to overcome the obstacles of the national markets and profit fully from an enlarged area of distribution.

It is therefore essential for the implementation of MEDIA Plus to be based on professional expertise and for the support mechanisms to be accessible to the greatest possible number of businesses, in all the countries and regions making up our Community.

And that implementation must be properly balanced between the needs of the professionals and the need for transparency, and strict control of public expenditure. In particular, Mr Perry, it must respect the financial regulation.

Thirdly and finally, I am pleased to see that Parliament shares the Commission' s opinion on the programme' s target sectors, as well as its wish to see transnational synergies developed. I think the future of the content industry in Europe lies in coproductions.

Transnational synergy between the production and distribution sectors will be something new, with a view to a more competitive industry. But when we talk about the culture industry, we are still talking about culture, of course, and we do want our films to travel, we do want to encourage, emphasise and achieve cultural and linguistic diversity.

It is not just a requirement of the Treaty, the people want it, and political nous recommends it.

So, ladies and gentlemen, what is the Commission' s position on the proposed amendments?

First of all, in the 'vocational training' section, I am in a position to accept in full, or in substance, 37 of the 48 amendments presented today.

Mr President, I have the list of amendments available.

In fact the only amendments I have reservations about relate, of course, to the budget.

Ladies and gentlemen, I am really embarrassed to have to stand here and say I cannot accept the figure you propose.

Personally, if I were not speaking as a Commissioner, I would consider Parliament' s figure far too low for the objectives we want to attain.

Unfortunately, we have a restrictive budgetary authority, and, unfortunately again, we have our governments, which want far less even than the budgetary authority authorises me to want.

So you see, I am forced to tell you that your proposals - though not excessive, Mrs Hieronymi - cannot be supported by the Commission.

Another factor is the exclusion of initial training: Amendments Nos 12, 110, 111 and 112.

I believe it ought to be possible to support this type of training, but not as a general rule. We should support it as an exception and as a subsidiary activity, when no other support exists at national and European level, and in particular in order to network initial training bodies and give such training a European status.

Another problem is the exclusion of the training areas to be supported by the economic, financial and commercial management training programme: Amendments Nos 113 and 114.

You see, if we want to train professionals effectively, it is essential to teach them to understand the European and international dimensions of the market in their fields - and to do so at European level too.

Setting up international coproduction, marketing and distribution in foreign countries are all things our future audiovisual industry workers need to be taught if we want them to operate on an international scale, and that is our aim.

So there will be support for economic, financial and commercial management from a European perspective.

My fourth point is the inclusion of training for technical professions in audiovisual media, Amendment No 18, and radio, Amendment No 33.

This training is well developed at national level and, as such, it does not require a European dimension like the other proposed training.

On the other hand, I am in favour of opening up MEDIA training actions to radio professionals, which may constitute a compromise between Amendments Nos 33 and 34.

Finally, there are two declaratory amendments on encouraging fiscal measures, Amendment No 4, and intellectual property, Amendment No 9.

Although these amendments are legitimate in spirit, they go beyond the scope of the decision.

Mr President, I come now to the second part of the proposal for a directive: development, distribution and promotion.

I am willing to accept 57 amendments, 80% of the amendments tabled by Parliament, literally or in spirit.

I can make the list of these amendments available, Mr President.

I am forced to express reservations on eleven of the amendments tabled.

Four of them, Amendments Nos 53, 65, 69 and 93, are declaratory and outside the scope of the decision.

Their inclusion, while legitimate in spirit, is not justified in the text of the proposal for a decision.

It will come as no surprise that my reservations relate, in particular, to Amendments Nos 44 and 54 on the legal basis.

Article 157(3) is the legal basis proposed by the Commission, and Parliament is seeking to add another legal basis, the article on culture.

Ladies and gentlemen, I understand your position, but I think Article 157 relating to industry is the appropriate legal basis for this decision - as was already the case for MEDIA 2 - considering its subject matter, its aim and its content.

Establishing an industrial policy for audiovisual media does not mean we forget about cultural diversity, because the aim of the culture industry is precisely the achievement, on the ground, of cultural diversity.

But the choice, as legal basis, of the article relating to industry conforms to consistent case law which lays down that in the framework of the system of Community powers, the choice of the legal basis of an act must be founded on objective factors capable of jurisdictional control and such factors notably include the aim and the content of the act.

MEDIA Plus is a programme intended to strengthen the competitiveness of the audiovisual sector, but I must stress that one recital, recital 11, highlights, if that were still necessary, the cultural dimension of the audiovisual sector, in accordance with Article 151(4) of the Treaty.

I note your concerns and I really hope that the next revision of the Treaty will offer a new framework, as well measures enabling the European Parliament to be fully involved in decisions on audiovisual policy.

As regards Amendment No 87 on the budget for the second section, my comment is the same as for the amendment on the budget for the training section.

So I need not go over it again.

As regards Amendment No 103 on radio, MEDIA Plus cannot be extended to other sectors given the financial constraints, but I have already made one concession, in the training section, to including radio in the programme.

On Amendments Nos 115 and 116, regional and minority languages, the Commission is, as you know, very concerned about respect and promotion of linguistic and cultural diversity.

Moreover, this concern is taken into account throughout the MEDIA Plus programme, primarily through positive discrimination measures in the support mechanisms in favour of professionals operating in countries and regions with low production capacity and with a limited geographic or linguistic scope.

Amendment No 115 would create a sub-programme within the programme. So I do not think we should go that far.

But Amendment No 116 actually does nothing more than take up and specify the measures which are already scattered throughout the programme.

So, if Parliament really wants it, and so decides, I will not oppose that amendment.

Ladies and gentlemen, Mr President, beyond these few points of disagreement, which are minimal, I want to express my satisfaction at the cooperation and the many points of agreement between the Commission and Parliament.

The amendments proposed today, which are of a high quality, will undoubtedly make it possible to improve the texts establishing the MEDIA programme.

They will contribute to achieving our goal: the creation of a strong content industry in Europe.

With our MEDIA Plus programme we are seeking to complete all the other actions which should restore to the European cinema not its credibility, because that was never lost, but its confidence, because it is by having confidence in the ability of the European cinema that we will succeed in developing it as we all wish.

Thank you very much, Commissioner Reding.

The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon.

The next item is the report (A5-0185/2000) by Mrs Sanders-Ten Holte, on behalf of the Committee on Culture, Youth, Education, the Media and Sport, concerning a proposal for a European Parliament and Council recommendation on European cooperation in the domain of quality evaluation in school education (COM(1999) 709 - C5-0053/2000 - 2000/0022(COD)).

Mr President, Commissioner, one of the EU' s key goals is to promote mobility within the labour market, and this can only be stimulated by high-quality education.

It is therefore essential to develop tools not only to improve education, but also to ensure that education meets modern-day requirements.

Quality assessment, self-assessment of schools in particular, is a key element in the development of quality education.

This is why, all in all, I am delighted with the Commission' s recommendation that is now before us.

However, I also have some comments with regard to the recommendation, and I included these in my report.

In my opinion, it is especially important to encourage Member States to develop sound methods for assessment in education, bearing in mind that self-assessment is complementary to external evaluation.

In addition, it is important for them to exchange good models and experiences and that all those involved in the school are actually involved in the self-assessment process, including parents and students.

Moreover, it is important to stimulate cooperation between schools and various bodies, also at local and regional level.

Good examples of this can be found in the trial projects and also, of course, at European level.

What the Commission needs to do, therefore, is to draw up an inventory of sound existing methods, in order to set up a database which can be used interactively so that activities can be scheduled and regular reports submitted to Parliament by putting the item on the running agenda.

I have drawn on many ideas from my fellow delegates, but also from many institutions in the sphere I mentioned above.

It transpired in the process that the will to turn this project into a success is present on all sides, and the impetus created by the EU has certainly found fertile soil.

It is therefore all the more unfortunate that repeated attempts on my part to reach agreement with the Council - because you know it was my intention to complete the report at first reading - were thwarted time and again and met with reactions that came too late and insufficient mandate.

I would therefore call on the Council to come up with a proposal for a common position within the short term.

We are nearly there, but I would first of all like to clarify the line adopted by our Parliament, so that we can coincide with the line taken by the Council.

Finally, we reached general agreement in the committee on a large number of amendments.

I thank you all for your very constructive attitude.

I would now ask you for your support to deliver on these agreements.

I would advise you not to pursue the amendments tabled by the PSE.

It is important to couple education with the labour market.

This is borne out by the results reached in Lisbon.

After all, we should not educate people for unemployment, and education needs to pre-empt this.

This is why this should also be included in this report.

The other amendments are already more or less reflected in the text or in other amendments.

Finally, I would like to mention the financial dimension.

I have not made any changes on purpose, not because I think the budget is generous but because I think that it will appear from the reports whether the budget is too tight.

That will then be a good time to consider a possible increase in the funding.

I thank you and look forward to your reactions.

Mr President, it was late when I made my last speech, it is even later now so I shall be try to be even briefer.

But education is important and we must make sure it gets the attention it deserves.

What it does not always get is the action to match those words.

We all know the EU has very limited responsibilities as regards education, but there are some places where the European Union can give added value.

Quality evaluation is one of those.

When I went into town earlier on this evening I saw young people in the city of Strasbourg looking at leaflets up on a wall.

What they were looking at were their baccalaureate results.

So we think nothing about evaluating youngsters.

What we need to do is evaluate the schools and to make sure that the schools are doing well.

Since the schools are preparing young people for an education in the single market of Europe, we must make sure that the schools across Europe are all doing their work to prepare people for the single market those young people are going to work in.

In some parts of the Union - and I am quite willing to cite the United Kingdom - we are not doing as well as we could.

There are very many bright youngsters who do very well in the schools, but 20% of young people leave British schools without any qualifications at all.

We cannot afford to allow that to continue to happen.

There have been estimates that in the next two years we will require half a million extra people in IT jobs.

Where are those young people going to come from?

We have to make sure that the schools can deliver them and I am quite sure that what is contained in this report is one of the ways that we can help raise the standards in schools.

In English we say "two heads are better than one" .

I am quite prepared to believe that 15 heads, or 15 sets of data across the Union, will help us achieve better quality in the schools.

I would just say to the Council - and I hope there is somebody from the Council listening to this - I know we can have confidence in the Commissioner, but let us say to the Council that their fine words at Lisbon were great but they should now deliver on them.

I am therefore very sorry that the great efforts that the rapporteur made to get full agreement were not actually rewarded.

So do not be too surprised if this Parliament backs the rapporteur and tries to push the Council to live up to the fine words they were so ready to utter.

Mr President, building Europe means first and foremost being aware of its diversity and its differences.

In studying the educational systems of the Member States of the European Union we should draw on a profound knowledge of the practices and acquired rights in our various countries, because each of our countries has its own educational reality.

Any change to the educational system calls into question the ideology of the society and its economic development.

Quality in education is a challenge for our society, but education must not become a focus for social operators who want to impose their personal aims upon it.

If an in-depth reform of the educational system is needed, it must involve all the partners in the system and, above all, it must not be rigid.

It must be capable of evolving in step with society because educational systems suffer when they are not rooted in life.

But for all that, we must not forget that the all-round development of the human being is an essential goal of education.

We must not seek to respond at any price to a constantly developing market.

On the contrary, we must let young people acquire the tools of knowledge which allow them to face their future.

Today, the concern is certainly not to wait for pupils to fail, at the end of their schooling, before showing some imagination.

They need to be offered appropriate teaching.

No child is devoid of talent.

Every system creates its own type of failures.

The criteria for identifying failure are essentially subjective.

Success is judged according to pre-established standards.

Depending on the circumstances, politicians may even find it in their interests to exaggerate or minimise things that are going wrong, especially as the problems of education occupy a growing place in the political debate and the media.

Any pupil in difficulties is a young person whose future is compromised.

Any child who is failing is expressing his unease in the educational institution, but also in society.

A young person who is not recognised as an individual with his own experiences and his own knowledge is a rejected human being.

In rejection he will give vent to his despair; he will give vent to his hatred.

The fight against failure at school, in other words, against failure in society, is and must be a major concern for anyone with political responsibility.

So it is time to regard the young person as a developing being, wishing to train himself rather than being trained.

Perhaps we should change the way we approach knowledge and review the operation of our educational systems, but we must be careful not to seek uniformity because the multiplicity of cultures is a source of personal enrichment and a condition for successful human development.

There is no miracle cure, but there are battles to be fought.

And that means that all those who believe it must combine forces to do so.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, it is almost midnight already, and I do not wish to extend this sitting unnecessarily.

I agree with what Mrs Roure and Mr Perry have said and, of course, with the content of Mrs Sanders- Ten Holte's report.

I should like to confine myself to a couple of points, and I shall begin by referring back to Feira and Lisbon.

This report is really a follow-up to the thoughts of the European Council meetings in Lisbon and Feira.

When we contemplate the information society and globalisation, when we consider the speed at which technology is changing our society, it becomes obvious that we must guarantee a school education that enables young people to stay abreast of these developments.

We must create the basis for the essential establishment of lifelong learning.

For that reason, I approve of the measures that are proposed here.

They will probably help us to deal more effectively with this challenge.

Let me just come back to a point that I raised myself in an amendment.

It must be possible to work with the existing resources, with the available networks and databases.

There is no need for us to keep reinventing the wheel.

We should use what we have, comparing the knowledge we each possess and then operating on the basis of that knowledge.

I shall move on now to a technical point.

In recent days we have heard that Mrs Sanders has been trying to make the first reading suffice.

But of course there is a price to pay for that.

Whoever wants to shorten the legislative process to one reading by making use of the scope for interinstitutional agreements has to conclude a deal.

This deal does not involve a decree from the gentlemen of the Committee of Permanent Representatives, who have no say; they must simply declare their acceptance of the sound parliamentary proposals.

They have not made such a declaration; they did promise us something, but we set no store by promises.

We shall vote on our report tomorrow.

Thereafter, if the gentlemen of Coreper feel able to accept our amendments, we are prepared to expedite the matter very swiftly in the autumn - there is no rush.

We should not buy a pig in a poke; we should vote on our report tomorrow and give these gentlemen the opportunity to think again.

Mr President, Madam Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, in addition to what has been said already, with which I can only concur, may I reiterate that the foundations for the future prospects of the youth of tomorrow are laid in the classrooms of today and that brainpower will be the key asset of the future.

Among the basic skills we now have to learn is how to teach young people to cope with the rapid changes that are taking place in the present era.

These basic skills also include the ability to motivate individuals to engage in lifelong learning, to arouse their curiosity, to foster their willingness to be mobile, flexible and open-minded and to accept responsibility and to train them to be independent.

Let me just cite one example of this motivation and support.

In my own country of Austria, this type of benchmarking, in the form of the Third International Mathematics and Science Study (TIMSS) Pop 3 study, in which we did not perform particularly well, has led to the establishment of a programme known as Qualität in Schulen (Q.I.S - Quality in Schools).

At the heart of this project is the school curriculum.

It contains a model for schools to follow and statements relating to the present situation and enumerates specific aims and measures for the promotion of quality in various areas.

It is a fixed-term agreement with an impact inside and outside schools, providing guidelines for educational practice as well as information for the public and serving as a planning instrument and a yardstick against which the development of a school can be measured.

Comparison creates competition, and competition promotes individuality among schools and hence a variety of models for guidance.

This is the path we must pursue.

Many thanks, Commissioner Reding, especially for the fact that we shall now be able to go home before midnight.

Thank you, ladies and gentlemen, for staying the course!

The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon.

(The sitting was closed at 12 midnight)

Approval of the Minutes of the previous sitting

The Minutes of yesterday's sitting have been distributed.

Mr President, on Monday I made a point of order about President Nicole Fontaine's reported comments in the British press regarding her recent visit with Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II.

A British Labour Member of this House, Mr Miller, repeated what were purported to be the Queen's remarks, not once but three times, on Monday, on Tuesday and on Wednesday.

He sought to drag the Queen into a political controversy and to use her name to score cheap political points.

Mr President, it may be that President Fontaine was unfamiliar with the British rules of protocol which obtain in such matters, but Mr Miller has no such excuse.

He knows perfectly well that ours is a non-political Head of State. He knows perfectly well that for nearly fifty years she has scrupulously avoided engaging in controversial political issues.

He knows perfectly well that she cannot come to this House to set the record straight.

His behaviour is a disgrace and a scandal.

Mr President, I am proud to be British but today I am ashamed to share my nationality with that man.

Has he no decency or honour at all?

Mr President, well, how can I respond to such an attack as that?

When I raised the point on Monday, and on Tuesday, and on Wednesday, I asked Mr Helmer for his comments on the euro.

So far, he has refused to comment.

Can I also say that when Mrs Fontaine spoke to Her Majesty the Queen and obviously put certain questions to her the Queen, in her response, was representing her government, which is a Labour Government.

That might not suit Mr Helmer, but I am sorry to say that is the way it goes.

Can I also say yes, I am Scottish, yes, I am British, but, Mr Helmer, I am European as well and proud to be.

Mr President, I wish to use this point of order to speak in my capacity as chairman of the delegation for relations with the countries of Central America and Mexico.

As you will be aware, elections were held in Mexico last Sunday.

Yesterday the delegation which I chair met and discussed a report drawn up by our fellow Members who had been to Mexico to act as observers at these elections on behalf of this Parliament.

We finally approved a three-point statement.

The first point was to recognise and welcome the dignified and civic-minded conduct of our Mexican friends during these elections. Secondly, we welcomed the election of Mr Fox and expressed our hope that relations between the European Union and Mexico would continue to make progress under the general agreement approved and ratified in March.

Thirdly, we wished to congratulate President Zedillo on having enabled Mexican institutions to make this change to democracy.

Mr President, I would ask you to see if the President of this Parliament could forward our resolution, the complete text of which you will receive today, to the Mexican authorities.

I will certainly inform President Fontaine.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I want to draw your attention to something really annoying in connection with the Minutes.

The "Texts Adopted" also form part of the Minutes.

I pointed out yesterday during the vote on the directive to combat money laundering the English translation of Article 6(3) needs to be corrected to bring it in line with Amendment No 26, because the English translation is wrong.

In the middle of the second paragraph of the English version there is only a reference to representation in legal proceedings, but no reference to legal consultants, as there is in the German text.

That is a key point in this directive and since the Council working group is working on the basis of the English text it is quite crucial to correct this text.

I had already complained about this in committee vis à vis the language services.

At the time the committee decided not to table an amendment because the German text is the original version, as drafted by the rapporteur.

I complained about this yesterday - the situation was not remedied - and today is the third time I am complaining about it!

I do think the services of this House should work more carefully on such key questions and it really is intolerable that despite my criticism yesterday the Minutes have got the text wrong again!

I would ask you get to the bottom of this matter, to sort out this most important aspect of the directive and to please correct this in the English translation!

You gave ample clarification of the matter yesterday. We will certainly ensure that the necessary correction is made.

Mr President, yesterday we received a communication on yellow paper from the vice-president, with some nuts attached to it.

This note was about supporting the export of products from Vanuatu, a developing country in the Pacific.

I think that is a very good idea and quite right. And I am quite happy to support it.

But what rather puzzles me is that in it the vice-president quite explicitly stated that it is illegal to import these nuts into the European Union.

So I must ask this vice-president to explain how these nuts came to be illegally imported, since it was he who delivered them to us!

That in itself is a contradiction so would he please clarify the matter.

Ladies and gentlemen, I have the great pleasure of welcoming the members of the delegation from the Swiss Federal Assembly, led by their speaker, Mr Marcel Sandoz, now seated in the official gallery.

The members of the delegation have come to Strasbourg to meet their European Parliament peers on the occasion of the 19th EU-Switzerland Interparliamentary Conference.

The meetings commenced yesterday and will continue throughout today.

The agenda includes the bilateral agreements between the European Parliament and Switzerland, the future development of the Swiss integration policy, the likely results of the European Union Intergovernmental Conference and the enlargement process of the European Union.

On behalf of all the Members of the European Parliament, I hope that the meetings will be profitable for the delegation and I wish them a pleasant stay in this beautiful town of Strasbourg.

Committee on Petitions - European Ombudsman

The next item is the joint debate on the following reports, tabled on behalf of the Committee on Petitions:

(A5-0162/2000) by Mrs Lambert, on the deliberations of the Committee on Petitions during the parliamentary year 1999-2000;

(A5-0181/2000) by Mrs Thors, on the annual report on the activities of the European Ombudsman in 1999.

Mr President, I am glad to have the opportunity to address the European Parliament concerning the results of my work as European Ombudsman in the year 1999.

The Annual Report for 1999 covers the last year of the first mandate of the European Ombudsman.

Last year the Ombudsman's office received 1,577 new complaints compared to 1,372 in 1998, an increase of nearly 15%.

The number of inquiries opened rose from 171 in 1998 to 206 in 1999, an increase of over 20%.

As well as becoming better known, the European Ombudsman is also attracting a higher proportion of serious complaints which require full investigation.

You may be interested to know that the same trend has continued to the present year.

During the first six months of this year, the number of new inquiries rose by 32% over the same period in 1999.

Inquiries are the most resource-intensive aspect of the Ombudsman's work.

It is therefore a great challenge to deal with this increase, whilst maintaining the quality of our work and meeting our target of closing most inquiries within one year.

I do hope that the European Parliament will support the Ombudsman in seeking the resources needed to carry out the work effectively.

During 1999, we continued to receive a quite high proportion of complaints, over 70%, which lay outside the mandate of the European Ombudsman.

The proportion of the complaints outside the mandate even increased slightly, probably because we received a growing number of complaints by e-mail.

We gladly accept complaints by e-mail and many of them contain well - presented allegations of maladministration.

However in all, more of the e-mail complaints are directed against authorities of Member States.

During the campaign for the election of a European Ombudsman last year, some critical voices suggested that the Ombudsman's mandate should be broadened to include complaints against Member States in cases where a question of European Union law is involved.

I am not sure whether they understood that this would mean the European Ombudsman carrying out tasks currently belonging to the European Commission as the guardian of the Treaty, and to the European Parliament as the democratic forum to which citizens may address petitions.

We study carefully all the complaints we receive, especially if they involve rights under European Union law.

In 1999, we managed to advise the complainant, or transfer the complaint to a competent body, in about half of the cases.

Of these, we transferred 71 cases to the European Parliament to be dealt with as petitions and advised a further 142 complainants of their rights to petition the European Parliament.

In many cases, complaints against national, regional or local authorities could be dealt with effectively by an Ombudsman in the Member States concerned.

In every Member State there should be a non-judicial body which can assist European citizens in conflicts with Member States' administration concerning their rights under European Union law.

As a believer in subsidiarity, I remain convinced that the most effective way to achieve this result is through the development of a network of cooperation with these Ombudsmen as similar bodies such as petitions committees.

We organised jointly with the French Ombudsman, Mr Stasi, a seminar for national Ombudsmen and similar bodies.

In Paris in September 1999, Mr Perry, the first vice-chairman of the Committee on Petitions, represented the European Parliament.

A further seminar is planned to take place in Brussels under the Belgian presidency of the Council in the year 2001 in cooperation with the Commission and with Belgium federal and regional ombudsmen.

The regional Ombudsmen and similar bodies were invited to a meeting in Florence last year in which Mr Gemelli, the chairman of the Committee on Petitions, also attended.

The regional Ombudsmen and similar bodies will also be invited to Brussels next year.

The Ombudsmen and similar bodies in the Member States have shown a positive attitude towards cooperation with the European Ombudsman.

I strongly believe that cooperation with them on equal terms will achieve the best results for European citizens.

At the beginning, great doubts were expressed as to whether the European Ombudsman had sufficient powers to achieve anything for the citizen.

These doubts were unjustified because the Community's institutions and bodies have responded properly to the Ombudsman's work.

Since the beginning, they have themselves settled the complaint to the satisfaction of the complainant in over 180 cases.

For example, they have replied to unanswered letters, made payments that are due and reversed previous unfavourable decisions.

This indicates a spirit of responsiveness and flexibility superior to those national administrations of which I have experience.

Sixty-two of these settlements occurred last year, reducing the scope for friendly solutions to be proposed by the Ombudsman.

However, we did achieve one friendly solution in 1999 in a case where the Commission and the Council agreed that the complainant should be paid the amount due him for his work as a European Union regional coordinator monitoring the Palestinian elections.

If the institution or body concerned will not correct the maladministration itself, the Ombudsman's ultimate weapon is to draft a recommendation followed, if necessary, by a special report to European Parliament.

Five years ago, there were many people who said that the Community institutions and bodies did not pay much heed to European Parliament.

Even if they might have been right then, things have clearly changed since the Treaty of Amsterdam and the fall of the Santer Commission.

In 1999 we made ten draft recommendations.

In seven cases the institution concerned has accepted a draft recommendation.

In two cases the Ombudsman has made a special report to the European Parliament.

One case remains ongoing, since Europol needs more time to comply with the draft recommendation that it should approve some public access to documents.

I believe that the European Ombudsman's activities have reached the level that one has the right to expect of a body which is new and consists of 25 persons working in a fairly complex legal environment.

We are achieving results for European citizens, and this is what matters above all.

I would like to use this opportunity to thank all the Community institutions and bodies for another year of constructive cooperation.

I would especially like to address the Commission and its responsible Member, Mrs Loyola de Palacio, and thank her for continuing her predecessor's commitment to an honest and constructive attitude towards cooperation with the Ombudsman.

I would also like to express my warm appreciation for the helpful and cooperative attitude towards the Ombudsman's office shown by the Committee on Petitions and especially its vice-chairman, Mr Gemelli, and also thank the rapporteur for the Committee on Petitions Mrs Thors, for her important work on her comprehensive report.

Mr President, the report that I am presenting this morning is effectively a dual report which reflects the work of the committee itself and the work of the office of Parliament's Mediator for Transnationally Abducted Children, Mrs Banotti.

I should also like to express my personal appreciation of the work of Mr Söderman, the Ombudsman.

I should also like to thank the secretariat of the committee not least for the statistical break-down which is provided there which, I must confess, is not my own work.

I would urge Members who are not familiar with the Committee on Petitions to read these reports.

It might well be of use to them in providing a service for the people they represent.

I would also draw their attention to the website mentioned, set up under the Europe Direct initiative, which could provide useful information and possibly avoid the need for a petition or indeed confirm it as an appropriate vehicle.

There is a growing need for such information as people become more aware of the importance and relevance of the European Union level.

The aim of the Committee on Petitions itself is to provide a good and effective service for individuals within the European Union and for civil society generally.

Any individual, citizen, resident or group may petition Parliament if they feel that Community law or principles are not being properly applied at whatever level.

Last year we received 958 petitions of which 492 were considered admissible.

I will mention just two of them to demonstrate the range of the topics and the potential effectiveness of the mechanism.

We had one British petitioner who succeeded in getting her years of teaching experience recognised by the French authorities, presumably affecting her salary and promotion prospects.

In another case a petition from a Spanish citizen, acting for an environmental association resulted in infringement proceedings being brought against the Spanish authorities in relation to the Habitats Directive, a frequent cause of complaint - the directive, not the authorities - with lasting national effect.

It is such cases which provide valuable feedback to the European Parliament and the other institutions as to how our legislation works to the benefit of the individuals and society, or not, as the case may be.

We could not do our work effectively on this committee without the support of numerous Commission officials who investigate cases and instigate proceedings where necessary.

I wish to express our thanks.

We know we could provide a more rapid and effective service if Member States could provide an equally committed response in replying to requests for information and explanation.

In one case we are currently dealing with it has taken 14 months to get a reply to a letter. That is not unusual.

That is why we are recommending that the Council or relevant permanent representation should also be represented at our meetings so that they develop a greater understanding of the problems citizens face and respond effectively.

I would draw the Council's attention to points 8 and 10 of the report - if it was here.

The aim of the committee is to improve the overall quality of our feedback mechanisms.

Some of our ideas are mentioned in this report.

Others will appear in a further report in September from Mr Perry and Mrs Keßler.

We are proposing, as we did last year, a database mechanism so that petitioners and Members can track the progress of reports and see where the problems lie.

We trust that the relevant authorities will bear this in mind this year and act on the proposal.

There are various points concerning our relations with other committees.

We would ask them to call on the Committee on Petitions more often to express an opinion on certain areas where concern has arisen.

We would like to be involved in preparing joint reports on areas of particular concern such as the environment, social security, consumer protection and so on. We would also wish to use the experience of our committee members through their work on other committees of Parliament to institute a rapporteur-style system for specific topics.

We are also keen to establish links with petitions committees in other Member States, with a view to exchanging good ideas and understanding.

We consider as a committee that petitions are a valuable and empowering tool for democracy in what can often feel like a remote and anonymous institution.

We need to value this mechanism and use the experience of the people we represent, as expressed through their petitions to improve our work as a whole.

I commend the report to the House.

Mr President, Commissioner and Mr Söderman, the rapporteur' s and the committee' s understanding of the Ombudsman' s report for 1999 - the year characterised by crises within the EU institutions and by an immense distrust of the administration - is that the citizens will only view European integration as legitimate if they have rights that mean they can actively participate in a political dialogue with the institutions.

The political dialogue is not, however, a real dialogue if the citizens do not have the right to receive information and to have access to the documents that they ask for and if the opinions they express are not paid attention to, discussed or taken seriously.

What has all this got to do with the Ombudsman' s task?

The Ombudsman' s task is, of course, according to the Treaty, to investigate cases of maladministration within the Community institutions and within the public bodies.

At the request of the European Parliament, the Ombudsman gave a definition of the term "maladministration" in the annual report for 1997.

These cases occur when a public body fails to act in accordance with a rule or principle that is binding upon it.

During the Ombudsman' s last period of office, the institutions agreed to apply this definition, and it is now, and will be in the future, the basis for the Ombudsman' s activity.

In the report, the committee stresses that this jointly approved definition of "maladministration" also involves the right to inspect how the institutions have interpreted Community law.

Irrespective of the legal form the Charter of Fundamental Rights will take, it will, in any case, be an expression of the Member States' common constitutional traditions which, in accordance with Article 6 of the Treaty, shall be respected by the Union and therefore also by the institutions and public bodies.

The committee observes, therefore, that the Ombudsman ought to play an important part in implementing a future charter of citizens' rights.

The committee has also expressed its clear support for the fact that the Charter of Fundamental Rights ought to contain rules which give citizens the right to expect good administration within the EU.

"Good administration" is the opposite of "maladministration" .

The right to good administration, both with respect to the Charter of Fundamental Rights and the Code of Good Administrative Behaviour which Parliament and the Ombudsman have sought, should at least contain: the right to have one' s case heard, the right to inspect documents, the right to prompt answers from the administration and the right to receive replies supported by reasons.

All these aspects have been central to the Ombudsman' s work.

These rights are prerequisites for the active citizenship that is necessary if the EU is to regain the confidence of its citizens.

It is these rights that make citizenship active instead of passive.

Good administration can create conditions for active citizenship, whereas maladministration can undermine these conditions.

What are the most common complaints to the Ombudsman and into which categories do they fall?

Incomplete or refused information, delays that could have been avoided, discrimination, lack of the right to defence.

Citizens want to see good administration.

They want to be active citizens.

These conclusions can be drawn from the ever increasing number of complaints to the Ombudsman and from the nature of these complaints.

The Ombudsman has become renowned for his work for the wider public.

This is something he should receive a lot of praise for.

An investigation that he completed a few years ago resulted in most of the Community' s institutions and public bodies currently having legislation that allows the public to have access to documents.

He has tirelessly continued the work for real transparency and for its no longer being possible for data secrecy and personal protection to be used to prevent the public' s scrutiny of the activities of the authorities.

Step by step, the Ombudsman has developed his work, endeavoured to obtain better administration and gained the trust of the citizens.

His cooperation with the national ombudsmen is also important, as will be his future cooperation with the corresponding bodies in the candidate countries.

This is substantial work that Parliament has reason to support.

It ought to do this by making sufficient financial resources available to the Ombudsman so that he can carry out the necessary investigations which the mandate requires.

We should in the future also make sure that we support an Ombudsman who is independent in his decision making.

I would like to address a big thank you to the Ombudsman and his office, as well as to the secretariat at the Committee on Petitions which, as we know, is currently working under difficult conditions.

Mr President, the European Parliament' s Committee on Petitions is a very special body.

It receives complaints from citizens, as the two previous speakers rightly said, who believe their rights as EU citizens have been restricted.

As draftsman of an opinion on the right of residence, I would like to make a few comments on the specific problems in this area.

The free movement of persons is one of the basic freedoms achieved through European integration.

Since the Maastricht Treaty there is a general right of residence, provided the individual concerned has adequate means of subsistence and adequate health insurance protection.

Freedom of movement and right of residence can be restricted only for reasons of law and order, security or health.

Experience has shown the Committee on Petitions that in practice the right to freedom of movement comes up against a great many problems because: (a) Member State authorities are slow to transpose the rules of Community law, (b) problems arise with the recognition of diplomas and qualifications in the case of specific professions, (c) the rules on social security have not been standardised, e.g. complicated forms for the refund of medical costs.

An analysis of Treaty infringement proceedings between 1996 and 1999 shows that in 97 cases there was a direct link between the petition and the Treaty infringement proceedings before the European Court of Justice.

Unfortunately, the Council often ignores the communications from the Committee on Petitions about serious violations of Community law by Member State authorities. That reflects a negative attitude towards the European citizens' right of petition.

In future the Council should devote the necessary attention to the rights of EU citizens.

Mr President, the right to petition and to complain is not some recent invention.

Even 2000 years ago petitioners could put their concerns before the Roman emperor.

But this right was always in danger of being changed, restricted or abolished.

Yesterday' s petitioners have become today' s responsible European citizens.

No administration or institution is infallible.

Many petitions point to a discrepancy between the legal provisions and European integration.

So petitions are a gauge for the relations between the citizens and the legislator and there are many levels of petitions.

A population of hamsters in an industrial area is of just as much concern to us as the ban on silicon implants or the introduction of a heavy goods tax.

I turn now to the Ombudsman.

My group congratulates the Ombudsman on the work he accomplished in 1999.

It was, and is, to Mr Söderman' s credit that he has done so much to create greater transparency and openness within the European administrations.

Since most of the complaints in the Ombudsman' s remit relate to the European Commission and concern a lack of transparency, work needs to be done to improve this situation.

That includes access to documents, not only for the citizens of Europe but also for the Ombudsman.

New office technologies cannot be used as grounds for the lack of transparency either.

Comprehensible, substantiated replies to the citizens create trust, the opposite gives rise to distrust and a rising number of complaints that need to be dealt with, which therefore in turn creates costs.

The Ombudsman' s proposal for a Code of Good Administrative Behaviour is particularly welcome.

The citizens have a basic right to an open and responsible administration geared to providing services, since after all it is paid for out of their taxes.

In my view it is most important for the European Ombudsman to play an independent role, which can serve as an example for the introduction of national ombudsmen in the candidate countries and in my Land of Thüringen.

Mr President, Mr Söderman, we in the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party, and myself personally, are proud that our Ombudsman is courageous, enterprising and able to act.

It is extremely important that we have someone with such integrity who has dared to stand up for openness and transparency and against the culture of underhandedness, secrecy and, unfortunately in certain cases, of cheating and corruption, which also exists in the European institutions.

Only an open and public administration can win support among those who are working here amongst the politicians and among the citizens whom we represent.

The line the Ombudsman is pursuing has a lot of support amongst the citizens of all Member States.

It is an indisputable fact, and there are several international scientific reports to prove it, that there is a crystal-clear connection between a high level of openness and transparency in the administration and a low level of corruption.

The opposite is also true: a closed and secretive administration tends to foster a higher level of corruption.

That is, of course, also true in the European institutions.

That is why it is so important for us to have a completely independent ombudsman who can act independently and without being subject to any lobbying whatsoever or to interested parties attempting to influence him.

The increasing proportion of complaints coming from citizens also points to the need for our Ombudsman, who really acts in the interests of the citizens.

The only criticism that can be directed at the Ombudsman is probably that, unfortunately, the institution is still far too little known in many Member States and that far too few citizens are aware of this right.

This is probably something which I would like to see concentrated on in the future.

To summarise, the Ombudsman fulfils a very important function.

I would like to congratulate him on the work he has carried out during the year and wish him luck in the future.

Mr President, Commissioner, Mr Söderman, it may be well to remember that just a year and a half ago there was a debate in this Chamber over whether we needed a Committee on Petitions in general.

I am very pleased to be able to say that the Committee on Petitions has again shown its indispensability, especially at a time like this, when we wish to enhance the status of the ordinary citizen in the European Union.

I genuinely hope that the Commission on Petitions succeeds in establishing good levels of co-operation with the other committees in the coming year.

I believe that we will be able to draft joint reports on the most important problem areas.

With regard to the Ombudsman, he has truly established his position and independence.

The growing number of grievances is an indication that the public have found him, and we members of the European Parliament have often been able to guide people in his direction to have their problems solved.

Public access to documents is an issue that will occupy us in the future, and we have already had some valuable advice on the matter from the Ombudsman.

Mr President, in one minute one cannot say much, so I am going to take this opportunity to summarise.

Firstly, I wish to thank the rapporteur, Mrs Lambert, for taking up all our proposals in the debate.

There are therefore not even any amendments.

Secondly, I wish to say that at this stage nobody doubts that the Committee on Petitions and the Ombudsman make an extremely important contribution to compliance with Community law.

We see this every day in the Committee on Petitions.

Like Mrs Hautala, I am therefore very happy that the Committee on Petitions has survived the attempts to remove it, since, as well as demanding compliance with Community law, it is the committee which is closest to the citizens.

It is the committee which makes the institutions most visible to the citizens.

The greatest problem is probably the long procedure which follows a complaint by a citizen.

The citizen has to study Community law in order to present a petition, and then any response is delayed month after month.

The most important petitions deal with social and environmental issues, which are the matters of most concern.

On some occasions, Mr President - and I will end here - when a complaint involves the eviction of a citizen or the destruction of a natural area, the response arrives when it is too late to deal with the matter.

The speeding up of the process is therefore an important issue which has been taken up by Mrs Lambert.

Mr President, the Radical Members of the Bonino List will support the two reports, and they value and support the work of the Ombudsman.

However, we would like to ask the Ombudsman a very specific question regarding the fact that it is still not possible for complaints to be signed electronically.

In our opinion, this issue is relevant to all the institutions, having a bearing on Parliament's own work as well. However, in particular, precisely because the Ombudsman wishes there to be as much focus as possible on his work, we feel that the possibility for the Ombudsman to attach an electronic signature could be the first step towards introducing the use of this vehicle within the institutions.

I would just like to comment on an important statement which has not received due attention.

Seventy-seven per cent of complaints received concern the Commission.

The Ombudsman has told us that the Commission has made no progress this year in the area of transparency. Transparency is an effective weapon against fraud and corruption.

In particular, on 7 December last, President Prodi undertook to find and propose legal and organisational solutions to give both internal and external candidates to Commission competitions access to their examination papers.

Would the Ombudsman please inform us, in the same way that he has informed us that Europol needs more time to comply with the recommendation, whether the commitment made by President Prodi on 7 December to making papers available by 1 July 2000 has already been implemented or not.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I gather from the Ombudsman' s Annual Report that, as we have now heard, the main complaint of the citizens is about lack of transparency.

But it appears that not everyone concerned is aware of this problem.

The Commission has submitted a proposal for a regulation on public access to documents which you, Mr Söderman, rightly criticised in public as not going far enough.

Indeed there has been quite a lot written on the subject.

The spirit underlying this proposal can be gauged from the statement by the Advisory Committee of Independent Experts.

According to the experts' second report, like all political institutions the Commission needs room to consider, to formulate policy before it becomes public, because policy that is made directly before the public eye is often bad policy.

As a representative of the European public, I find this approach to questions of transparency and of policy-making in general unacceptable.

So I firmly support Mr Södermann' s justified criticism!

Mr President, I would like to add my congratulations and thanks to the Ombudsman for the report which he has presented this year and also to Mrs Thors and Mrs Lambert for their reports to the Parliament.

All these reports, particularly that of the Ombudsman, show the very reliable, dependable work that has been done over the year.

The European citizens undoubtedly need somebody to whom they can turn if they have problems with the administration and in Mr Söderman I know that we have an Ombudsman upon whom we can depend.

I saw that at first hand when I attended the seminar in Paris.

It was very good to see the respect in which the European Ombudsman is held by his colleagues, the national ombudsmen.

On this side of the House we certainly believe the Ombudsman should have all the powers that he needs to discharge his responsibilities.

On access to documents, we happen to think that the views of the Constitutional Affairs Committee are important, but that should not be taken to mean that we have any doubts at all about the principle that the Ombudsman must have access to documents.

In that he has our full support.

It is surprising that last year the Petitions Committee was at some risk and the report by Mrs Lambert shows the very good work that has been down by the Petitions Committee.

With our chairman Mr Gemelli we are now looking at ways of making the Petitions Committee more effective and more efficient in the work it does on behalf of citizens.

One of the important things that we will be bringing forward to the Parliament is a Code of Good Administrative Behaviour.

It is important that citizens and the officials of the institutions know what is reasonable behaviour so that all have a standard to which they can refer.

I would also like to thank the Commission for the support we have received in the Petitions Committee.

That has been very good and very effective through the year. I hope under the French Presidency we will get the same support from the Council but that unfortunately has been lacking in the past.

Mr President, I should like to start by congratulating the two rapporteurs on their interesting comments.

With its ever widening circle of activities, covering a broad range of citizens' interests, the European Union is turning into a modern Leviathan, complete with the inevitable high-handedness which accompanies every administrative mechanism; from certain points of view, it is becoming even more dangerous than the equivalent national government services.

That is because control mechanisms have not kept pace with the increase in activities.

There are three ways of blocking the dangers which result from this extensive administrative mechanism in the European Union.

The first is to have more direct and more frequent involvement by European Parliament in controlling the individual activities of the institutions of the European Union.

The proposal by the rapporteur, Mrs Thors, that the Commission include a section on reports and complaints in the annual report on Community law and the proposed organisational agreement making it easier for complaints to be examined quickly need to be followed up here.

If the tenet of these proposals is extrapolated, the suggestion is that the European Parliament should, in the future, devote more time to these matters, which are equally important if it is to enhance its status and its right to aspire to codecision with the Council.

In more general terms, it is time to see parliamentary control exercised on a different footing.

The second way is to introduce the European Charter of Fundamental Rights as a binding charter guaranteeing European citizens immediate rights, both adjectival and substantive, which protect their interests fairly and which convert to the right to compensation in the event that their interests are attacked.

The increasingly likely prospect of a Charter which amounts to no more than a declaration will obviously damage the credibility of the European Union which, while abundantly eloquent on the importance of transparency in the operation of its institutions as a basic policy objective and accessibility to European citizens as a basic factor in achieving it, shies from recognising the rudimentary mechanism needed in order to achieve these objectives.

The third way is to strengthen and improve the role of the ombudsman, mainly by giving him easier access to all the documents needed in order to conduct an efficient investigation.

At the same time, the wealth of material in his report should be closely studied and taken as the starting point for the changes which need to be made to the modus operandi of the Community institutions.

I wish the ombudsman courage and good luck for the future.

Mr President, I would like to start by thanking the European Ombudsman, Mr Söderman, the two rapporteurs, Mrs Lambert and Mrs Thors, all the members of the Committee on Petitions and the Secretariat.

We started from the premise that the purpose of the institutions is to serve the citizens and that, therefore, any breach of the citizens' rights will lead to a loss of confidence in the institutions.

We are currently required to create a complex, comprehensive, harmonious, functional legal framework, and we must therefore also create judicial mechanisms such as the Charter on Rights, a body of law establishing criminal, civil and administrative law, the agreement procedures for the mutual recognition of judgments passed by Member States, Europol and the sectoral agreements, the establishment of the European Fraud Investigation Office as a tool for investigating abuse of the law, the likely institution of the office of European Public Prosecutor which should be the investigating office of the Court of Justice, the separation of the careers of judges responsible for giving rulings and investigating magistrates, and the separation of criminal, civil and administrative responsibilities: all these are instruments which advance the progress of the European Union.

Yesterday's framework agreement is a milestone in this sense.

Finally, we would like to request that, in a similar way to Parliament in the codecision procedure, the Committee on Petitions may be permitted to present its own justification for certain decisions, and we call for amendment of the Treaties in order to streamline the entire legal system and existing legislation.

Mr President, Mr Söderman, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I would like to thank the rapporteurs for their hard, thorough and excellent work.

The Ombudsman controls power and solves disputes between those who hold power and those over whom power is exercised, and last year there were almost two thousand such cases.

I would like to state seven principles.

The bigger a union is, the greater the need for transparency.

The newer it is the greater this need is, and the more complex it is, the greater the need for better transparency.

The more oriented it is towards the information society, the more open it has to be, and the more civilised it is the more public it must be.

The more multi-cultural it is the greater the transparency, and the more democratic it is the more open it likewise is.

We are used to reading instructions for use with all equipment, down to how to use the whisk in the kitchen.

The principles of good administration, which have been worthily established by the Ombudsman, are our citizens' instructions for use with regard to Eurobureaucracy.

And, goodness me, these instructions certainly are necessary!

There is no democracy without good administration, and that is why the Union Charter must contain the principles of good administration.

I would like to make one more important point. Public access to documents in the information society and the principles concerning them must be upgraded in line with the new technology; in other words, a grievance must be able to be made over the Internet and precedents and associated documents must be available in real time.

My suggestion is that we need an Ombudsman' s portal on the Net.

Mr President, as a member of the Committee on Petitions, I would particularly like to congratulate my fellow Member, Mrs Lambert, on her excellent report and I thank the European Commission for its valuable assistance in handling the petitions we receive.

Petitions are a recognised right of European citizens and residents of the European Union, enabling them to take advantage of the rights given to them by the Treaties.

Few citizens, however, are aware that they may submit a petition.

The files that we handle, moreover, show a lack of understanding of the rights conferred by European citizenship.

This, unfortunately, results in 50% of petitions being inadmissible.

Admissible petitions usually raise problems with freedom of movement, setting up businesses, social benefits, recognition of diplomas and qualifications and taxation.

Furthermore, we are receiving more and more collective petitions concerning subjects relating to the environment, and with the extension of the competence of the European Union, it is conceivable that the number of such petitions and the number of areas handled will increase.

In order to respond to citizens' expectations, adequate coordination between the Committee on Petitions, the European institutions and national authorities is essential.

Greater account must also be taken by the other parliamentary committees of the work carried out by our committee.

The chronic absence of the Council from our committee meetings is detrimental to the correct handling of petitions.

Indeed, the national authorities are the first to apply Community law and it is indispensable for them to work in coordination with the European institutions, and in particular Parliament and the Commission.

We are currently waiting too long for responses from the national authorities, sometimes even several years.

We are fully aware of the extent of this task and the difficulties to be overcome.

First of all, it cannot be denied that this committee is not very well known, although its work is indispensable in strengthening the link between citizens and the European Union.

Furthermore, the structures and means of this committee must be strengthened in order to make it more effective, and a closer relationship with the petitions committees of the national authorities would be desirable.

Finally, one of the strong points of the French Presidency' s programme is a Europe that is closer to the citizens.

The work of our committee falls within this sphere and it is up to us to make this expectation a reality.

Mr President, I want to welcome Mr Söderman this morning and to congratulate Mrs Lambert and Mrs Thors for their reports.

The reality of our society is that if governments and administrations had their way they would never appoint Petitions Committees or Ombudsmen.

By nature they tend to be secretive.

They are only there because the citizens and their public representatives demand them and defend them when they are there.

Therefore, it is important that we continue to demand that the Ombudsman's office and the Petitions Committee of Parliament are adequately resourced.

One way of choking off the effectiveness of the Ombudsman's office and the Petitions Committee is to deny them adequate resources.

In Parliament it is disgraceful that the Petitions Committee, the single most important direct contact that the citizen has with this institution and with the other institutions of the European Union, is treated the way it is treated.

It does not have adequate secretarial assistance. It is treated abominably in relation to translations, which are down at the bottom of the list.

It is simply not good enough.

I would appeal to the Commission and to the Council if they were here - they ignore the Petitions Committee, as well as ignoring Parliament - to give the resources that are necessary for these bodies to do their job.

The Petitions Committee in particular is an important mechanism of access for the people of Europe.

It is important that we ensure that it can do its work effectively.

The two most important issues that come before the Petitions Committee are the recognition of people's qualifications to work in other Member States and the environmental impact of construction development.

In particular, people are concerned that environment impact studies, which are required under EU law, are treated as having no more worth than the paper they are written on.

They are either ignored or they do not address the real issues.

Mr President, I would personally like to congratulate Jacob Söderman on the good work he has done, which resulted in his re-election on 27 October last year.

At the same time, I would like to praise the Ombudsman for a model annual report which is easy-to-read and, at the same time, comprehensive.

It can be seen from the report that it is the Commission that is the subject of the majority of the investigations that have been undertaken, 77 percent to be precise.

It should certainly be emphasised that this is mainly due to the fact that the Commission is the institution that makes the most decisions directly affecting citizens.

In the report on individual complaints, it emerges, however, that there is insufficient transparency.

Insufficient and inadequate information was also the most common cause of complaint.

Openness is important if citizens are to be able to have more opportunity to influence how the EU operates and if tendencies to corruption, cheating and fraud are to be checked.

I would like to highlight the fact that this report emphasises that all EU institutions and bodies must establish a Code of Good Administrative Behaviour.

There is a risk, however, which is also evident from the Ombudsman' s annual report, that the significance of such a code would vary considerably from one institution or body to another.

The PR side of the Ombudsman' s activities has already been brought up by other speakers and can never be underestimated.

I would like to close with some questions: What would be the consequences of a Charter of Fundamental Rights for the Ombudsman' s work?

Are there sufficient resources for the work to be carried out well?

What are the main reasons for the institutions' shortcomings in relation to the citizens?

Is there a lack of will, are the resources insufficient or is there unreasonable bureaucracy which is preventing and delaying the handling of this issue?

Mr President, on the basis of the Ombudsman' s report and that of Mrs Thors, we may say that the institution of the Ombudsman is well established.

The Committee acknowledges the work done by Jacob Söderman, and the public too have discovered the Ombudsman.

The basic pillars of the work of the Ombudsman are independence and transparency.

It is just as pertinent to emphasise the importance of good administration for the public and for the authority of the EU in the eyes of our citizens.

It is good that the committee supports the Ombudsman in his efforts to create regulations for good administration.

The principle of good administration must also be included in the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights which is being drafted.

From the report it appears that only around 30% of the complaints to the Ombudsman fall within his sphere of responsibility.

For that reason there has to be closer cooperation between the Ombudsman and national and regional ombudsmen.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, it is a pleasure for me to participate in this debate today, together with Mr Söderman, the Ombudsman, whose work in the service of the citizens of the Union is very important. The Commission takes a very positive view of this work.

I wish to say that the Commission believes that the citizen should always be the focus of our concerns.

The citizen is ultimately the beneficiary of our activities and is our raison d' être.

In this respect, both the Committee on Petitions and the Ombudsman play a key role, on different levels and with different purposes, but they are both nevertheless essential to the improvement of the operation of the institutions.

The Committee on Petitions deals with the specific concerns of the citizens and, in this respect, as has been pointed out by Mrs Lambert - who I warmly congratulate on her report - the petitions presented to Parliament illustrate the problems of the citizens in relation to European administrations and also, in many cases, national administrations, at the same time highlighting the legislative vacuums which exist on both European and national levels.

The Ombudsman, as indicated by Mrs Thors - whom I also warmly congratulate on her report - deals with complaints against institutions and bodies of the European Union with regard to the deficiencies of its administrations.

He urges us to improve the management and quality of services by indicating the weak points to us, the points which need improvement and greater attention.

However, nobody wants a more effective and transparent administration as much as we do. It is we who are responsible for this administration and to this end any criticisms of our defects are welcome.

We can only confront our defects if we know what they are.

I must insist that this is why we give such importance to the work of both the Ombudsman and the Committee on Petitions; so that the institutions may work properly.

With regard to Mrs Lambert' s report, I would like to deal with two specific issues.

One of them, relating to cooperation between institutions, is essential to the improvement of the operation of the Committee on Petitions and its capacity for action.

In this regard, I would like to express my satisfaction because the report highlights the constructive role of the Commission in the examination of petitions and because it considers it to be satisfactory on the whole.

It awards us a sort of 'pass' , and I thank you, but we will try to improve.

We see this is as a stimulus to make a greater effort, to work better and cooperate more.

Secondly, it proposes a review of the examination procedures of the Committee on Petitions.

It seems to me a great idea to rearrange the examination of petitions by themes, to give specialised rapporteurs the task of examining these petitions with greater care, and, where necessary, to draw conclusions which will allow the deficiencies to be corrected, take decisions to resolve possible vacuums in legislative texts, or counteract the unwanted effects of these texts.

Furthermore, the Commission is prepared to consider a review of the interinstitutional agreement on the processing of petitions which would amend the one currently in force, from 1989, with Parliament and the Council, especially with regard to something that seems to me to be essential, which has been pointed out by some of the speakers, that is, the problem of the periods prescribed for reply.

It is true that we sometimes take a long time to reply.

It is not always the Commission' s fault. There are times when we are relying on responses from national administrations, but it is true that in this respect we have to make an effort to improve and make an even more satisfactory contribution to the work of this committee.

I would like to highlight the importance of cooperation with other administrations. We wish to improve this cooperation as far as possible.

The Commission is open to dialogue, both with Parliament, and with the Council itself, in order to reduce the time taken to produce replies and increase transparency and communication with Parliament and the Committee on Petitions.

With regard to the Thors report, I wish to say that we agree with the need to consolidate the independence of the Ombudsman as an institution and support his work towards transparency and openness.

Clearly, we consider that the principle which motivates decisions affecting the citizens is essential and we try to apply it in a systematic way.

We also accept the definition of maladministration as being when a public body does not act in accordance with a rule or principle which is binding upon it.

Nevertheless, I wish to say that, as Mr Söderman has pointed out very well, the Ombudsman is a non-judicial body, and in that sense, it can in no way substitute judicial bodies.

Its tasks are different from those of law courts.

I believe that it is very important, in the relations between the Commission, the Ombudsman and other institutions and bodies, to systematically respect the institutional balance laid down in the Treaties.

It is true that the increasing reality of the institution of the Ombudsman, which in some ways is a younger institution than some of the other European institutions, requires some time to mature so that the citizens may become aware of it.

The Ombudsman, in his report, has indicated that the number of complaints, investigations and inquiries over the last year have increased considerably, and this is simply the result of greater awareness of the institution on the part of the citizens.

We also need time for the relations between the Ombudsman and the other institutions to mature in order to establish the desired balances and resolve the obvious tensions which may occur until things are working properly.

However, I must say that, so far, the cooperation between the Commission and the institution of the Ombudsman, represented, of course, by Mr Söderman, has been wonderful.

I would like very briefly to point out that these institutions are important because any action by an administration may at some time display a lack of transparency, a lack of efficiency, a violation of basic rights or even corruption.

However, I wish to say that in no way can we portray the Community administration as particularly laden with defects.

If we compare it with other administrations, I believe that it compares very favourably and that we score highly in these areas.

Ladies and gentlemen, finally, I would like once again to congratulate the Ombudsman, Mr Söderman, on the work which he is doing, on the significant increase in his actions and his work, on his cooperation, although he sometimes makes criticisms, but that is his job and his role, and we in the Commission understand that.

The drawing up of a code of conduct applicable to the relations between Community officials and the citizens is a priority, and work is being done in that area by Mr Kinnock and the Commission in general.

With regard to the amendments of the Statute of the Ombudsman, the competent parliamentary committee must issue an opinion in accordance with Article 195 of the Treaty, and when Parliament takes the initiative, we will analyse all the relevant issues.

I would like once again to congratulate the two rapporteurs, and of course congratulate and thank Mr Söderman for the magnificent work which he is carrying out with independence and rigour.

The vote will take place today at 12 noon.

The next item is the report (A5-0141/2000) by Mr Atkins, on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism, on the Commission communication to the Council and the European Parliament on the creation of the single European sky [COM(1999) 614 - C5-0085/2000 - 2000/2053(COS)].

Mr President, we meet at a time when congestion in our skies has never been greater.

According to the statistics, the incidence of a 15-minute delay has risen from 12.7% in 1991 to 30.3% in 1999 and is still rising.

We are worried not only about the effects that congestion has in terms of inconvenience and the implications for the economic stability of our Union, but we are also concerned first and foremost about threats to safety that may result from it.

It is a fact that there is a shortage of air traffic controllers.

It is a fact that there has been a lack of investment in air traffic control systems.

The demand for air transport is rising almost daily because of cheap fares, the desire of people to travel abroad on holiday and on business or even to be able to take a few days' break at the drop of a hat has added to this pressure.

Whilst this pressure has been growing, we owe it to those working in the system to congratulate them and thank them for what they have done.

Unfortunately - and this is not entirely their fault - they are not coping with the pressures as well as we would wish: we have all had experience of that only recently, as a result of the delays caused by the strike in France.

All this, then, has a detrimental effect upon the mobility of our citizens, and in terms of the economic and financial and social costs for our businesses and a wide variety of other people affected on a day-to-day basis by what is going on.

I would like to congratulate Commissioner Palacio for having the initiative to bring this to our committee in the terms that she did, and with the force and verve that she has shown, initially, in setting up the high level group, and also in the leadership that she has given to addressing this problem.

What has been produced by the Commission is a major contribution to dealing with the saturation of airspace.

The Council of Transport Ministers needs to take a political decision to address this.

We cannot put it off any longer.

We need a single sky over a single market but at the same time we have to recognise that individual nation states have views about how these matters should be addressed, particularly insofar as they affect the livelihoods of the workforce and also the use of national airspace for military purposes.

Military airspace and its abuse in some countries is something that we also have to address not just in terms of the space that is taken up by military aircraft, but also on occasions the abuse of the civil air corridors by military aircraft not abiding by civil air procedures.

This too is an area which need to be addressed.

In this report I have proposed - and the committee has broadly accepted - a suggestion that Eurocontrol should be a regulatory body with more powers, more effective sanctions and with the right of appeal for those who are affected by it.

By the same token, we think that the provision of air traffic services should be open to liberalisation, subject to what each individual country decides is appropriate for itself.

As Members may well know, in the United Kingdom we have addressed the subject by introducing a principle of privatisation.

That may be right for us. It may be wrong for others.

It is up to individual nation states to decide, but they must decide to address this problem of the division between regulation of their airspace on the one hand and the air service management provision that could be offered by others or other organisations.

We do believe that there should be objective and independent criteria on how the system is managed, with incentives offered for the achievers and penalties offered for those who do not meet the desired levels.

We think that passengers should be compensated for unjust delays and that their rights in these cases should be clear and well known.

But above all we wish Commissioner Palacio, with our support, to press the Council of Ministers and all those associated with this to take urgent decisions.

If there is one across-the-board criticism of the report from the industry, it is that perhaps it does not go far or fast enough.

We must address this issue now.

Mr President, I would like, if I may, to deliver very briefly a few comments on this report.

It seems obvious that we need to completely rethink the organisation of air traffic control in the European sky.

In this respect, the Commission' s initiative is commendable.

A re-think is one thing, it is also obvious that everything must be carefully reviewed, but I think we should beware of a certain number of preconceived ideas found in reports, communications and speeches on this topic.

It also seems obvious that the political division of the European sky no longer corresponds to the technical requirements and market requirements.

I was extremely surprised to learn that in today' s Europe, political boundaries still prevail when it comes to the organisation of air traffic control.

A European air traffic control space must be created, but must this area be completely unified, and according to which criteria?

I have many doubts as to the conclusions of the report.

It seems obvious to me that there are a number of advantages to dividing up air traffic control, as air traffic control involves segmenting the territory and technical security limits, but also human limitations mean that each air traffic controller, each control tower can only have a limited territory and a limited number of flights to monitor.

In this respect, the cellular, segmented organisation of the European territory must be retained and, in a way, improved.

I am therefore in favour of an increase in the number of air traffic control centres as, not the unification of the whole control system, but the unification of the legal system and also technological unification takes place, as this report, and the research behind the report, have highlighted the absence of European will...

(The President cut the speaker off)

Mr President, Madam Vice-President, ladies and gentlemen, first I want to give very warm thanks to my colleague Robert Atkins for drafting such an excellent report.

He took great trouble not just to comment on the Commission' s proposals but also to outline them.

I regard the broad line of separating the regulatory from the operational function as the right one.

Indeed in paragraphs 4 and 5 we note again that our Parliament has now decided on two occasions that the regulatory function is to be transferred to the European Union.

That brings me back to the last speaker.

Of course we have to distinguish between possibly having several or many service providers in the operational field, but the regulatory function must remain with, or more to the point go to the European Union.

Nor is that in any way a problem.

Today we have 15 Member States in the European Union, and 12 more have applied to join.

If we start to proceed according to the EEA system even at this point - defining the common rules and then asking the candidate states their opinion - we can integrate them.

That is why I also think it is a good idea in the present situation for the European Commission to pool Member States' interests in regard to the regulatory function in the framework of Eurocontrol.

We do not need multilingualism, we need unanimity on the question of the regulatory function.

I really would strongly urge the Commissioner to refer the proposals Parliament will be deciding on today back to the High Level Group and to continue ensuring that this working group produces very sound practical results.

We have great respect for the vice-president, for she set up this group of military and civilian experts and the work is progressing well.

There may still be some resistance in individual countries.

We wish the vice-president much luck and success, so that come October we can submit an excellent programme.

Mr President, can I first of all, on behalf of the Party of European Socialists, welcome the Commissioner's initiative.

We share her objectives, we support her aims.

However, we do perhaps regret the lack of integration with other initiatives that she is pursuing, which is apparent if one reads her communication.

We also note the lack of political will that exists within both the Commission and the Council, although it is worth perhaps reminding ourselves that this initiative started with the Council in June last year when it requested the Commissioner to bring forward this communication.

Indeed in March of this year, the Council in Lisbon sought further progress, progress which I am sure we would all endorse.

The Party of European Socialists also supports and indeed welcomes the rapporteur's carefully judged position.

It is subsidiarity in action: European where necessary, national where possible.

I would like to thank him personally for taking on board many of our concerns, not least in the area of safety, which I acknowledge is now the number one priority for him in his report.

The key concerns of the PSE include a regret at the lack of analysis of the real cause of air traffic delays.

Airports' runway capacity, airline planning, passenger behaviour, airport infrastructure, as well as the shortage of controllers which was mentioned by the rapporteurs.

A second concern of ours is this key principle, which we support and which needs to be developed further, namely the separation of regulation from service providers.

That has to be a key building block of our new approach.

Eurocontrol too must be reformed and revamped and relaunched.

The third principle we support is liberalisation but not privatisation; and fourth and finally we want to see these proposals developed in conjunction with the proposed European Aviation Safety Authority.

Indeed, above all, safety first should be our guiding rule, and I am sure it will be our guiding principle in the months to come.

Between 1986 and 1996 air traffic in Europe doubled.

It will double again in the coming ten years.

We need to tackle this issue urgently and swiftly but in a coherent way.

What we want to hear perhaps from the Commissioner today is a clear timetable from her as to the speed at which she will be acting in the months to come.

We all know there will be people waiting in airport lounges this summer asking, why their plane is delayed, not for minutes but for hours.

Hopefully the Commissioner today can bring forward a timetable for when those delays will cease.

I look forward to her comments, particularly bringing this Parliament up to date on the conclusions last week of the Council which received the interim report of the high level group.

I urge colleagues to back the rapporteur's proposal and I urge the Commissioner to bring forward a very clear timetable.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, Sir Robert Atkins has, in my view, compiled a sound report.

He clearly indicated the direction we need to take, because we find ourselves in an absurd situation where we have a unified market for aviation but over and above that, we have an airspace, which has been divided up in an illogical manner.

A number of MEPs have already described the effects of that.

It is obvious that, if we want a single sky, we need to make investments, as the report clearly states.

Thousands of people need to be recruited and investments made in technical infrastructure.

As such, it is clear that money has to be earmarked for this.

It also means, and I believe that this aspect is more complex, that political decisions need to be taken very quickly.

And in reality, these can only go in one direction.

We need to tackle the issue at European level.

We are all agreed that Member States need to finally decide for themselves what they want do.

National airline services also need to realise that their time is up, that we need to lift services to European level rather than national, as this is the root of the evil, if I can put it that way.

Needless to say, services need to come first, because air-traffic control does not exist in isolation. It is a service to airline companies and its customers.

People sometimes overlook this aspect and only focus on their own patch.

If we talk about services within a unified market, this means, of course, that monopolies are then a thing of the past, that we need clear European legislation and that we must move away from monopolies in the service industry. We are all agreed on this, and I therefore hope that we can make good progress.

An important point, as Mr Watts has already pointed out, is safety. Nobody should compromise on safety.

As such, Commissioner, what matters more than anything is that once the high-level group has published its findings in October, we need to receive proposals from yourself as quickly as possible.

I do not think that this will cause any problems for you. Then, everyone will need to put pressure on the Council of Ministers, Member States will need to take decisions that need to be taken and take the course which we have indicated a few times in the European Parliament and which is once again highlighted in Sir Robert Atkins' report.

Mr President, the report deals with the problem of increasing air traffic.

I want to focus on just one aspect of this report or, more specifically, on a major omission from it.

A number of proposals are put forward but for me the problem with this report is its main thesis that congestion can just be solved with the liberalisation of the air traffic management and control system.

What the options are doing is focusing on technical fixes, not the underlying trends.

Certainly a single European sky would increase the efficiency with which European air space is used.

Improvements in air traffic management would make more space available.

Restricting the use of military air space would also make a significant difference. But none of these technical fixes are going to make a long-term impact unless we address the underlying problem, which is the unsustainable growth of air traffic.

By failing to link the issue of congestion with air traffic reduction the report misses out on a vital strategy.

It can be compared to rearranging buckets under the tap to stop a flood without considering the possibility of at least turning down the tap a little to reduce the flow of water.

The Commission's recent report has already said the growth of the aviation sector is unsustainable and must be reversed and that growth is forecast to double in the next 15 years.

That causes major congestion problems but it also causes major environmental problems as well - not only the noise and pollution for people living around the airports but also the impact on global climate.

Air transport is already the world's fastest growing source of greenhouse gas emissions and could account for up to 15% by the year 2050.

Unfortunately this report fails to make the vital link between congestion and air traffic reduction and therefore misses a vital opportunity to address these problems in a lasting manner.

Mr President, Commissioner, I think there is some ambiguity regarding the expression "single European sky" , because air traffic control is in fact, as you are well aware, already a European field of activity.

There is already a European system for controlling the air space with Eurocontrol and there is already a body, the Central Flow Management Unit, based in Brussels.

This is not perfect, of course, but they do already exist.

The situation must therefore be improved starting with the statement, which is patently obvious, that delays have increased and that with traffic on the rise, they will become worse.

It is recognised that there are many causes of delays but, in the end, I find that we are facing an offensive presenting air traffic control as the only reason for delays.

I believe it would be sensible also to concentrate far more on the problems of types of plane, types of flow, stopovers and of course the continuing defence-related problems.

I feel as if we are involved in a headlong pursuit to implement solutions that seem obvious, but that do not take account of the specificity of air traffic control.

Mr Zimeray said this earlier: yes, a plane journey is divided into different areas and the denser the traffic, the more divisions there are.

Because dividing things into different areas is the human way of controlling or managing a number of aircraft.

Therefore, in my opinion, thinking that there would be too many control centres is nonsense.

Why not say in that case that there are too many aircraft?

In addition, as far as I know, there are no specific air traffic control hold-ups at borders either.

The great proposal that is put to us for improving traffic consists of separating regulatory and control functions.

But what is the value of such a measure?

It may well be necessary to consider more relevant divisions, why not?

But that is not what is being proposed.

The separation of functions would lead to the liberalisation of air traffic service provision, establishing, as indeed the Atkins report states, a liberalised internal market.

Air traffic control is not an airline, nor is it a market sector.

Let it not be forgotten that its main function is to ensure safety.

I believe, however, that it is contrary to the interests of safety to subject aircraft control and monitoring bodies to market pressure.

The ability to invest in new technological tools and training must therefore be safeguarded.

In France - and I am not trying to make France a model - there is a general directorate that governs everything and, in the past few years, investments have been made and air traffic controllers have been recruited.

On what grounds would you want to break...

(The President cut the speaker off)

Mr President, this report takes as its starting point an observation which is familiar to all Members of the European Parliament, as frequent users of aircraft as a means of transport: the skies are becoming more and more congested as a result of the growing demand for this form of transport.

This surfeit of aircraft inevitably goes hand in hand with delays in air traffic, causing frustration for passengers, for companies, for business and for tourism.

We share the rapporteur' s opinion that air transport must be seen as a coherent system of operators, airports and air traffic control services, the component parts of which are directly interlinked and that only a study of this system as a whole will solve the problems of airspace capacity.

We therefore welcome the creation of the High Level Working Group, comprising both civilian and military representatives and chaired by Commissioner de Palacio, who has committed herself to studying the issue of flight delays with a view to minimising the problems they cause. She will in due course be submitting a report on this issue to the Council.

Our hope is that this final report will focus on drawing up viable proposals and practical, realistic and effective solutions to the problem of air traffic delays in Europe. We also hope that this report will abandon controversial suggestions that contribute very little to achieving this, such as advocating unrestricted competition between providers of air traffic management services.

We fail to see the connection between this so-called liberalisation and the issue of delays, which must be resolved as a matter of urgency.

Furthermore, any proposed solutions must respect the national sovereignty of the Member States and restrict the centralisation of regulatory action to absolutely essential matters. Any proposed solutions must also safeguard the particular requirements of defence and the specific military needs of each country and honour the commitments that all countries have made in the framework of international organisations.

This does not mean that those countries are not obliged to make air traffic in high air space as flexible as possible and to seek more efficient ways of linking this with military operational needs.

The European air management programme, whose purpose is to achieve complete coordination and integration of ATM systems at European level, must also continue to be expanded under Eurocontrol. The programme must be continued, because the problem lies not so much in the way air space is divided up, which could perhaps be justified in terms of ensuring that there is an appropriate number of aircraft and routes for each controller, as in the technical harmonisation of ATM systems.

Mr President, this is a valuable report: it deals with a very sensitive and, I would say, extremely technical issue, although the problem is essentially political.

There has been talk of the fact that there are too many aircraft in the sky, that one controller has too many aircraft to deal with, etc., but we need only look at the United States of America, which is the most advanced country in the world in terms of aeronautics, where these problems are dealt with and, although they may not be completely resolved, adequate solutions have been found.

One basic fact stands out in particular: the United States only operates one central air traffic control system while in Europe there are still 15 separate control systems.

We also have to take Switzerland into account as well as the border countries. All these factors are difficulties which we will have to overcome.

It is therefore right to call for a single air traffic control system, at least for the whole of the European Union, which clearly needs to include Switzerland for technical reasons.

This is the basic point and it will enable us to resolve a number of difficulties as well as promote technical development, and here I am referring to the TCAS, GPS and GNNS systems, which clearly facilitate a more even flow of air traffic.

I would like to finish by expressing some doubts regarding the application of the principle of subsidiarity: it is a fundamental principle but one which is not always easy to apply.

Along with shipping regulations, air transport and air traffic regulations could genuinely be described as the most international rules in existence, and it is therefore difficult to break the matter down into different areas of responsibility.

One last thing: I see that the report principally targets the large air carriers and airlines.

Let us not disregard other air space users such as air-taxis, private companies and private users flying club aircraft.

Mr President, Commissioner, securing a place in the transport market is an uphill struggle.

This is certainly true if the competition is fierce, the pressure is on, there are worldwide cooperatives and external cost items are considerable.

This is the situation which the aviation sector currently faces.

We need to consider the future of the sector for the reasons set out above.

In my opinion, we should not accept unlimited growth as a fait accompli.

It is true that certain freight cannot be transported in a way other than by air, but the vast majority of freight can.

We should tailor our policy accordingly.

This, however, requires long-term efforts and specific, effective investments in alternatives.

We are not that far advanced yet. Indeed, the development of the Trans-European Networks has been a mixed success.

We now need to look for alternative solutions in the short-term.

In my view, what matters most is using the available space in the most effective way, both in terms of airspace and aircraft, which requires both personnel and organisational measures, as pointed out by the rapporteur.

By creating one single European sky, we will provisionally have enough airspace to allow us to come up with structural measures to impede the unbridled growth of aviation, based on the current state of affairs.

After all, this is what needs to be done if we want to realise the ambitions of a sustainable transport policy.

It is important not only to facilitate, but also to restrict where necessary.

Although the rapporteur' s initiatives are sound, it is early days and we should not rest on our laurels.

We should keep thinking about the future of the transport sector and aviation, in particular.

Mr Atkins' report addresses an issue which is perhaps the most important issue which either Mrs de Palacio or we in the European Parliament will have to deal with over the next four or five years and I must start by congratulating Mr Atkins on his approach in this specific report.

Despite which, there is clearly a huge problem here.

Overall delays in flights have risen from 12.7% in 1991 to 30% in 1999.

By 2010, the number of flights will have more or less doubled, resulting in wasted time, financial loss, saturation and, hence, safety risks.

Eurocontrol has proven to be inadequate as a mechanism for managing air traffic.

It is therefore absolutely essential that Vice-President de Palacio take decisive action, as she has done so far, in order to establish a real single European sky.

The Member States must overcome their perhaps justified anxiety as regards the management of their airspace and, at some point, must take a longer-term view of newly-emerging needs which goes beyond their borders and beyond the present situation.

We need to take immediate action and to regulate the myriad technical details, such as relations between civil and military aviation.

In the meantime, however, passengers must be compensated for delays by airlines and must, of course, be apprised of their rights.

I should like to close my intervention by reminding the House that, when the European Parliament voted on the report for the Intergovernmental Conference, it took view that the regulatory operation of air traffic in Europe, in our Member States, should be taken over by the European Union.

Mr President, I thank Mr Atkins for his report and also for his willingness to cooperate and work with not only my group but other groups in coming up with this document.

There is no doubt that air traffic control delays are a problem.

A visit to any of the major airports at this time of year will make that obvious.

I hear that the average delay is said to be 20 minutes.

All I can say from my experience is that somebody must be picking on Manchester very badly because I have not yet flown with Sabena from Brussels to Manchester when we have ever got anywhere near a 20-minute delay.

I can safely say that the timetable now is just a mere guide, not a definitive object, when planning travel.

It is a clear problem that we need to address.

The report must consider all the issues involving air traffic and adopt a twofold approach as proposed by the Commission.

But not all delays are due to air traffic controls.

It is the greatest cop-out in the world for airlines to say to passengers that the delay is caused by air traffic.

There is never anybody from the air traffic controllers in the airport to turn around and say that is not true.

Frankly, a lot of the delays are caused by the inefficiencies of some of the airlines themselves.

It never ceases to amaze me the number of passengers that go missing in airports!

What do these people get up to, I ask myself?

Invariably they cause delays as much as air traffic.

The issue of Eurocontrol is important.

We support the compromise that is made in point 8 with regard to Eurocontrol.

We also support the need for the military to give up some of their air space.

Finally, there are some TDI amendments with this.

I am particularly interested in Amendment No 24.

I can only assume that the TDI group must...

(The President cut the speaker off)

Mr President, I would also like to thank the rapporteur for an excellent report.

Experiences from last Monday reconfirm that this is a very important report indeed.

Many Members of Parliament had a journey here to Strasbourg of up to fifteen hours.

Flights were cancelled, and many were severely delayed.

This situation is absolutely intolerable. Airspace is badly congested, flights are continually late and the rights of air passengers are totally non-existent.

The report proposes relevant action that must be put into effect right away.

However, I do not believe that it will be sufficient, as air traffic is expected to double over the next ten years.

Short flight routes must be withdrawn in favour of rail, leaving room for longer flights, as there are simply no alternatives to these.

Reports aimed at improving the competitiveness of rail transport are, from this point of view, very important.

Environmental levies, which are being planned for air traffic, should not constrict long flights unfairly, but should work as an incentive to withdraw short flights in favour of rail.

Mr President, Commissioner, with globalisation we have discovered with pleasure that, above all, aeroplanes can take us from our own city to any corner of the world, and we have enjoyed this so much that we can no longer live without flying.

However, just as we discovered the congestion of our cities by motor vehicle, it is now airspace which is becoming clogged too frequently. We regularly suffer delays, we lose our luggage and we have suffered all kinds of work-to-rule or trade union strikes.

We passengers believe that we must establish and defend our rights and manage our airlines, airports, flight timetables and air traffic control better.

However, we often also think that we have to share the sovereignty of the air more amongst all the Europeans and that there is a large section of the airspace with is reserved which we do not take social advantage of in the way that our times demand.

Therefore, as well as reforming Eurocontrol, increasing the number of radio communication frequencies and implementing new and better technologies for tracking so that more air corridors and more planes can be fitted in, in these days of normality it is necessary for civil commercial aviation to be able to use the reserved spaces, especially in the highest quotas and highest altitudes, which do not usually have too much military use.

The citizens demand it and I believe that it is possible to find a solution which is perfectly valid for all, sharing - I insist - sovereignty and the reserved space used by military aircraft.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, like the rapporteur and the previous speaker I think we urgently need to take the appropriate measures to tackle and eventually put a stop to the constant increase in delays in European air traffic.

The discussion in committee and again here in plenary today keeps centring on the best ways and means of changing air traffic management.

Sir Robert Atkins, for whose expertise I have enormous regard, and a majority in the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism believe the prime way to achieve this objective is through liberalisation measures.

Liberalisation will without doubt increase the number of providers, but it will not resolve certain problems and will even create new ones.

Firstly, so long as the Member States give precedence to their justified national interests over the general European interest in regard to the coordination and use of European airspace, we will see no radical changes.

Secondly, that is another reason for Eurocontrol' s poor efficiency.

No matter whether the regulatory and control bodies are separated or not, whether you liberalise or privatise, so long as there is no political will to accept that European airspace issues can only be approached on a pan-European basis, another ten reports will not help either!

Thirdly, priority must be given to the civil use of airspace.

In a peaceful and united Europe there is not one logical reason for reserving a large part of airspace for the military.

Fourthly, do you not agree that if we make a kind of fetish out of liberalisation, it is highly likely that there will be fewer and fewer service providers for less lucrative routes and that there cannot be fair competition unless we lay down binding, uniform, social and security standards?

Fifthly, we do not need the Commission to use its influence on national governments in the event of domestic industrial disputes, as called for in paragraph 14 of the report; we need a smoothly running social dialogue between all the players involved in air traffic!

Mr President, Mr Atkins' report raises a number of real problems in the development of the air travel system in Europe.

First of all, the matter of safety.

The strikes that sometimes disrupt traffic take thousands of passengers hostage without proper warning.

Increasing numbers of intolerable delays are not, as has already been stated, solely due to overcrowding in the sky, but to also the airlines' attempt, for reasons of cost-effectiveness, to rotate their planes with excessively short, unreasonable and ultimately impossible turnarounds.

The report, however, omits to bring up one fundamental issue: the issue of traffic rights.

At the present time, it is extremely difficult for a European company with a line serving, for example, Paris, Houston and San Francisco, to board passengers in California, as this is legally considered as cabotage, whereas an American company serving New York, Madrid or Paris, may board passengers in Spain for disembarkation in Europe.

It is in the international negotiation of traffic rights that this concept of European air space...

(The President cut the speaker off)

Mr President, it has been noted that air transport is increasingly accessible to a greater number of our fellow citizens.

This democratisation is admittedly welcome, but raises important questions for the future: increased traffic, overcrowded airports, congested skies and lack of respect for the environment, in particular in terms of noise pollution.

The desire to create optimum air traffic control in Europe is based on good intentions, but why should the Commission challenge the air policies of the Member States and their bilateral agreements through a single air space?

Of course, I agree, on the one hand, with the goal of rationalising the movement of aircraft and, on the other hand, with the goal of aiming for improved traffic flow, while fully respecting consumer protection and passenger safety.

I would like to believe Mrs Palacio when she assures us that, and I quote, there is "no reference to creating competition between air traffic control services or their privatisation in the works of the Commission" .

But in that case, the staff concerned would have no justifiable need of trade unions?

The Commission is demanding the advent of a proper air traffic management authority, a strong regulatory authority. I say no.

No to a complete overhaul of Eurocontrol.

No to a new regulatory structure - after all, the current system effectively organises, particularly with regard to safety, a balanced flow of traffic while respecting the national systems which all states are entitled to. No to the Commission representing the Member States with regard to external States, thereby destroying any political decision-making power in the field of air transport.

Mr President, Madam Vice-President of the Commission, both the Commission' s communication and the rapporteur' s report, which is magnificent, are in line with the European Council of Lisbon, which asked the Commission for a series of specific proposals as soon as possible.

It is now for the Council to take the necessary and urgent political decisions which will allow the single aviation market to be supplemented with a single air traffic control system.

The growth in demand currently stands at between 5% and 7% and it seems that it will follow the same trend over the next few years. This makes it even more difficult for the European air management systems to do their work, since they have shown themselves to be incapable of dealing with this development and they are the cause of 50% of delays, although it is true that there are other causes, such as the limitations of the airports and flight schedules which do not take account of the limitations of the infrastructures.

Another cause which makes the current system ineffective is the different organisation of the civil system and the military system, as well as the different standards of technical equipment on the ground.

The airspace must be accessible under the same conditions for general, commercial and military aviation, which does not mean that we should not give priority, or indeed exclusive access, to the military in the event of crises.

However, the mere fact that a crisis may occur does not mean that certain Member States can justify maintaining the conditions which prevailed during the cold war.

It is necessary for the civil and military controllers in the control centres to work in close cooperation.

There is a clear need to achieve more effective cooperation between the different users of the airspace, and I believe that that cooperation and a joint approach should be sought at European level.

I congratulate the rapporteur and the Vice-President of the Commission for the opinions they share on an issue which is so important and so sensitive in the daily lives of our citizens.

Mr Atkins' report is detailed and balanced, and it presents the current and correct position of this House.

Lastly, Madam Vice-President, please take note that we are aware of your efforts and we will support you in the line you have taken.

Mr President, I must express major reservations with regard to the Atkins report as it bears the stamp of commercial interests concealed behind the best of intentions.

In actual fact, the airlines would like the air traffic control sector to be completely liberalised, not so much for reasons of safety, interoperability or reducing delays as to be able to access a market of air traffic control services that would enable the more powerful among them to purchase more expensive, secure slots and leave the problem of delays to other airlines and private aviation.

Under cover of a single sky, such liberalisation would actually offer us a multispeed sky.

I have no other way of explaining the witch hunt undertaken in this report with regard to civil air traffic control alone.

We all know that this only represents 30% of delays, which admittedly are worth combating, but which essentially depend on military constraints.

This is a political problem that depends first and foremost on politicians.

We all know that the considerable increase in air traffic is the main underlying cause of overcrowded and saturated skies.

We all know that the number of runways and landing platforms would have to be reduced in order to have any chance of a break, a simple break in the saturation.

Finally, in my country, the airlines have chosen to set up shuttles that send a dozen low-capacity aircraft from each provincial French town every morning between 6.00 a.m. and 8.30 a.m. to Paris alone.

Is it the fault of air traffic control if they refuse to allow all these flights to land simultaneously in Paris?

These are the fundamental causes of air delays.

Naturally, the single sky must be set up through a reformed Eurocontrol and harmonised control services at European level.

However, personally I cannot imagine collective safety services that are dictated by profit alone, controlled by shareholders.

In addition, I cannot imagine tomorrow' s single European sky becoming an sky shared unfairly between airlines.

Commissioner, I hope that, in preparing the future directive on the single sky, the Commission will be able to handle this matter by taking a calmer and more impartial overall view.

Mr President, I am acting as the representative of the air traffic controllers protesting against the European Commission proposal which, in the name of the attractive slogan "single European sky" , will clear the way for the privatisation of air traffic control.

The Atkins report clears the way for the monopoly of private groups that have their eye on air traffic control which, with the increase in traffic, is likely to make money.

This reports mentions delays, which are, apparently, increasingly frequent.

But how would subjecting air traffic control to the requirements of private profit possibly put an end to delays?

It is precisely the airlines' quest for profit that has led them to make the choices that cause these delays.

It is in the interests of passengers and their safety, and in the interests of employees in this sector for air traffic control to remain a public service, dedicated exclusively to ensuring the smooth running of air traffic.

Competition and the quest for profit in an area as sensitive as air traffic control will inevitably lead to disaster.

If it is necessary to put an end to national peculiarities with regard to air traffic management, and if it is legitimate to unify the European air space, this must be achieved by rejecting any idea of privatisation, competition, or quest for profitability, and we will vote against this report.

Mr President, I really must congratulate my colleague, Sir Robert Atkins of the British Conservative Party, on his most excellent report on the Single European Sky.

This proves beyond doubt that the overarching ambition of the European Union is a single nation with its single national flag, its single national anthem, its single legal space, its single national borders and now the citizens of Europe will soon be able to breath single European air.

However, after the failure of the single land policy, known as the CAP, the single sea policy, known as the CFP, we can now look forward to a similar failure of the single sky policy.

Not least, given the number of strikes in air traffic control, I suppose we can now look forward to the single European strike.

But you have struck a real blow for the Eurosceptic movement in the UK, Sir Robert, I congratulate you.

Mr President, It is quite true to say that air traffic delays need to be urgently addressed. However, it is also worth noting that 33% of ATM delays recorded between January and June 1999 were mostly due to temporary capacity reductions associated not least with the Kosovo crisis.

The real problem lies in the sectors straddling areas north and south which include Switzerland, France, Italy, Spain, parts of Germany, Maastricht upper-air space and these are responsible for 44% air traffic flow management delays and 30 bottlenecks.

At one time, Greece was part of that problem. However, the impressive results by the Greeks goes to show that the improvements can be made if there is strong action and real cooperation by national governments.

All too often Eurocontrol is used as the scapegoat and is blamed for the present situation, but the real blame must lie with the inaction of national governments in the areas that I have outlined.

It is quite clear that the European Transport Council must take immediate action to ensure that the air traffic control decisions are applied by all Member States Europe-wide.

It should be remembered that Eurocontrol is the only pan-European institution in the air traffic management domain and must be supported.

Finally, one issue that was raised - the critical shortage of manpower to the tune of 1,000 air traffic controllers throughout Europe - needs to be urgently addressed by national governments.

That in itself will go a long way to improving flow control.

In addition, both airports and airlines need to look closely at their practices, as they too are responsible far too often for the high percentage of delays incurred.

Mr President, allow me to begin by offering my thanks to the rapporteur, Mr Atkins, for a powerful presentation, to the Commission for making this issue one of its priorities and to the Commissioner responsible, Mrs De Palacio, for daring to translate words into action.

This has meant that the question of a single air traffic control has, in a short time, come closer to a solution perhaps than ever before.

Of course, there still remains much to be done.

In particular, a number of reluctant Member States need to be convinced, but that is precisely why it is so incredibly important for the European Parliament to give the Commission its full support today for the continuation of the work.

We are, of course, in the middle of yet another chaotic summer for flights.

The development we are now seeing will result in a doubling of air traffic in the years following 2010.

This assumes that we have had the necessary political decisions.

Otherwise we not only run the risk of congestion in the air leading in the future to 15, 30 or 60 minutes' delay, which we can perhaps put up with, but are also in danger of no longer being certain of ensuring safety.

This is something we must never put up with.

It is in this light that Mr Atkins' report and the Commission' s presentation must be seen.

The EU has spent a considerable amount of time and energy on tearing down borders and creating a single market.

Everyone who travels a mile up in the air - and we are there quite often - can nevertheless see that there are borders everywhere.

The report lays down an extremely tight timetable.

Let us together ensure that the summer of 2000 is the last summer with chaos in the skies over Europe.

The Commission can actually achieve this with the help of the Atkins report.

Mr President, Madam Vice-President of the Commission, ladies and gentlemen, there has hardly ever been such a topical report as this one.

Just in time before the summer break, when everyone goes on holiday and more and more people also travel by plane, today Parliament is considering questions of air traffic.

A tiresome subject, as we all know, and as every air traveller finds out.

We all suffer from delays that often last hours.

It has now become a daily scene at airports to see every passage-way overcrowded with bored, irritable or even aggressive passengers.

It happens to us MEPs very frequently, as it does to much of the population during the holidays.

Let me remind you of another aspect.

When aircraft cannot land on time, that not only creates a great many personal difficulties for people on business trips who have to keep to their schedules but also produces extra costs and environmental pollution.

So I welcome the fact that the Commission has submitted a report on these important subjects and that a High Level Group was set up to consider the problems of establishing a single European sky.

I hope we will have the final results of its inquiries before us in good time in the autumn so that we can then really move on to taking concrete measures jointly with the Commission.

The safety aspect comes top of the list for all passengers, but especially for frequent fliers.

Safety standards must on no account be endangered.

That is why we need better airspace control and protection.

Eurocontrol must satisfy all these safety requirements, but that means we also have to create the necessary framework conditions.

Mr President, I would firstly like to warmly thank Mr Atkins for his effort and the serious and rigorous work which he has done over the last few months and which, as the rapporteur for the Industry Committee, Mr Zimeray, has pointed out, illustrates the fragmented situation of our air space both with regard to the existing administrative borders as well as technological fragmentation, which is due to the different systems which are applied in different countries.

On this basis, we have to take account of a fact which is pointed out in the report: the increase in air traffic, the increase in delays. Of course, nobody knows better than the honourable Members what a problem this is.

We must make it very clear that not all delays are due to the management of air traffic; almost half of all delays are due to air companies, airports and sometimes weather conditions.

However, it is the case that 50%, or perhaps a little more, of delays are due to problems in the management of air traffic.

I also wish to make it very clear that this does not mean it is the fault of controllers.

It is not a problem involving the practices of people who carry out their work in conditions of great tension, difficulty and complexity, and who do everything possible to guarantee the highest possible level of safety. This is the main problem: how to guarantee the highest possible level of safety.

The controllers sometimes have to do their work despite excessive numbers of flights, and a lack of human resources, which forces them to work longer hours than they should, and also with certain methods, certain technologies and certain technological supports which are not sufficiently developed.

I wish to make it very clear that this is not a problem with people, with the controllers, who, I insist, do wonderful work.

I must say that it is truly impressive to see them at work because they are responsible for everybody' s lives, for the lives of anyone in a plane at any one time.

As the 'Single European Sky' illustrates , I believe that what is failing is the management system, since it is in a fragmented situation, divided up by administrative barriers, by administrative borders - in a European Union which has been able create so many common elements - and because of the artificial divisions between sky for military use and sky for civil use which persist in many countries, even though we left the cold war behind some time ago. Furthermore, this does not reflect the countries' real defence needs.

This is because the majority of defence flights take place in low altitude areas of the airspace and not in the high areas.

Furthermore, these areas of airspace are used for very few hours of the day, not every day, and in many cases just a few times a year.

What we need to do, ladies and gentlemen, is create a common airspace above a certain height, and manage it jointly - as one speaker said a moment ago - forgetting about borders in that high area of the airspace. We should stop talking about British, Spanish, French or Swedish airspace, and simply talk about European airspace in this high area, and leave the area below 29 500 feet, or 31 000 feet - we will have to specify which area - to national management because there are other types of problems there and its military use is more obvious.

In any event, we must make the military and civil use of airspace more flexible, improve the efficiency of management and provide air traffic controllers, who are currently working in very complicated circumstances, with an easier environment which will allow them to do their work more effectively.

Ladies and gentlemen, you have asked me about timetables.

In principle, the High Level Group, to which I am going to communicate Parliament' s conclusions at the next meeting on the 14th, will finish its work by October.

Therefore, the resulting specific proposals will be presented during the subsequent months and we hope that the specific proposals will be under way by the next European Council in the Spring, under the Swedish Presidency.

The 'Single European Sky' initiative in no way implies the removal of Eurocontrol.

On the contrary, Eurocontrol is absolutely essential; it is an essential element which must be strengthened and supplemented since, within the European Union, we can go much further than the scope of Eurocontrol.

Furthermore, ladies and gentlemen, we must think in terms of a strong European common regulator and we must forget - because, of course, it is not going to appear in the Commission' s communication or proposals - the controversy, which in my view is artificial, between privatisation and non-privatisation.

Let us not get into this argument.

That is not the aim of this initiative.

Countries may deal with this within their own competences, but it is outside of this 'Single European Sky' initiative.

This initiative will allow us to guarantee a strong European regulator.

That is what we are dealing with; creating a common airspace which can be used flexibly.

Ladies and gentlemen, I would thank all of you for your work, especially the rapporteur, Mr Atkins, and I would like to say that I hope that between us we will manage to improve the management of air traffic in one of the areas, which is not the only one, which leads to delays.

We are also working to solve the problem of slots and other problems, but there is a time and a place for everything.

The vote will take place today at 12 noon.

Health and safety of pregnant workers

The next item is the report (A5-0155/2000) by Mrs Damião, on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs, on the report from the Commission on the implementation of Council Directive 92/85/EEC of 19 October 1992 on the introduction of measures to encourage improvements in the health and safety at work of pregnant workers and workers who have recently given birth or are breastfeeding.

The legislative instrument that we are considering today in the evaluation report referred to us by the Commission has run its course as far as contractual rights and social security systems are concerned.

Thousands of female workers in various countries in the Union have benefited from it, but it is now out of date.

It is out of date because the 1952 ILO convention has just been revised and there is an expectation that most countries in the world will substantially improve their maternity protection.

It was and still is, of course, hoped that the Union will continue to be in the vanguard in social terms, in this area as in others.

But not everything is out of date, because in terms of organisation of work, there have been shortcomings in transposing the directive and even greater shortcomings in implementing it.

In most countries, the three stages of job organisation are not being respected. These stages are: the employer should adjust the working conditions and/or hours of the worker to avoid exposure to risk; if that fails, the worker should be moved to another job; only if neither option is possible should the worker be granted leave, as this reduces the worker' s income and also her career opportunities.

By way of example, I must tell you that in some countries, not even a minimum period of recuperation is allowed for the mother, which the experts say should be around 45 days for a normal birth for a woman working in a normal job.

Nevertheless, there are countries that are not complying with these rules at all, on the pretext that they are guaranteeing women a choice.

We think that women must be guaranteed the option of enjoying an appropriate period of maternity leave, which they can share with the father, but that the leave should be assessed and guaranteed according to the risk to her own health.

Furthermore, this directive does not provide for a link between its own risk assessment provisions and other directives, particularly the framework directive on risk assessment and information for workers.

Since there is no such link, employment of women is subject to unfair criticism because the costs of maternity-related risks apply exclusively to young women of childbearing age.

These risks are being underestimated and should not be a matter for the employer or constitute an obligation on the employer only when the woman' s doctor informs the employer of her condition.

Firstly, because this is too late: risks from radiation, chemically-charged atmospheres and poor working posture are well known now and all have harmful consequences for the health of the woman and her baby, particularly in the first few weeks.

Secondly, these measures do nothing to protect the reproductive health of men and women. There is a considerable degree of infertility in the Union today: over 11% of European couples suffer from such problems, which result from lifestyles shaped by the economic structures within which we live, and also by the fact that measures are not in place to provide protection against these dangers.

An example of this is the extreme temperatures that cause infertility in women and men.

The Union, which is today in a position to do so, should draw up and implement legislation to this end.

With regard to maternity leave, we are aware of the costs to economic activity of proposals to extend this leave.

We also know that these costs are much higher when employing women, but health specialists recommend that a baby should remain at home for at least five months, protected from the outside world and, above all, growing up in a suitable psychological and emotional environment, which will provide it with the necessary balance for growing up with a sense of security, because it needs its parents.

Parental leave should therefore be extended, and, if healthily divided between the parents, will benefit them both.

The directive should also take the informal economy and atypical employment contracts into consideration.

Finally, I hope that the Commission will tell us what it is intending to do in this area, now that it has an extended legal basis, which includes Article 13 and ex Article 118. This means that it can certainly cover other aspects mentioned in the report.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, Mrs Damião has drafted a very good report and taken good account in it of my opinion for the Committee on Women' s Rights and Equal Opportunities.

It is most important to everyone to improve the health and safety protection at the workplace for women who are pregnant, have recently given birth or are breastfeeding, both to protect the woman and to protect the unborn child.

This is a general social issue and must be treated with the greatest care.

The Commission' s report on the 1992 directive is only concerned with the technical transposition of the directive and does not look at the situation at the workplace, which has to some extent changed, or at the changed role of women in society.

The number of single parents has risen and women are more concerned with achieving economic independence.

The Commission must submit a proposal for revision of the directive that takes account of all these changes, and it must do so as quickly as possible, this very year.

There is a considerable need to improve the legislation.

That applies to preventive health protection measures at the workplace for the mother and for the unborn child.

Here we must avoid any risks.

Any activity that puts their health at risk should without exception be prohibited.

Periods allowed for breastfeeding should be regulated and there should be facilities for breastfeeding at the workplace.

Maternity leave after the birth of the child should be at least eight weeks.

There must be clear rules on financial support, both for the period of pregnancy leave and for maternity leave.

The question of reinstatement also needs to be clarified.

None of these necessary provisions must lead to discrimination against women or to a reduction of their chances of access to the workplace.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, today we are debating the implementation of Council Directive 92/85/EEC of 19 October 1992, which is one of the most important directives in the field of the technical and health protection of workers.

I well remember its genesis and the problems that were discussed at the time.

A positive aspect is that at that time, irrespective of the dispute about the legal basis, its importance to women workers in the single market was recognised and a first step was taken towards establishing minimum standards for the protection of pregnant workers and new mothers.

The Commission report before us continues to show up weaknesses in the implementation of the directive, which means we must increase our efforts to establish the protection of women during a special period of their life in law and in practice.

Really it is very sad for a society to find we have to pay much greater attention to this area in particular.

So I support the call to revise the directive as soon as possible.

However, we will not manage it by the end of the year 2000.

Some of the demands that will have to be incorporated in a proposal for a revision of the directive are set out in the draft amendments before us, and the PPE Group can therefore support at least some of them.

First and foremost, they include the call for a strict prohibition on dismissal during pregnancy and maternity leave, safeguards to ensure that on expiry of their leave the women will be reinstated in their job or given a comparable one and effective penalties for those who infringe that prohibition.

For women who want to or have to reconcile working life and motherhood, anything else would mean penalising or unjustifiably discriminating against them in their occupational and private life.

Seen in these terms, the effective protection of pregnant workers and new mothers is one of the most important contributions to an active family policy.

With a view to eastward enlargement and protection in those countries, let me also point out that the single market must not lead to discrimination against pregnant women and new mothers.

Madam President, Commissioner, I would like to start by thanking the rapporteur for her thorough, responsible and unreserved report.

This is an extremely sensitive issue which is closely related to other matters which are regularly referred to such as the ageing population, the demographic trend, the low birth rate, the right to health, the right to work, the right to motherhood and the social value of motherhood. This matter cannot be viewed as affecting women alone: they must be protected and supported by society.

The 1992 directive, whose implementation in the Member States we are assessing today, is intended precisely to introduce minimum measures to encourage the improvement of the health and safety of pregnant women and women who have recently given birth and are breastfeeding.

The Commission's evaluation report shows that the directive has proved its utility in that it has been of some benefit in a number of Member States in certain areas of the issue, such as leave on grounds of health and safety, etc.

However, apart from these points, which are of a general nature, we share the rapporteur's criticism of the Commission's report.

This report was overdue and limited almost exclusively to dealing with legal and technical transposition.

There is a lack of concrete statistics and data on vital aspects of the directive, such as the monitoring of workplace risk assessment for pregnant workers and the frequency of work-related accidents and illnesses, and satisfactory information is not provided on the coordination of legislative adaptation of specialist inspection, penalties or scientific research for the detection, prevention, elimination and recuperation of professional hazards relating to pregnancy.

We feel that there has been a lack of serious monitoring on the part of the Commission. There has been a lack of coordination between the health and safety directorate and the equal opportunities unit, and the ambiguity of the directive itself in this area has become apparent.

The delay in the production of an evaluation report - and I would remind you that, precisely because of the low minimum standards set, Italy was only persuaded to approve the directive on the condition that its implementation would be monitored very soon afterwards - should have led the Commission to put forward a proposal to revise the directive, particularly in relation to certain aspects referred to by the rapporteur: the length of maternity leave, the increase in the duration of maternity leave where risks are involved, a more precise definition of the concept of an adequate allowance, the prohibition of dismissal of women during pregnancy or maternity leave with effective penalties, the prohibition of any form of discrimination with regard to women's careers or the improvement of working conditions, the implementation of all the measures necessary to safeguard the health and safety of woman and unborn child, without prejudice to the woman's right to work or her career and encouraging breastfeeding through diverse measures.

In addition to taking all the necessary compatibilities into consideration, when they revise the directive, the Commission and the Member States should be motivated by the principle of non-discrimination and the recognition of motherhood and fatherhood as fundamental rights which are essential for a balanced society.

Mr President, it is important that women have good and secure conditions during pregnancy and childbirth so that mother and child have a good start, and it is important that pregnancy and childbirth do not reduce women' s opportunities in the labour market.

We have a directive from 1992 which establishes minimum rights for maternity leave and women' s entitlements to financial compensation when they are absent from the labour market due to childbirth.

The Commission has now investigated the Member States' implementation of this directive and, in her report, Mrs Damião quite correctly points out that the Commission' s report contains only a technical and factual assessment of the directive' s implementation and does not provide an evaluation of whether the directive in practice provides pregnant women or women who have just given birth with better conditions.

She does not, therefore, think that the Commission' s report provides an adequate basis for carrying out a review of the directive.

I very much agree with the rapporteur about this.

I am, therefore, also opposed to our requesting a review of the directive now.

I do not think we should demand a new draft directive which contains the right to a longer period of leave, together with demands for longer enforced leave, and which lays down more detailed requirements for financial compensation in a way that does not take the necessary account of the differences between the Member States' social systems.

The existing rules make for great flexibility, and most countries guarantee women better conditions than the common regulations require.

It might be wondered whether new regulations would mean very much in practice.

In any case, maternity leave and financial aid ought to be given priority in the individual countries.

However, I think it would be a good idea to obtain a better overview of what the circumstances are in the different countries so that governments can learn from each other' s good and bad experiences and inspire each other.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the European Commission is required to submit a directive proposal on measures for workers during pregnancy, birth and breastfeeding by the end of 2000.

The assessment of the existing measures, which was intended to lead to change, is four years behind schedule and fails to meet the requirements which the European Parliament prescribed at the time.

The Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance calls for an increase in the level of protection.

The report mainly focuses on institutional aspects.

In our opinion, this report should also embrace the right to return back to work to the same or an equivalent job after maternity leave.

We are asking for the rights of pregnant and breastfeeding women to be extended.

In practice, women are often discriminated against during this period, despite rights on paper.

This is why we call for a reversal of the burden of proof.

Employers will need to demonstrate that any dismissal or change of job is not linked to pregnancy.

Finally, we would like the Commission to explain why at the recent ILO conference, the Member States failed to adopt the common positions. How is it possible that the United Kingdom abstained from the final vote, which, in view of the procedure, is tantamount to voting against?

We would like to close by thanking Mrs Damião for the work she has carried out.

Mr President, at a time when Europe, with the Beijing +5 Conference in New York, is emphasising its pioneering role in the implementation of the principle of equality between men and women, it seems equally important to guarantee their freedom.

This freedom is achieved through a right to specific protection for women, a right that is always related to their bodies, in particular to maternity and, more specifically, pregnancy.

We are therefore pleased with Mrs Damião' s excellent report, which highlights the urgent need to revise the 1992 directive.

Her request for a formal ban on dismissal during pregnancy is essential, and I will dwell only on this point.

It seems to me to be dangerous to allow employers any leeway in this field, as they will always use it to their advantage.

Today, with the revision of Convention 103, the ILO is levelling down the protection of pregnant women, by accepting certain dismissals that are said to be unrelated to pregnancy.

Europe, with Mrs Damião' s report and the revision of the directive, has a duty to be a political reference for women' s rights world-wide.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I should like to start by congratulating Mrs Damião on the magnificent job she has done on this report. We were happy to contribute to this in committee, not only by giving the report our total support, but also by adding some amendments that were accepted in the final version.

We consider the approval of this report to be a significant event as we approach the summer recess, for four fundamental reasons.

Firstly, we think it is unacceptable that women should suffer social prejudice or discrimination because of pregnancy or maternity issues;

Secondly, because we must more vigorously tackle risks to the health of mother and child associated with working conditions;

Thirdly, the idea of reconciling personal and professional lives, the family and work, in modern society is becoming increasingly important to those of us concerned about people' s day-to-day lives. This is precisely one of those key areas in which a responsible approach to reconciling these interests is called for;

Fourthly, because maternity policies must be consistent with family and childbirth policies generally, particularly at a time when the crisis resulting from Europe' s ageing population is increasingly drawing Member States' attention to this issue.

We shall also be discussing some of the amendments and our position will be based on the balance that we feel has been struck in the report.

Nevertheless, we will not support all of the amendments, because we feel that this balance is actually preferable to some of the steps suggested in the amendments.

We shall support the amendments suggested by our British Conservative colleagues, such as Mr Bushill-Matthews, who drew our attention to the issue of small- and medium-sized enterprises, which we feel must be taken into account when legislation is adopted, whether at Community or national level.

On the other hand, however, we hope that the British Conservatives will back the report, because although it is true that some of the Portuguese Presidency' s conclusions highlight this issue, I must emphasise that paragraph 36 of the final Feira Summit text stresses the importance of companies' sense of social responsibility.

For us Portuguese Christian-Democrats and Conservatives, this is a very important idea. We believe that companies also have a certain social responsibility, which they should build upon.

I would just like to add that we wish certain votes to be held separately, as a means of improving the report, some points in which strike us as rather obscure.

We do not view pregnancy as a social resource and there is one other point on which we would like to see a separate vote in order to improve the report.

Lastly, I would urge all Christian-Democrat Members to endorse this report by my Socialist colleague.

Mr President, I wish at this point to express my disappointment at the Commission' s failure to adopt any position on the revision, assessment and notification of Directive 92/85 on maternity protection as yet.

Nevertheless, although I wish to highlight the considerable harm that this omission has caused to mothers, every cloud has a silver lining, and this report, which has been brilliantly drafted by Mrs Damião, is proof of that such silver linings exist. This report will enable the European Parliament to move ahead now.

The report clarifies concepts, harmonises legislation at Community level, establishes shared responsibilities, takes account of new risks in the way work is currently organised, looks for incentives to increase the population in an ageing Europe and considers pregnancy to be a natural condition for women, and one which should be respected and protected.

It specifically notes the rights of women working independently or as teleworkers, and highlights the growing concern about single parents, who are becoming increasingly common in Europe.

The aim of extending maternity leave to twenty weeks is an ambitious one, which is recommended from a technical point of view, and must gradually be implemented. We must therefore prepare ourselves for this in economic terms, by sharing out responsibilities through cooperation between states and employers' and workers' organisations.

In order to achieve the aims that are being proposed, it is also crucial for us to encourage greater dialogue, collaboration and coordination between specialists in health, hygiene and safety at work, so that a more suitable working environment can be provided for pregnant women.

The European Community must strive to gain the support of applicant countries to ensure that awareness is raised as rapidly as possible, so that the measures recommended in this report can be adopted, since there may be greater resistance in those countries, which could be difficult to overcome.

Lastly, I wish to sound a warning about point 9 of this report, because measures for protecting new mothers, such as very long maternity leave, may have unwanted effects, as it may become disadvantageous for employers to employ women, and they may consequently prefer to take on men.

The Commission must therefore create a system for detecting fraud and for applying harsh penalties to companies practising this kind of discrimination.

Mr President, adopting a directive does not necessarily mean that reality is as we would wish it.

We have a good example of this here.

According to the Commission' s assessment, the situation regarding the health and safety of pregnant women looks fine, but that is certainly only on paper, for is that also the way it looks in reality?

The pace in the labour market is more hectic than ever. Great efficiency is demanded, and women are supposed to work as if they were not pregnant, even if they are.

It is stressful, and it is unhealthy both for the pregnant woman and the foetus.

We know this, because investigations have proven this to be the case.

The European Parliament and ourselves as representatives of the people are entitled to know whether the legislation we adopt also actually works in practice.

I think we have an example here of the Commission' s doing all too little in this area.

The message from Parliament to the Commission should therefore be that the work which has been done is not good enough.

We must know whether the legislation is working.

The Commission' s purely legal analyses now already show that there is a need for further protection.

I think there is a greater need to discover what suitable protection consists in, and there should be stricter rules governing dismissal during pregnancy.

The Commission must go back to the drawing board, set to work again and table the necessary proposals.

The European social model is characterised by the fact that we have a high level of protection.

This should be an area - and this remark is aimed at the Liberal Group which has adopted a very different view - in which the EU should have a big influence.

It should not be left to the individual Member States.

Women' s participation in the labour market is a prerequisite of our achieving the ambitious goals we have set ourselves regarding employment and the modernisation of the European social model. Modernisation and efforts in this area are therefore important.

They cannot be left to the Member States. Europe as a whole needs to attend to these issues.

Mr President, many women are discriminated against today in their workplaces.

We know that many lose their jobs when they become pregnant.

The Damião report contains many good proposals, but we in the Swedish Liberal Party still have fundamental objections to the report.

I would like to say to my predecessor, who spoke just a moment ago, that, in this Parliament, we ought more often to ask ourselves the question: What should the European Parliament actually be doing?

How much detail should we go into?

We believe in the subsidiarity principle, i.e. that decisions should be taken as close as possible to the people they affect.

Social policy is an area where the EU ought to have limited jurisdiction, except when it is a question of free movement for citizens within the Union.

Every Member State should have full responsibility and the right to make its own decisions regarding its social security systems.

Maternity/paternity leave and maternity/paternity benefit are examples of issues that are not directly transnational.

We do not believe in detailed common European social legislation.

This does not, however, prevent Member States from cooperating and sharing ideas concerning social issues.

The Damião report contains an amalgam of legitimate demands for proper security for women workers throughout Europe, demands for greater freedom of movement and a better functioning single market and demands for the national right of decision on the details of the socio-political system.

In this connection, the report contains an imbalance.

My final question is: Why should the European Parliament decide that every woman in the whole of Europe must have eight weeks off work when she has had a child?

I know several women who have gone back to work earlier - there must be freedom of choice!

Mr President, Mrs Damião, the author of this report, is justified in her criticisms of the Commission as regards the delay in revising the current directive.

The report quite rightly laments the Commission' s failure to comply with the timetable set by the directive and the fact that there has been no assessment of how effectively the directive has been implemented. The report stresses the need for a proposal for an urgent revision of the directive, and suggests inclusion of various measures, which we essentially support and agree with.

As a matter of fact, in the discussions held in the Parliamentary committees, we tabled various amendments designed to guarantee the statutory right to take breaks from work for breastfeeding, to ensure non-discrimination in the workplace against pregnant women and women who have just given birth or who are breastfeeding, particularly in terms of salary, and to guarantee career progression and employment, with particular emphasis on the situation of working women who have temporary or atypical contracts.

In general, the amendments were accepted, with the exception of the amendment on the payment of allowances during time off work and maternity leave, which must be equivalent to 100% of the previous salary and be taken into account for the purposes of calculating pension entitlements.

I hope that Parliament will adopt this amendment.

Mr President, if the Commission's intention was to improve the effective health and safety of pregnant workers and workers who have recently given birth, it may be said that it has not achieved its goal.

The report has two clear shortcomings: firstly, the fact that it is overdue and secondly, its limitations.

It could have been finished as far back as 1997, but even though it is late, it could at least have clarified the wording of certain articles of the directive and defined the many undefined concepts which have given rise to numerous interpretations. Among the various missing data which would have been useful, it could also have provided the results of the questionnaires sent to the Member States and the results of the coordination of relevant laws and activities by the European Standardisation Centre.

The European Parliament recognised the need to revise the directive as early as 1992, with the result that now, given the need for a social market economy, it agrees with the objectives of Mrs Damião's report: to link maternity policies to family policy and to remove ambiguity by practically and quantifiably enhancing the rights of pregnant workers and workers who have recently given birth.

Mr President, Madam Vice-President of the Commission, the incorporation of women into the labour market means that at some time their working life will coincide with a pregnancy, which sometimes means that they are obliged to take additional leave so as not to endanger their own health or the health of the unborn child.

Pregnancy is a natural state for women which society must respect, defend and protect.

Society must care for working women in particular by ensuring that they remain in their jobs.

The incorporation of women into the workplace is a reality which cannot be reversed and women cannot be put in a situation of having to chose between having children and keeping their job because of the complications which a pregnancy may entail.

The ageing of the population, together with the low birth-rate in the European Union, means that this is an issue of enormous importance for all social operators.

As important as the protection of pregnant women is provision for breast-feeding, which is beneficial to the health of both mother and child.

The protection of maternity and breast-feeding cannot be considered as a form of unequal treatment between men and women, since maternity is exclusive to women and it is women who must be protected, independently of the fact that some parental leave can be granted to men.

The Member States must deal with the possible negative effects of this directive by making it easier for companies to employ young women by exempting them from the social costs during parental leave.

The directive must include a minimum leave of 20 weeks, with an obligatory period of at least eight weeks after giving birth.

A minimum salary of 80% must be guaranteed, with no loss of pension rights.

The ban on dismissal during pregnancy must be strictly complied with.

In no circumstances must pregnancy be a cause for discrimination against women.

The Committee on Women' s Rights and Equal Opportunities unanimously condemns the delay on the part of the Commission, which is even more serious given that it extends from 1992 to 2000, which is the period in which there have been the most changes in terms of women' s access to work.

Furthermore, we believe that this deficiency in the legislation may be exacerbating a very serious phenomenon, that is, the rejection by young people of motherhood.

We ask the Commission, before the end of 2000, to present an amendment of Directive 92/85/EEC and that that directive be applicable to all pregnant workers, in all areas and occupations, with no exceptions or conditions.

The new legislation must be clear and progressive.

It must provide for new working situations and also the new family situation of single parent families.

The pregnant worker must be provided with adequate protection, which is designed for their specific circumstances, but this should not mean discrimination or a reduction in their work opportunities, but quite the opposite.

We must be able to provide the means for breast-feeding to be compatible with work.

Mr President, in today' s Europe there is no room for a divorce between women and employment, and much less a divorce between women and maternity.

Mr President, the Commission report, which I have read in great detail, says: "In general terms Directive 92/85/EEC has been well implemented by the Member States and this is reflected in the low level of complaints about the rights of pregnant workers received by the Commission".

The rapporteur has set this all to one side, effectively saying it is irrelevant, claiming that the original directive just did not go far enough.

I like some of the suggestions in her report.

I congratulate her for the enthusiasm with which she has pursued her agenda. But in general it is not a health and safety agenda.

It is very much a traditional socialist agenda.

Firstly, her report aims to harmonise social policy across the EU rather than leave the detail to Member States - a point made with great force by Mr Olle Schmidt earlier in this debate.

Secondly, it wants to improve the terms and conditions of employment for pregnant workers and new mothers by way of extra maternity leave and specified minimum pay levels.

Neither of these are really health and safety issues.

She is proposing solutions for which there is no health and safety problem.

As British Conservatives we confirm our concern about health and safety for all workers, especially vulnerable groups.

We confirm our commitment to subsidiarity regarding terms and conditions of employment.

But we also confirm our concern to help more women into jobs rather than putting up further barriers to female employment.

Hence we urge the House to reject the report.

Mr President, this text is important insofar as the legislation concerned has significant consequences for the well-being of women and also children, that is, the future of our society.

In this respect, we may well be surprised that the Commission has waited as long as it has to present us with its evaluation report on the implementation of this directive and proposals for improving conditions for maternity leave.

It seems to me that, in this proposal for a revision of the directive that we are asking the Commission to present quickly, it is essential to preserve the reality of three fundamental principles for women and their well-being: the prohibition of dismissal for pregnant women or women on maternity leave, the right to a mandatory minimum leave and allowance during this leave to be taken into account for the purposes of acquiring pension entitlements.

Furthermore, it seems to me that this new directive should comprise substantial improvements, in particular all women must be offered the opportunity to take 20 weeks' maternity leave, without necessarily being obliged to take the entire period, but the employer shall be obliged to offer it, and a minimum of 8 weeks after the birth, in order to foster development of the bond between mother and child.

With regard to high-risk pregnancies and the birth of disabled children, it is obvious that provision must be made for specially adapted proposals offering an extension of the length of maternity leave, taking account of the specifics of the case.

As far as definition of the allowance is concerned, it seems that the figure to be considered must be at least 80% of the previous salary, and that includes for purposes of acquiring pension entitlements.

Finally, it is recommended that this text should correlate and reinforce the formal prohibition of dismissal during pregnancy and maternity leave.

Mr President, my compliments to the rapporteur for her work on protecting women during pregnancy and maternity, a particularly difficult time.

This report certainly represents progress, not just for women in general but also in that it safeguards family rights and upholds fundamental values.

The European People's Party has always upheld the concept of the family, the basic unit of society, as the basis for European construction and the Christian values from which it stems require that it be respected.

At a time when Europe has demographic problems, the institutions need to issue a firm signal to reassure working women, who have to have sufficient peace of mind and the necessary guarantees to be able to opt for motherhood.

This is why it is necessary to have a sufficiently long period of rest from work before giving birth and even longer afterwards, when there is a child to breastfeed, look after and bring up.

Therefore, benefits should not be cut considerably during this period and pension funds should not be affected either.

I would add that, as regards the matter in question, self-employed women should also have a guaranteed right to benefits, which should be funded from contributory national sectoral funds.

Finally, I would like to express my support for maintaining the prohibition on dismissal of women during this period, and also for the fact that the cost of benefits for workers on maternity leave are not borne directly by the company where the woman works but entirely by the State, in order to avoid discrimination and penalising women in the labour market.

Ladies and gentlemen, I would ask you for silence, not a religious silence, but a parliamentary silence, so that we can listen properly to Commissioner de Palacio.

Mr President, I would firstly like to thank Mrs Damião for her magnificent report, despite the fact that it contains a series of criticisms of the Commission' s actions.

I must accept these criticisms since they are true and are based on real facts.

However, I must offer a justification and an explanation.

In order to produce this text, the Commission has had to rely on documentation provided by the different Member States and, unfortunately, that documentation has not been provided with all the speed and efficiency which the Commission would have liked.

That is the reason for the delay in presentation.

The Commission obviously fully shares the Parliament' s interest in improving the protection of pregnant workers and those who have recently given birth.

The Community legislation and the jurisprudence of the European Court of Justice still do not offer a sufficient framework although they are undoubtedly key elements to making further progress in this aspect which is essential to safeguarding the rights of pregnant workers.

Directive 92/85 was adopted before the Treaty of Amsterdam.

We believe that it is now, after the Treaty, that we will be able to go further and take some steps forward.

That is what we propose and to this end we are going to prepare a supplementary report on the implementation of this directive, which we will present in 2002.

As the honourable Members know well, the Commission last week approved its new social agenda for 2000-2005 and it is within this framework that we hope to offer an adequate solution, not only to this specific problem, but also to a whole series of other issues.

Mr President, this is the last time this week that the House will be meeting in such great numbers.

I would like to draw your attention and the attention of fellow Members to a very sad matter.

This Parliament' s reputation with the press is excellent, because for the past twenty years, Parliament has managed to issue press releases for the written press twice a day.

This previous system has now been changed.

I had a brief look to see how the system worked this week.

The press release to commemorate former President Pflimlin did not appear until 11.22 p.m. on Monday evening.

The report on the Feira Summit was issued on Tuesday morning, the report on Tuesday morning' s discharge sitting was issued at 9.12 p.m.

The report on Zimbabwe, Tuesday afternoon, was issued at 10.55 p.m.

The report on the European Central Bank on Wednesday morning was issued at 8.00 p.m. the same day.

This kind of reporting is not really of much use at all to the written press.

At that time of the day, editorial staff have gone home and we are, in a way, generating old news.

I would ask you, Mr President, to revert back to the old system and to ensure that the press releases, the daily press releases, not only appear on time, but also afford a general overview - in a decentralised manner - for each language.

I would ask you to request the Bureau to think about this very carefully and reconsider their decision.

Mr Staes, your comments will, of course, be passed on to our staff so that we can work as efficiently as possible.

Mr President, on a point of order, I am sorry to delay the House when I know there is a large amount of voting to go on.

I have just discovered from my agenda that the vote on my own report is to be taken last.

I have not been consulted about this.

Indeed I indicated earlier that this needed to be taken as early as possible in the voting because - and as one of those involved in aviation, I know this better than most - I have only got one flight to get me home. And so I am stuck!

So I throw myself upon the mercy of the House and wonder whether it would be possible to vote early, rather than to vote late, on the Atkins report?

I have taken note of your request.

Mr President, if you agree to Sir Robert Atkins' request, then I would actually suggest taking the votes in the order we ended up with yesterday.

Mr Mombaur, I have not granted Mr Atkins' request: I have simply taken note of it.

There is a fixed voting order, to which I will adhere, and I am sorry if some of the reports will have to be voted on this afternoon rather than this morning.

We shall now proceed to the vote.

Mr President, Commissioners, ladies and gentlemen, I really want to give warm thanks, not just to the Commission but also to all those involved, to all my colleagues on the Committee on Agriculture, for enabling us jointly to achieve this compromise!

I would ask you to adopt this document today, because otherwise the Council would be able to take a decision on 16 and 17 July without having Parliament' s opinion, since we would not be cooperating as faithfully as we should according to a European Court of Justice ruling.

So I would ask that we adopt this document today.

Once again, many thanks for your cooperation!

Commissioner, would you like to respond to the question?

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I regret having to take the floor in regard to Mr Kuhne' s report, but this concerns a very serious course of events.

This report, which is about the discharge of Parliament' s 1998 budget, as you all know, contains a paragraph 18 and a sixth indent.

This sixth indent concerns our group.

There was an agreement - and all the group chairmen will confirm this - between the group chairmen that we would not address concrete cases relating to individual groups in the report, but that in future we will jointly endeavour to tackle any problems that may arise.

So in view of the wording in the report, I tabled a compromise amendment on behalf of my group, and it was indicated to me a few days ago that the rapporteur would approve that compromise.

We thereupon refrained from tabling an amendment that also refers to problems in regard to the Socialist Group.

I now hear that the Socialist Group evidently will not endorse our Amendment No 10, tabled in my name.

Let me state quite plainly, in all seriousness and with great regret, that this means the agreement between group chairmen was given up.

Let me also say that our group is disappointed, not just I personally but the entire group.

If the Socialist Group does not support compromise Amendment No 10 - and that is up to the group - then let me tell you that this will be a very grave decision it is taking here today.

Mr Poettering, as you are aware, explanations of vote are made after the vote.

We cannot start a debate now, even if the matter is an extremely sensitive issue.

Yes, Mr President, I note that the law is not equal for all, because I wanted to speak along the same lines, in the previous sitting, on the resolution on Feira, and I was not given the authorisation to do so, and I did it at the right time in the end.

I remember that there was a general row, in those benches, calling for the Rules of Procedure to be respected.

This has not been the case today.

On behalf of my group, I would like to point out that it is absolutely unacceptable, firstly, that a non-existent agreement be cited, and secondly that my group be threatened.

It makes no sense to put conditions on other people' s votes.

I accept that one can defend one' s positions, but what is not acceptable is that, in this action, before the vote, my group should be threatened in relation to an issue which has been voted on by the Committee on Budgetary Control, with the votes, also, of the Members on those benches.

Furthermore, and I will end, Mr President, by saying that there is no mention by name of any group in the Kuhne report.

I recommend to Mr Poettering that he reads the report carefully.

(DE) The Commission can accept Amendments Nos 1, 2 and 19 (third part). Amendments Nos 3, 4, 16, 19 (fourth part), 22, 25, 30 (of which the first and third part).

It accepts Amendments Nos 32 and 33 (second part) in principle. The Commission cannot accept the other amendments.

(DE) The Commission cannot accept Amendment 4.

It accepts Amendments 5 and 6 in principle and Amendments 2 and 3 in full.

Amendments Nos 5 and 6 are not here.

I have only got four amendments here.

(DE) Mr President, I apologise again for my mistake a moment ago!

The Commission cannot accept Amendments Nos 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 and 10 (first part), 11, 12, 13, 14, 15 (the first, third and fourth part of 15), 16, 17 and 18.

Secondly, if the proposal is worded as a recommendation, the Commission could also accept Amendments Nos 2, 10 (of which the second part) and 15 (second part) in relation to paragraph 9.

(The President declared the common position approved as amended)

European Council of 19/20 June 2000 at Santa Maria da Feira

(Parliament rejected the motion for a resolution)

(Parliament rejected the motion for a resolution)- Joint motion for a resolution on the conclusions of the European Council meeting in Feira on 19 and 20 June 2000

(Parliament adopted the resolution)Joint motion for a resolution on the European Union observer delegation monitoring the elections in Zimbabwe

Motion for a resolution B5-0595/2000 on illegal immigration and the discovery of the bodies of 58 illegal immigrants in Dover

(Parliament rejected the motion for a resolution)- Joint motion for a resolution

Mr President, I respect your decision.

But may I point out that it is extremely thoughtless to vote on legislation - and the next report is a legislative report - on a Thursday afternoon in July!

Mrs Roth-Behrendt, I must inform you that we have not just one legislative report but as many as four to vote on!

Consequently, if we wanted to deal with them all in the same way we would have had to have extended voting time well beyond 2 p.m., and we cannot do that.

In any case, we usually vote when there is a room available and not when there is not.

Mr President, in view of the vote on the Papayannakis report I should like to ask the Commission to convene a conciliation committee next week so that we sort this out before the 1 September deadline.

Please convey that to the Commissioner please, as she is not listening at the moment.

(EL) There are serious reservations regarding the proposal to amend Regulation EC No 1251/1999 on flax and hemp grown for fibre because of the unfair allocation of quotas between the Member States.

Countries with an important agricultural sector and a high rate of employment in agriculture, such as Greece, have been given the lowest quota limit, for both flax and hemp.

We should like to take this opportunity to stress the need for an awareness campaign in the Member States in order to overcome ignorance and educate the public about hemp grown for fibre; in Greece, for example, shops selling hemp fibre have been shut down by the police and small undertakings have gone out of business.

Mr President, pensioners and elderly people are in favour of innovation, even though it may appear otherwise, and so, as representative of the Pensioners' Party, I cannot help but support the inclusion of any rules leading to innovative measures when decisions are taken on the Structural Funds.

On this occasion, after stating that I voted for the motion, of course, I would call - and I do so willingly - for, in future, the projects to be financed as innovative actions to include projects which are concerned not only with improving working conditions in the strict sense but also with everything which affects pensioners, who, during the period in which they are not working, use the contributions they paid in when they were working, and so this period is, indirectly, a continuation of their working activity.

Mr President, I would just like to say that the Radical Members abstained from the vote on the Virrankoski report because the Council was trying to secure for its own budget the costs arising from missions conducted by military advisers or others within the framework of the CFSP.

Since Parliament has always taken great care to ensure that that CFSP expenditure is an integral part of the Union budget, with the result that it falls within the scope of the Commission budget, we are concerned at the way the Virrankoski report departs from this practice and at the tendency to include CFSP running and operational expenditure in the Council's budget.

This is why we abstained from the Virrankoski report.

We voted against extra money for military advisers because we believe a peace policy needs peace experts and non-violent conflict resolution.

- (DA) On 6 July 2000, members of the Union for a Europe of Nations Group voted against giving discharge to the Commission in respect of implementation of the general budget of the European Union for 1998.

The reason for this is that the present Commission, which has undertaken to implement an extensive administrative reform, is not showing sufficient willingness to implement this reform.

The many cases of foot-dragging, delay and refusal to hand over documents to the Committee on Budgetary Control, together with the extraordinary fact that crucial reports and minutes are disappearing from the record offices where they belong, are an uncomfortable indication that a form of administration is being maintained which is more suited to the age of absolute monarchy.

Clearly, the purpose of the secrecy is to protect the Commission' s members and officials from the penalties which are used in every democratic national administration and without which the European Union' s administration will never operate properly.

In the course of the debate on the report, I have mentioned two matters which are still outstanding, but these are merely isolated symptoms of a general malaise.

One year after coming into office, the Commission has still not presented any proposal for fundamentally changing the provisions in the regulations for public officials which provide the kind of legal protection for incompetence and dishonesty that is completely absurd in an administration which purports to be democratic.

The treatment of this report in the Committee on Budgetary Control has also shown that some Members of the European Parliament are more concerned with protecting the Commission against those citizens who pay for the EU' s budget than with attending to the same citizens' demand that their money be administered honestly and efficiently.

Unacceptable pressure has been placed upon a number of rapporteurs, and the shady operators who have an interest in preventing the serious examples of fraud and deception in the Commission' s administration from coming to light have not held back from making physical threats.

A number of MEPs have today voted in favour of giving discharge.

I do not believe that a great many of these MEPs are satisfied with the Commission' s economic administration, but we have reached a point where the majority prefer to close their eyes to what is going on than to run the risk of their electors and fellow citizens becoming fully aware of the scandalous states of affairs which make themselves felt year after year.

I am convinced that, in the long run, the majority of MEPs will regret having been so indulgent.

- (DE) On 6 June I as rapporteur recommended to the Committee on Budgetary Control that we give the Commission a discharge for the 1998 financial year.

Today I voted against that discharge.

The deciding factor was the way the Commissioner for budgets handled the Fléchard case.

This firm was suspected of fraud as early as 1992.

Nonetheless, it was let off a fine to the tune of EUR 14.6 million.

Nonetheless the Commission continued to do business with it all those years, without asking any questions.

Now the Italian financial police are investigating and it is said that the firm is involved in shady deals and the black marketeering of butter on a grand scale.

Of course, we must not prejudge.

But the Commissioner for budgets does not have the right to refuse to tell us how many millions the Commission has paid to this firm over the past years.

Mrs Schreyer promised the figures to the Committee on Budgetary Control on 24 May, but has still not produced them.

She gives one excuse after another.

On Tuesday, she tried to make this House believe, wrongly, that Regulation 2390/1999 prevented her from presenting the figures.

The Community budget is not a matter of secrecy.

If the Commission refuses to render account, our response can only be to refuse the discharge.

. (NL) Granting the European Commission discharge is anything but self-evident.

In previous years, the financial irregularities were so extensive that the discharge had to be turned down, which led to the fall of the Santer Commission.

This time, the discharge pertains to the 1998 budget, and it is a particularly hard nut to crack.

That budget was entirely the responsibility of the previous Commission, but we are discussing it with the present Prodi Commission, which has started to adopt better management and examine incidents of fraud in the past.

In the spring of this year, the EP was right in postponing the 1999 discharge in order to clarify matters further and make improvements.

These clarifications have largely been given and improvements made, although a margin of serious error in excess of 5% is still frighteningly high.

The mislaying of the report relating to the Commission meeting, during which the penalty in the Flèchard case was decimated, is nothing short of a mockery.

The Committee on Budgetary Control endured an onslaught of harsh criticism by some and was at the same time given the benefit of the doubt by others.

The circumstances surrounding the rapporteur' s explanation can be called embarrassing and harm the committee' s reputation.

Faced with the need to finally make a decision on whether or not to grant discharge, we eventually gave the current European Commission the benefit of the doubt for 1998.

It should, however, realise that this does not create a precedent for the 1999 discharge.

The European Commission is partly responsible for this discharge and has also had the opportunity in the meantime to put its house in order.

Mrs Redondo has asked for the floor on a point of order.

Mr President, I would like to ask for the vote on the report on the protection of forests to be postponed until the next sitting, because today, for unavoidable reasons, I must leave this Parliament at 5 p.m.

Mrs Redondo, we have been unable to vote on a number of legislative reports because there is just not enough time, and so these will be put to the vote this afternoon after the votes on urgent subjects, as usual.

As you are aware, certain decisions are taken by the Conference of Presidents.

Usually, when voting time starts at midday it lasts for an hour.

Today, it started at 12.15 p.m. and ended at approximately 1.30 p.m.

The votes on certain resolutions, such as the European Council of Feira, Zimbabwe and the trafficking of human beings took a relatively short time.

The votes on the legislative drafts take up rather a lot of time.

In any case, this is not the appropriate time to discuss this subject.

We will take note of your comment and pass it on to the Conference of Presidents, for, in the order of voting, according to the procedure we have been following, out of all the recommendations for second reading - which engage our capacity as a legislative House - priority is given to the drafts which engage our power of colegislation.

I am sorry, Mr President, to continue from where I left off a moment ago and come back to what Mr Swoboda just said. Mr President, I understand everything you have said.

But this week for the first time we did not have a vote at noon on Tuesday. That is a decision that was taken.

We were against; the majority of the House - had they known of it - the rapporteurs - Mrs Redondo Jiménez and Mr Arvidsson and others - would no doubt also have been against it. But if we do this, then we must also show some degree of flexibility.

Among this rather smaller body of people I dare to say this; most of us are experienced parliamentarians and we know that there are different kinds of sittings. The Thursday sitting in July is a particularly sensitive one.

We know that, we may not be happy about it, but that is how it is. So I would ask you to check whether the four legislative reports that are still on the agenda, and that do not need long votes, can be carried over to the next part-session.

Mrs Redondo Jiménez herself asked the same, in the case of her report, and she has my support. Mr Arvidsson - all this relates to what I know about - will, I hope, also agree.

So I would ask you to contact the rapporteurs and the groups. Mr Swoboda has already said it, and I can repeat it for my own group: we will agree to these four legislative reports being carried over to the September part-session or to a part-session in Brussels.

Mrs Roth-Behrendt, as you are aware, a request can be made to postpone a debate either at the start of a sitting in the morning or at the start of voting time.

Therefore, when voting time is resumed this afternoon, a rapporteur or another member of the Committee will be able to request that the report be put to the vote in September.

I do not have any objection to this.

Mr President, you are absolutely right, that is the correct procedure. But if we plan to do that and if it is certain that, let us say, Mr Swoboda or I or others move this proposal, it would be only fair to inform the rapporteurs of this possibility.

In any case, the presiding President will be informed of the request and will, of course, give the floor to any Member who wishes to speak at that time.

Mr President, I voted against the Rühle report.

Firstly, it appears to contain an error, for it mentions a 1998 budget of as much as EUR 10 940 000 million - at least in the Italian version - which seems to me at first sight to be rather too great a sum.

There has to be an error of at least 3 decimal points.

Apart from this, I would like to stress that, in addition to the other aspects which are inadequate as the rapporteur himself states in his report - which begs the question of why he does not conclude the report with a recommendation to vote against it - it would be appropriate to give at least part of these funds to voluntary organisations, which include many pensioners and elderly people who are willing to go out into the world and assist developing countries.

(FR) The European Parliament, during its sitting of 13 April 2000, quite rightly decided to delay the decision giving discharge to the European Commission on the implementation of the budget for the year 1998.

This decision was legitimate, insofar as the citizens of our nations have the right to be told how the money of the European Union, their money, is being spent.

Our group is entirely in favour of any vigorous attempts to combat fraud and embezzlement.

Indeed, the irregularities noted, both those covered in Mrs Stauner' s report on the questionable management of the Commission, and those underlined in Mrs Rühle' s report on the various European Development Funds, cannot leave anyone indifferent, and necessarily damage the image and credibility of the Community as a whole.

In addition, we must draw the proper conclusions, in terms of sanctioning those responsible, certainly, but also in establishing far more transparent procedures.

As shown by the votes of the Committee on Budgetary Control, the reports by Mrs Rühle and Mrs Stauner are heading in this direction.

Mrs Rühle' s report on the various EDFs clearly confronts the Commission with its responsibilities; it demands more clarity for all future aid distributed by the Community for the benefit of developing countries.

The desire to raise moral standards regarding aid policy and increase the efficacy of the use of aid is a principle which is now clearly defined and our group is pleased with that.

There is no question, however, of accepting that, on the pretext of better monitoring, in order to achieve a more honest and rational use of the European funds - and I am thinking of African, Caribbean and Pacific countries in particular, that our action should be a pretext for also organising the unfounded trial of certain countries of the European Union - incidentally one of the main net contributors (I am talking about France) - by means of a witch hunt which, it is said, targets certain high-ranking civil servants of that nationality.

Greater transparency is also our primary concern with regard to the finances of political groups within this House; the citizens of Europe, moreover, would not understand if we said otherwise.

We must also take note of the responses of our institution to the observations of the Court of Auditors, and without delay encourage all relevant reform in accordance with the financial regulation and the principle of transparency.

In conclusion, I will say - so much is clear - that we should not introduce confusion between the discharge procedure, which represents an overall appreciation of the management of the European Commission as laid down by the Treaty, and the handling of a number of isolated matters which, although clearly serious, are still only isolated cases and represent a low figure with regard to the total budget.

We must keep a sense of proportion!

Equally, as far as our Group is concerned, taking note of the further clarification we asked the Commission for in spring, in the context of the Stauner report, is no reason at all for our institution to then be affected by amnesia when it comes to tracking down unacceptable practice at the expense of our fellow citizens' contributions.

Our Group congratulates the rapporteurs, Mrs Stauner, Mrs Rühle and Mr Kuhne, on their commendable efforts.

We should, however, remain alert and be in a position to observe what the European Commission' s attitude will actually be with regard to the commitments it has made.

Our Group therefore considers it necessary, for the time being, to abstain.

(FR) Only after the mad cow scandal did we realise the need to improve the traceability and labelling of foodstuffs.

Europe was very slow to react and was left far behind in terms of beef.

Today, on the basis of a unanimous agreement within the Council, we finally have the opportunity to show a little determination.

Indeed, the common position submitted to us includes a large number of the amendments adopted by this House at first reading.

Concerning the mandatory statements, indication of origin, implementation dates, minced meat and the optional system, I believe that Parliament should be satisfied: the Council has listened to us.

This is why I wholeheartedly supported this common position as it stood and did not vote for any amendments.

The debate has focused on a few specific points and in particular on the indication of the category of animal on the label.

Certain fellow Members have explained, in good faith, that this statement does nothing to contribute to tracing beef.

However, after the series of food scandals, which this House has always vigorously denounced, how could we today omit to take account of the colossal role played by the consumer?

Specifically mentioning the category is a response to a demand.

It contributes to restoring consumer confidence.

Two types of information must be distinguished:

information making it possible to improve traceability, but that is not directly intended to inform the end consumer.

As it is too specific, it can really only be read by professionals.

It is on the basis of these statements that controls can be carried out.

We are therefore talking about setting up identification and traceability systems;

the second type of information is directly intended for citizens like you and me, who buy their meat every day.

What do they want to know?

They want to be sure that the product they are to consume is safe: the traceability and identification system will make it possible to guarantee the safety and quality of beef.

But the citizen would also like to know what type of meat it is.

This type of indication on the label is addressed directly to the end consumer and gives him intelligible information.

It is a mistake to say that this is pointless.

On the contrary, this labelling is just as important as establishing health guarantees.

Europe must give consumers back their confidence, as they have been avoiding beef since the mad cow scandal.

The implications are significant for the agro-food sector overall, which has been struck squarely by this crisis.

These two types of information are not in competition; they are complementary and contribute, each at their own level, to restoring the confidence of European consumers.

The confidence of our consumers cannot be decreed, it must be won.

. It is a correct policy objective of the European Union to ensure that businesses carry out their affairs in an environmentally-friendly manner.

The Community Eco-Management and Audit scheme known as EMAS afforded an opportunity to EU companies to secure accreditation that they are implementing good environmental practices within their operations.

What we are discussing here today is the revision of the original 1993 regulation which put in place the Community Eco-Management and Audit scheme.

The criteria for inclusion on the EMAS register are very stringent.

The fact of the matter is that there is public reporting of the results which are carried out by each national standards authority within every Member State of the European Union.

Each national standards authority carries out a comprehensive and full review of all the activities of a prospective applicant under the EMAS scheme that may affect the environment.

Under the new regulation which we are discussing here today easier access will be made for small- and medium-sized enterprises to apply for accreditation under the EMAS scheme.

For the most part it has only been larger industrial companies which have sought recognition under the Community Eco-Management and Audit scheme to date.

We must remember that the EMAS scheme is the European version of the International Standard known as ISO14001.

In essence, this ISO International Standard is the equivalent to the ISO9000 for European companies but with the appropriate environmental slant.

It is the correct policy of the European Union to ensure that all companies in Europe respect the environment and ensure that the necessary practices are put in place to guarantee their operations do not adversely impact on the environment in any shape or form.

That is why I fully support proposals to ensure that easier access will be made for small- and medium-sized enterprises to be incorporated under the EMAS framework.

There must be greater flexibility within this system no matter how stringent the rules are to ensure that all sectors and all businesses in the European Union have an opportunity to secure accreditation under the Community Eco-Management and Audit scheme.

I fully support this programme and commend this report.

Recommendation for second reading: Breyer (A5-0166/2000)

Mr President, I voted for the recommendation, which sets limit values for benzene and carbon monoxide in the ambient air.

Of course I am in favour of this, in that whenever there is a danger, pensioners and the elderly are always among the first to be affected, for, understandably, their lungs are often in bad shape.

Apart from this, I would like to call strongly for there to be focus in the future not only on the air inhaled by the citizens, but also on the air inhaled by those who work with dangerous substances such as benzene and carbon monoxide.

It would be appropriate for us to concern ourselves with this matter and reduce the working hours of those who work with dangerous substances to less than those of the other workers, to enable them to enjoy an average life span.

I feel that the European Union should concern itself, in particular, with the conditions and working hours of the citizens who inhale those dangerous substances against which we rightly protect pedestrians.

Workers should receive even greater protection.

Recommendation for second reading: Jackson (A5-0164/2000)

Mr President, I voted for the motion and I congratulate the rapporteur, Mrs Jackson, who worked so hard to ensure that this recommendation on the practical organisation of environmental inspections becomes a directive.

There is no point in Parliament adopting hundreds and hundreds of extremely important and useful directives and regulations if adequate, effective, practical monitoring is not then carried out in order to ensure that they are genuinely implemented and are of benefit to all the citizens of the European Union, particularly - as I said a moment ago - when it is a matter of environmental health, as it is in this case, and when failure to observe the rules causes harm, above all, to pensioners and the elderly.

The principal aim of this recommendation is to strengthen the compliance with and to contribute to a more consistent implementation and enforcement of Community environmental law in the Member States.

This draft recommendation establishes minimum criteria to be applied in the organising, carrying out, following up and publicising of the results of environmental inspections.

It provides for environmental inspections of all industrial and other enterprises whose emissions and discharges on the environment are subject to particular authorisations or licensing requirements.

This would certainly be the case for all companies who receive pollution control licences under the auspices of the Environmental Protection Agencies.

According to the text of this recommendation, environmental inspections will include: site visits; verification of self-monitoring by the operators of the controlled installations; checking the premises, the equipment and the adequacy of the environmental management at the site as well as the records kept by the operators.

Two types of inspections are foreseen, in particular, routine inspections carried out as part of a planned inspection programme and non-routine inspections as a follow-up to complaints in connection with the issue and renewal or modification of various licences.

Member States will be required to draw up in advance plans for environmental inspection activities covering all their respective territory and the installations within it.

These plans shall be available to the public under broader and wider information campaigns which are envisaged under this proposal.

Under this draft recommendation, each plan should define the geographical area which it covers, cover a defined period of time, include specific provisions for its revision, identify the specific sites or types of installations covered, prescribe the programmes for routine environmental inspections, provide for and outline the procedures for non-routine environmental inspections, provide for coordination between the different inspecting authorities.

I would like to commend the rapporteur, Caroline Jackson, for her report.

In her report she is calling for this proposal to be translated into a directive which would have uniform application across the European Union.

The rapporteur believes that only a directive can force the Member States to introduce these inspection systems.

As a member of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy of the European Parliament, I support the need for Member States to establish harmonised environmental inspections.

The EU Council must listen to the European Parliament in this regard.

We must all recall that the European Parliament has the power of codecision on environmental matters as a result of the implementation of the provisions of the Amsterdam Treaty.

The European Union also has competence in environmental matters under Article 130 of the Maastricht Treaty.

Santa Maria da Feira European Council of 19 and 20 June 2000

Mr President, the Feira Council of 19 and 20 June 2000 showed a certain hypocrisy regarding a goodly number of subjects, and I will cite four of these.

Regarding Austria, which was officially marginalised by the Council: the fourteen Heads of State and Government, having been foolish enough to impose unjustified sanctions, were then stupid enough not to be able to get out of the impasse they had got themselves into.

This matter is particularly serious as it clearly shows that the powers of coercion given to the European Union can easily be used against national democratic expression.

On the draft Charter of Fundamental Rights, the Heads of State and Government have mostly pretended not to know yet whether they wanted to include social rights and make the document binding in nature.

There again, this is pure hypocrisy intended to beguile the opposition.

In fact, the majority would like a comprehensive, binding document as it boils down to silencing the democratic expression of each individual nation, under the pretence of better safeguarding European values.

On the pretext of unifying citizens' rights, the governments will succeed in taking from the nations the fundamental constitutional ability to define the rights which, for each country, are found at the heart of their own history and culture.

With regard to enlargement, while hoping and praying for a rapid conclusion to negotiations, the Council has been hypocritical enough to erect new barriers before the candidate countries, such as, for example, the Charter itself, which could obviously complicate accession negotiations.

Even on the subject of closer cooperation, which was added to the IGC agenda, the Council has hardly been sincere and has not said what it really meant by this.

Earlier today, at the Constitutional Affairs Committee, I asked Joschka Fischer a question on this subject, but he wriggled out of replying.

We will come back to that later.

(EL) There are four important observations to be made on the Portuguese presidency and the presidency's closing summit in Santa Maria da Feira:

First, the European Union took another very dangerous step towards militarisation by pushing for an EU military and police force and by developing an Atlantic framework for it to work within.

By contrast, no positive action was taken to promote peace, as the continuing quagmire in Yugoslavia illustrates.

Secondly, it is clear from developments at the Intergovernmental Conference that we are moving towards a "two-speed Europe" rather than towards democratisation, as continual reference to "closer cooperation" and various proposals to reduce the weighting of small countries in both the Council and the Commission illustrate.

Thirdly, the European Union, under pressure from the United Kingdom in particular, failed to reach a specific agreement and binding timetable on tax information, leaving tax havens free to operate within the Union.

Fourthly, the Lisbon Summit, midway through the Portuguese presidency, gave another sign in favour of abandoning the European welfare model and changing to the American model.

- (DA) The Danish Social Democrats in the European Parliament have voted today in favour of the resolution concerning the conclusions from the European Council' s summit in Feira on 19-20 June 2000.

We have done so because we should like to repay a good presidency which has set a commendable and forward-looking agenda for Europe, as is also reflected in the section of the resolution concerning the follow-up to the Lisbon Summit.

Our overall vote cannot, however, be taken as implying that we support the desire for an extended agenda at the Intergovernmental Conference and the legally binding incorporation of the Charter of Fundamental Rights into the Treaty. In this connection, we would refer to our explanations of vote on these matters, issued in connection with the Helsinki Summit, the calling of the Intergovernmental Conference, the European Parliament' s position on the Intergovernmental Conference and preparations for the Feira Summit.

I was unable to vote in favour of the compromise resolution, mainly because the paragraph on taxation is a little too sparse and casts a biased judgement on what was really decided in Feira.

Parliament should rather have noted, with satisfaction, of course, the determination of the Heads of State and Government to reach an integral agreement on the taxation package as a whole (taxation of savings income, business taxation, interest and royalties) at the end of 2002 at the latest.

We should have confirmed the need to preserve the competitiveness of European financial markets by the simultaneous adoption of equivalent measures in key third countries and identical measures in associated or dependent territories.

We should also have asked to receive the reports that the Commission should present at regular intervals on the application of information exchange systems and systems for taxation at source from savings, as well as the report on the basis of which the adoption and implementation of the directive are to be decided.

I would remind you that this was not the case.

I know that opinion on the tax compromise that we just managed to negotiate in Feira is divided.

This is reflected in all the European press.

I cannot help but name a few headlines from French language papers, 'Delaying compromise on savings tax' , 'Doubts on Feira tax compromise' , 'Superficial agreement, fundamental disagreement' , 'lame agreement' , 'taxation at source, coexistence, nothing at all?' or from the German language papers, 'Brown the Scot boosts London as a financial centre.

London leads the way in the EU tax battle' , 'Swiss banks see no need for action' , 'all financial centres must cooperate to do away with banking secrecy' .

The observation in the Basler Zeitung of 24 June is also telling, 'We are more likely to see the Matterhorn crumble than the Swiss electorate release bank staff from their confidentiality obligations and the Bern Finance Minister become the tax collector for Brussels.'

In this context, the headline in the Écho of 24 June, which accurately notes that 'without sufficient guarantees, Luxembourg will block the taxation directive' and that 'the exchange of information should also be applied by competing markets' , reflects what was really decided in Feira.

The fact that our resolution complains about the Feira timetable illustrates the ignorance or delusion of the authors of this passage, whom I would like to remind of what the Luxembourg Prime Minister specified in Feira on this subject, that is, that with regard to taxation of savings 'there are still around fifty technical matters which have never been discussed by the Commission' .

In this context, complaining that the timetable did not reflect the urgency of the problem is irresponsibly unrealistic.

(FR) The Lutte ouvrière Members share the indignation expressed by the GUE proposal, which we voted on, at the death of the 58 immigrants in Dover, and of so many others, who attempted to cross external or internal borders of the European Union.

In order to put an end to a situation where poverty forces thousands of human beings to leave for lands where they hope to have a slightly better life, we must put an end to a social system which, in order to concentrate extraordinary riches in the hands of the few, enforces poverty on the majority of the planet.

Obviously, a vote in Parliament will not bring about this upheaval, although it is an essential need for humanity.

It is disgusting that, even in areas where current national and European institutions could actually do something, they do nothing.

The Dover tragedy happened between two European countries.

The barbed wire fence we are currently setting up around the European Union exists even within the Union for third country nationals, and these barriers can kill.

It is not enough to denounce the crooks that make money by trafficking in human beings.

Immigrants must be guaranteed the rights to which every human being should be entitled.

We must ensure the free movement of persons.

We must put an end to immigration policies that turn immigrants into some sort of subhumans with no rights, if not into illegal immigrants preyed on by the police.

We wish to protest most strongly at the policy of the French Government, which revels in its role as President of the European Union but which refuses to regularise 65 000 immigrant workers who have become illegal immigrants as a result of unfair laws, and we demand that their situation be regularised immediately.

. (PT) The tragedy in the port of Dover involving the death of 58 immigrants is, just like the tragedy which claimed the lives of two boys from Guinea on the landing gear of a Sabena aircraft a few months ago, a terrible indictment of the current ineffective and misguided cooperation and development policies and of the inappropriate immigration and asylum policies being implemented by the European Union and by individual Member States.

Such occurrences, which show the damaging effects of current globalisation for what they really are, highlight the urgent need to establish guidelines and measures to reduce the gap between industrialised countries and developing countries. They also highlight the great need to implement bold and tolerant legislative measures at national and Community level in the area of migration, with a view in particular to improving reception conditions for immigrants and their integration, and ensuring that their civic, economic, social and cultural rights are fully recognised.

This was the spirit in which we tabled a motion for a resolution.

It is precisely because the compromise retreats from this that we did not subscribe to and, in fact, rejected it, since this compromise is marred by the negative concept of building a "fortress Europe" . We also rejected the compromise because it aims largely at using policing methods to find the "solution" to the problems of migration.

Mr President, I shall explain my vote in writing.

However, may I submit a procedural motion?

Previously, when Members were present for the vote and an explanation of vote was made in writing, it was possible to leave, as the President used to state that he had received such and such a written explanation of vote on such and such a report.

Yesterday I waited 40 minutes to say that I was submitting my explanation of the vote in writing!

It is a waste of time.

What we are doing is already somewhat inhuman: we vote from 12 p.m. to 1.30 p.m. and then we stay here until 4 p.m. to say that we are submitting a written explanation of vote!

The parliamentary services told me that I had to be here.

Perhaps you would have agreed...nevertheless, could we not clarify things?

I understand that Members who are not taking part in the vote on a report or resolution cannot submit a written explanation, but why must those who have taken part in the vote, who are submitting a written explanation, stay here for another half-hour?

Mrs Lulling, whose fault are you saying it is?

Your fellow Members who are giving their explanations of vote?

If all the Members here had given their explanations of vote in writing you would have had your chance rather earlier.

However, your fellow Members have the right to give explanations of vote on all the reports that we put to the vote.

Mr President, I would like to comment on points 2 and 3, in which it is claimed that the Intergovernmental Conference is the key issue in the run-up to enlargement of the EU.

The key issue is primarily that of how the negotiations with the candidate countries are handled and what result is achieved.

There is still no final date set, and the candidate countries think that the EU is extremely imprecise regarding its position.

I would also like to comment on point 10, the contents of which I think involve an unfortunate development in the direction of militarisation of the European Union.

I am saying this also as a representative of a country that is non-aligned.

Finally, I would like to comment on point 11, which talks of a positive step towards necessary tax coordination in Europe.

What sort of a statement is this?

In this connection, I would like to quote the Swedish constitution and its words about "the ancient right of the Swedish people to impose taxes on themselves".

(The sitting was suspended at 1.50 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m.)

The next item is the debate on topical and urgent subjects of major importance.

Mr Maaten has the floor for a point of order.

Madam President, I would like to take the floor at the beginning of the topical debate, because, in accordance with Rule 146 of the Rules of Procedure, this is the right time to do this in my opinion.

Indeed, the next item on the agenda is a resolution on Euro 2000 and hooligans.

And although we are certainly in favour of discussing this matter, there are elements in this resolution which are still under investigation by the legal authorities in the Netherlands.

In our view, therefore, it would be premature at this stage to pass judgement on this legal investigation.

I would therefore move, based on Rule 146, to adjourn the debate on this resolution until our part-session in September.

This Rule also stipulates that such a motion shall be put to the vote immediately.

First of all, Mr Maaten, the article you are talking about only refers to one Group or 32 Members.

Secondly, it does not directly concern the question of matters for topical and urgent debate, as the very principle of urgent matters is to discuss them at the beginning of the part-session in order to establish a framework for them.

This is not like a referral back to committee.

Consequently, the urgent matter is either accepted or refused.

If it is accepted, we must follow the procedure through and the debate must take place.

Madam President, I would ask you to communicate to Mrs Fontaine, so that she may make the relevant representations to the competent institutions, the great concern in the Gulf of Algeciras about the presence, for more than two months now, of the British nuclear submarine, HMS Tireless, which has broken down, apparently with a very serious problem relating to its cooling system.

According to the latest information, it appears that they intend to repair it there.

The inhabitants of the area have expressed their complete opposition to its being repaired there, by means of a joint resolution of the political groups which has been approved today.

From this House, we urgently request that the British Government immediately remove this machine from the bay and repair it in England, where we suppose that they will at least have the appropriate facilities to do so.

Mr Bautista Ojeda, your speech will be passed on to Mrs Fontaine who I am sure will handle it with the utmost attention.

Madam President, there are nonetheless groups which support Mr Maaten' s motion.

He has spoken on behalf of the ELDR Group and I endorse his motion on behalf of the EDD Group.

I would thus ask you to proceed to the vote in line with the Rules of Procedure.

No, Mr Blokland, the Rules of Procedure do not lay down that the postponement of an urgent matter can be put to the vote.

Topical and urgent matters are a very specific case.

It was voted upon on Monday and this House, by sovereign right, drew up a framework for it.

As soon as a matter becomes urgent, it cannot be postponed.

Obviously, the arguments developed by you and Mr Maatten can be considered during the debate, but I am not putting the postponement of this debate to the vote.

Madam President, you are interpreting the text in a specific way, but I read the text and it does not make any mention of exemptions for urgent debates.

Every item that is put on Monday' s agenda by the House can be taken off the agenda again in the course of the week, should it transpire that, on reflection, fresh arguments have come to light.

New arguments have emerged in this instance.

We now know that the Dutch justice system is launching an inquiry.

It seems clear to me, therefore, that when we decided to discuss this matter on Monday, we did not have this piece of information at our disposal.

We now have new information, which we need to take into account.

I therefore believe that your interpretation of the Rules of Procedure is not according to the letter of the Rules of Procedure.

Mr Blokland, I believe my interpretation is in line with the letter and spirit of our Rules of Procedure. It is clearly stated that the agenda - as we are talking about establishing the agenda - is established by this House at the beginning of the part-session, which has been done.

Regardless of this, if new factors come into play, these can be communicated during the debate to provide additional information for our fellow Members when they come to vote.

However, I stand by this interpretation, which is linked both to the principle of the agenda and the principle of urgent matters.

Madam President, I simply wish to express my agreement with the words of the Member from the Partido Andalucista, from Andalucia, and suggest, as a place to repair the British nuclear submarine, the gardens of Buckingham Palace. That is where they could take the aforementioned 'beast' .

All the arguments have been expressed on the subject of this postponement.

I maintain my position and I now suggest that we move straight on to the debate on Fiji and the Solomon islands, as that is what our fellow Members are waiting for.

The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions:

B5-0607/2000 by Mr Speroni, on behalf of the Technical Group of Independent Members, on Fiji;

B5-0616/2000 by Mrs Ludford, on behalf of the Group of the Europe Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party, on the situation in Fiji and the Solomon Islands;

B5-0620/2000 by Mr Corrie and Mr Johan Van Hecke, on behalf of the Europe People' s Party (Christian Democrats) and European Democrats, on the situation in Fiji and the Solomon Islands;

B5-0629/2000 by Mr Marset Campos, on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left/Nordic Green Left, on the situation in Fiji and the Solomon Islands;

B5-0636/2000 by Mrs Lucas, on behalf of the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance, on the situation in Fiji;

B5-0640/2000 by Mrs Lucas, on behalf of the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance, on the situation in the Solomon Islands;

B5-0644/2000 by Mr van den Berg and Mrs Kinnock, on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists, on Fiji and the Solomon Islands.

Madam President, what is happening in Fiji is further evidence that the pathetic dreams of those who believe in a multiethnic and multiracial society are unrealistic.

Indeed, we can see that the conflict between the indigenous ethnic group and the immigrant ethnic group has flared up dramatically, although it is true that there has been relatively little bloodshed.

The same thing is happening in the nearby Solomon Islands and all over the world.

The events in the Great Lakes region in Africa, the events on the island of Timor and the current situation in the Moluccas are all evidence of the fact that peaceful cohabitation of communities with completely different traditions, cultures and histories cannot exist outside the good intentions of those who are for total globalisation.

Therefore, in my opinion, we need to focus our efforts chiefly on protecting the indigenous ethnic groups, so that the indigenous Fijians do not share the fate of the South American Indians or the indigenous populations of Central and North America, and to ensure that their culture is preserved by controlling illegal immigration, so that what is happening there and has sadly already come about in the Balkans does not occur in Europe as well.

Madam President, we in Parliament are rightly particularly attentive to areas where ethnic tensions lead to conflict and attempts to overthrow democracy and the rule of law.

In both Fiji and the Solomon Islands democratic government and law and order have been undermined.

In Fiji the aim must be to restore the legitimate government elected on the basis of the 1997 multi-racial constitution, which was approved by both ethnic groups - Indo-Fijians and indigenous Fijians.

Violence against property and people must cease and the hostages released.

The interim civilian administration installed in Fiji does not meet the constitutional or democratic tests.

We therefore call on the Commission to begin with determination the procedures to suspend development cooperation with Fiji.

The beleaguered inhabitants of Fiji are looking to the European Union, which they see as the beacon of democracy and racial equality, to come to their aid.

We also warn the Solomon Islands that a suspension of aid may be needed there to restore democracy, peace and stability.

Madam President, I want to concentrate on the Solomon Islands, but first just a word on Fiji.

My ACP-EU Vice-President is one of those held hostage and I would ask you to send a letter of support to his family.

The ACP-EU delegation went to the Solomon Islands to study the ethnic tension.

It was quite clear after talks that a coup was imminent.

When we arrived we found a complete vacuum.

There was no dialogue between the warring parties.

There was no law and order, as those who were police by day were Malaitan militants by night and they opened their armouries to the Malaitans on the morning of the coup.

99.9% of Guadalcanal is held by the IMF group and only Honiara City is held by the Malaitans.

The ethnic conflict is all about the expulsion from Guadalcanal of 40 000 Malaitans back to their own island, to severe hardship, without any compensation.

As they did all the work, Guadalcanal is now at a standstill in both rural and urban areas.

The presence of Mrs Kinnock and myself did influence the situation for the better.

We had the 48-hour resignation demand on the prime minister withdrawn.

We advised them to recall Parliament and have a debate on the situation and this has now happened.

Amazingly the leader of the opposition is now the prime minister.

All this happened because we pointed out the European Union could withdraw aid if the coup took place at the point of a gun.

That aid is 25% of their GDP.

But the country is bankrupt and the new prime minister will face the same problems as the last.

He must make the parliamentary structure more active, work towards a cease-fire and then have talks on compensation with outside assistance.

Outside help will also be needed to regain law and order.

I should like to finish by thanking the members of the delegation office there who were so helpful to us.

Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, it is true that the Pacific always evokes images of paradise: beaches, coconut palms, sun.

Today, the reality is far sadder.

The two coups d' état that have taken place in Fiji recently in fact show unstable States divided by poverty.

The most incredible thing in this matter, apart from the passivity of our institutions, is that the pretext of interethnic tension is always used to explain such conflicts.

We are well aware, however, that the true cause is not just that.

In the Solomon Islands, the vast majority of the population is Melanesian and Christian.

In Fiji, almost half the population is of Indian origin, but these origins date back to the last century.

Moreover, in spite of these differences, all these people are at home in Fiji.

I believe there are causes other than this ethnic conflict.

For example, we deny the role played by those who make a profit from these conflicts: multinationals and local politicians.

For the former, periods of instability mean fewer social, tax and environmental obligations as the State is very weak in these cases and conflicts favour the arms industry as the political groups need to get their weapons from somewhere.

As far as politicians are concerned, the practice of pitting one group against another, as, for example, the far right does in Europe, allows a political vacuum to be created or power to be maintained.

This practice is only possible because the population is poor and suffers from a lack of knowledge of other groups.

In this case, the two conflicts should have enabled some people to take back or gain power that they could not win through the ballot box.

In Fiji, the coup d' état was fomented by a bankrupt businessman who used his distant Fiji origins to legitimise his actions.

As for the new Prime Minister, he is also from a business background.

In the Solomon Islands, a sham parliamentary vote brought a new Prime Minister to power, elected by the power of the gun.

These two examples support our vision of the conflict.

The joint resolution, however, is too sanctimonious and effectively wants to restore the previous situation.

As is all too often the case, it does not refer to the true sources of these conflicts: poverty and the underlying self-interested role of political and economic participants.

From this point of view, if we want to be really effective, we must prevent further conflicts and to do so, we must genuinely aid the development of education, the local economy and local democracy.

This is how we might succeed in changing things.

Madam President, my comments will be on the question of Fiji.

Some days ago, a number of ethnic Fijian Indians representing that community and the Indian diaspora who are concerned about these conflicts came to the Parliament.

They expressed their deepest concern about the situation in Fiji, about its symbolism and how it could affect Indian communities in other areas of the world.

Their concern was not precisely for the ethnic Indian community, it was for Fiji.

Fiji had a multi-racial constitution in 1997.

It was designed to solve the ethnic problems in the islands, including the land issue and that constitution was unanimously approved by an ethnic-Fijian-dominated Parliament and blessed by the Great Council Of Chiefs.

It was a model for a constitution for a multi-racial society and a thriving island.

Clearly the lawlessness and violence has undermined that constitution but we must look more deeply at the causes of the conflict.

This House has to ensure that in those countries where we give aid we monitor the breakdown of law and order and look at the interests of those ethnic minorities who are in danger.

The concerns expressed are very real.

We have the ability to suspend aid if we believe that there is something going wrong in Fiji.

Myself and Glenys Kinnock and other colleagues who have met with the ethnic Indian community want to help them find a solution to this conflict.

Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, the Commission has been observing the events in Fiji since 18 May with growing concern.

It really is discouraging to see the achievements of an entire decade put at risk.

Fiji had a constitution that was not based on racism.

It had a democratically elected government.

That has fallen and been replaced by an interim government appointed by the military.

Fiji has already suffered enormous economic damage at this point.

There is a risk that investors will lose confidence in it.

Politically, Fiji, which proudly wanted to give its name to the new 20-year partnership agreement between the ACP states and the EU, risks seeing its relations with the international community of states worsen considerably.

It even risks being expelled from the Commonwealth.

The Commission is currently preparing a proposal to the Council on the application of Article 366a of the Lomé Convention because, in its the view, the fundamental principles of the Convention - democracy, the rule of law and respect for human rights - are no longer guaranteed in Fiji.

Let me remind you that this proposal initially provides for consultations between the parties.

Further measures or sanctions will only be decided in a second stage, on the basis of the results of the consultations and how they are assessed.

So it is too early, at this point in time, to contemplate further measures or sanctions.

Any response on our part should be well-considered and targeted.

A trade ban, as called for by unions in Australia and New Zealand, would result in the dismissal of more than 40 000 workers in the clothing and tourist industry, and that should be avoided.

Turning to the Solomon Islands, here too the Commission has been observing the deteriorating security situation with concern. The Commission supports all the efforts made by the mediators to ensure that the parties concerned can discuss the outstanding issues and differences of opinion openly and without the threat of violence.

The Commission is ready to use its instruments to support the peace process as soon as the political and security situation allows it.

The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.

The next item is the joint debate on the following joint motions for resolutions:

B5-0608/2000, by Mr Pannella and others, on behalf of the Technical Group of Independent Members, on the need to stop Chinese colonisation and adopt a new Statute for Tibet;

B5-0610/2000, by Mrs Sanders-ten Holte, on behalf of the Group of the Europe Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party, on the urgent need for Sino-Tibetan negotiations with a view to the adoption of a new Statute for Tibet;

B5-0617/2000, by Mrs Muscardini and Mr Collins, on behalf of the Union for a Europe of Nations Group, on Tibet;

B5-0621/2000, by Mr Thomas Mann and Mr Bowis, on behalf of the Group of the Europe People' s Party (Christian Democrats) and European Democrats, on the Western China Poverty Reduction Project and the future of Tibet;

B5-0641/2000, by Mr Messner and Mrs Frassoni, on behalf of the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance, on the urgent need for Sino-Tibetan negotiations with a view to the adoption of a new Statute for Tibet;

B5-0645/2000, by Mr Sakellariou and Mr Veltroni, on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists, on Tibet

Madam President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I think we are preparing to vote on an important text on Tibet, and that today we have the opportunity to make a qualitative leap forward in this fundamental battle.

This is a battle of law, and of international law.

Tibet is occupied, Tibet was invaded by Chinese troops in 1949 and since then has been occupied and colonised by the Chinese.

I think that we must, of course, vote en masse in favour of this resolution, but that we must also vote for the amendment tabled by Mr Thomas Mann, by the liberal group and by the Group of the Greens, an amendment which asks our governments to consider the possibility of recognising the exiled Tibetan Government if, within three years, the Chinese authorities and the exiled Tibetan Government have not ultimately signed an agreement on the substantial autonomy of Tibet.

We can no longer leave the decision not to tackle the problem up to the goodwill, or in this case the ill will, of the authorities of Beijing.

We must oblige them and, through political action by Parliament, assert our determination to see this matter, which has lasted 50 years, finally resolved.

I would particularly like to call on my left-wing, socialist and communist friends to stop using double standards!

We all remember the great battles to decolonise Africa, the liberation of Algeria and Vietnam. Look at the results today: the latter is still in the hands of a totalitarian system, a dictatorship.

Today, in Tibet, there is a non-violent fight for democracy.

There is no reason not to do here what we did there, what many of us did in those days.

Today, the matter of Tibet must become a matter of law, an affirmation of non-violence by the international community.

China is a large country which has a right to democracy.

So much is clear, but that cannot be a reason to further sacrifice the right of Tibetans to live with their own culture, in full autonomy in every area that must be governed by the people.

I therefore sincerely invite my socialist and communist friends to vote for this resolution and this amendment, in order to make sure that, at least this once, Parliament is at the forefront of this battle for freedom, democracy and non-violence.

Madam President, happy birthday Dalai Lama!

But I am not sure that today is such a happy day for him, because after all, the most valuable contribution which the EU can make to the world is standing up for human rights and democracy, and these are still being flouted in Tibet.

In the light of this, I would like to make the following observations.

First of all, why is it that there is still no real dialogue at official level between the Chinese Government and the Tibetan Government in exile?

All manner of so-called indirect contacts have led to nothing.

The European Parliament should adopt a harder line in order to support the principle of non-violence. This is why this resolution is necessary.

Secondly, how can a renowned institution such as the World Bank be on the brink of financing a Chinese programme which is tantamount to a common or garden colonisation of Tibet?

This has to be prevented and hence this resolution.

Thirdly, how can the European Union possibly be one to let economic interests prevail in its relations with China?

Surely we cannot offer the Tibetan population attention only when it suits us?

In sum, Madam President, I would urge you to ensure that a real dialogue is established according to the Dalai Lama' s five-point peace plan; it will then be a happy day for Tibet' s entire population.

Mr President, Commissioner Verheugen, ladies and gentlemen, tomorrow the World Bank will be taking a decision with very serious implications for Tibet.

The aim is to provide international support to alleviate the poverty in western China, and surely everyone is prepared in principle to help those who cannot do much to help themselves.

In the framework of this project, however, 58 000 people are to be forcibly resettled in Tibet. Resettlement on that scale might well gradually turn the Tibetans into a minority in their own homeland, after decades of destruction of their culture and their monasteries, of persecution and threat to life and limb!

A fortnight ago, the Members of our Intergroup on Tibet and many other MEPs urged the President of the World Bank in Washington not to go against the Bank' s own principles for the protection of endangered peoples.

We have written to the national parliaments, to the ministries of finance in Europe, the USA and other continents, and of course to Commissioner Chris Patten.

We have urgently requested the members of the Board of the World Bank to study the report drawn by independent inspectors very carefully first.

For the inspectors seriously doubt whether the resettlement is environmentally correct or socially acceptable because of an irrigation programme.

If public monies are spent, the justification for doing so must be made just as public.

Strengthened by its planned membership of WTO, China, as I myself recently found in Beijing, is becoming increasingly aware of its role as an emerging world power.

But that also implies an obligation to act more responsibly than before and, for instance, to apply the concept of "one China - many systems" .

The full autonomy granted to Tibet must finally be guaranteed.

That includes freedom of religion, freedom of opinion, cultural and social independence.

Bilateral talks must be held with authorised leaders.

The Dalai Lama is available for this at any time.

As my colleague pointed out, this Nobel peace-prize winner, who is accepted worldwide, is celebrating his 65th birthday today and has been the Tibetans' leader for precisely 50 years.

His five-point peace plan, which reflects his profound belief in non-violence, remains as valid as ever.

It is high time to hold constructive dialogues on that basis.

On behalf of the EPP Group and the Intergroup on Tibet, I call on all the Members of the European Parliament to support our resolution.

Only a worldwide protest shortly before the World Bank' s decision, which is in fact due tomorrow, can prevent things from going seriously off course.

Madam President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, we are just about to vote, for the thirteenth time, on a resolution concerning Tibet, and we have to say, if we examine the effect these have had in the past, it is exceptionally poor.

This is why I am addressing the Commissioner.

I would like the European Union, with its three powerful institutions, to join forces and appeal to world opinion, the Chinese authorities and especially the World Bank.

As fellow MEPs have already explained, we need to put a stop to internal colonisation, this brutal murder of the cultural identity of the Tibetan population.

That is only possible if the World Bank stops financing precisely the opposite, namely the import of Chinese people with a view to destroying Tibet' s original culture.

How can we justify spending taxpayers' money on this kind of practice?

I hope you will help us bring about a U-turn, as requested by my fellow MEPs in the amendment; a U-turn which prescribes that, if there is no change in three years' time, we will eventually decide to recognise Tibet' s provisional government rather than continue to tread water.

Madam President, naturally, the Group of the Party of European Socialists fully supports this motion for a resolution.

The fact that the World Bank is about to make its decision, which has already been mentioned, is conclusive proof of the urgent nature of the resolution. If the World Bank finances the programme to combat poverty in Western China, the Chinese Government is likely to transfer large numbers of ethnic Chinese to Tibet, with the risk, or rather the explicit intention, that the Tibetans will be reduced to a minority.

In this case, their cultural, linguistic and religious traditions will almost inevitably disappear as a matter of course.

In our opinion, it is essential for Parliament to speak out against the World Bank's decision. We call upon the governments to do everything in their power and use every avenue available to them - economic and otherwise, in view of the fact that China wants to join the WTO etc. to ensure that China respects Tibet's autonomy and that negotiations are resumed as soon as possible between the Chinese Government and the Dalai Lama with the intention of establishing a new statute for Tibet.

This is the first point of our conclusions in this resolution.

The negotiations must be based on the Dalai Lama's five-point programme, which has our full support. We would also like to wish him a happy birthday.

Madam President, 50 years on we have been celebrating over the last few years the end of the war, the founding of the United Nations, the founding of the World Health Organisation, the return of independence to the Baltic Nations from the Soviet Empire, but sadly also 50 years on we have to commemorate China's illegal occupation of Tibet: fifty years of suppression and oppression of the Tibetan people by the Chinese regime.

That must never be allowed to become a fait accompli hence the amendment to this resolution to put pressure on China, which I warmly support.

Hence, also, the overall resolution to demand of the World Bank that it withdraw its support for our so-called project which would mean the movement of some 60,000 Chinese into an area currently populated by 4,000 Tibetans making a living with their herds, and the exploitation of Tibet's natural resources.

Both actions are immoral, both are against international law, both demand action by this Parliament and this Union on behalf of Tibet and its people.

Mr President, to begin with, I would like to say that I am speaking today on behalf of the Nordic Green Left Party.

We think that the Tibetans should have the autonomy that they themselves are striving for.

We are also concerned about China' s unwillingness to participate in a dialogue.

I would like to address the Commissioner and say that I hope that the Commission has very good relations with the representatives of the World Bank.

Decisions must, of course, be made by no later than tomorrow.

We have therefore only got an extremely short time in which to influence the World Bank, to which this resolution is, of course, primarily directed.

It is, of course, usually quite difficult to have any influence on the World Bank at all.

I would therefore like to be told formally whether it is possible for Parliament to wield any influence at all or whether we should try in the course of the night to get hold of our government representatives.

The Council is, of course, not represented here to any great extent.

I have had occasion to witness the situation in Tibet personally. It is far more serious, humiliating and painful than it is possible to describe in this Chamber or at any other meeting.

For the last forty years, the Chinese have forcibly denied the Tibetans their freedom, they have deprived them of their identity and, what is more, trampled on the human rights and dignity of the people.

That is why it is necessary for a Parliament which is so concerned with human rights and combating xenophobia and racism to call upon China to negotiate another statute recognising the rights of the Tibetans in full and genuinely guaranteeing the full autonomy of the Tibetan people.

I would like to be totally clear, even at the risk of appearing antagonistic.

It is, in fact, pointless to adopt a joint resolution full of good principles, fine words and indignation if, for economic and commercial reasons, maybe, we then allow the supreme Chinese authorities to be welcomed with the highest honours by our ministers or the mayors of the various European capitals, as is actually going to happen tomorrow in Rome, when Mr Rutelli, who is Mayor of Rome as well as a Member of the European Parliament, will officially receive the Chinese Prime Minister or, at any rate, a delegation.

If we continue to sacrifice principles and rights in the name of the economy, apart from making pious declarations of intent in Parliamentary debates it will be extremely difficult to find a genuine solution for the Tibetan people.

Madam President, the Commission, like Parliament, is deeply concerned about the human rights situation in Tibet.

We are particularly concerned about respect on the part of the Chinese authorities for the cultural, linguistic and religious identity of the autonomous region of Tibet.

We have raised this issue repeatedly during the bilateral dialogue with China on the subject of human rights.

In particular, the European Union has called on China to resume the dialogue with the Dalai Lama as soon as possible.

In our view, a direct dialogue between the Dalai Lama and the Chinese authorities is the only realistic way of achieving a lasting and peaceful solution to the issue of Tibet.

With regard to cooperation, the European Union takes the view that it is in the interest of the Tibetan people that we support aid projects in Tibet, provided the group of ethnic Tibetans benefits directly from them and is given priority in the management of the projects.

That is precisely what happened in the past when the Chinese authorities gave an official assurance to that effect.

On the question of the World Bank project, I can inform you that the Commission is not involved in that project.

So I do not believe we have any means of exerting much influence now, at the very last minute.

If any influence at all can still be brought to bear, it would be up to the Member States to do so.

The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions:

B5-0611/2000 by Mrs Ludford, on behalf of the Group of the Europe Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party, on the abduction of children in the north of Uganda;

B5-0622/2000 by Mr Mauro and others, on behalf of the Group of the Europe People' s Party (Christian Democrats) and European Democrats, on the abduction of children by the LRA;

B5-0630/2000 by Mr Sylla and Mr Vinci, on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left/Nordic Green Left, on Uganda;

B5-0637/2000 by Mrs Maes and Mrs Lambert, on behalf of the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance, on the abduction of children in Uganda;

B5-0646/2000 by Mr van den Berg, on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists, on the abduction of children in Uganda;

B5-0609/2000 by Mr Belder, on behalf of the Group of the Europe Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party, on the Moluccas;

B5-0612/2000 by Mr Maaten, on behalf of the group of the Europe Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party, on the Moluccas;

B5-0623/2000 by Mrs Maij-Weggen, on behalf of the Group of the Europe People' s Party (Christian Democrats) and European Democrats, on the Moluccas;

B5-0643/2000 by Mrs McKenna and Mrs Langendijk, on behalf of the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance, on the Moluccas;

B5-0647/2000 by Mr van den Berg, on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists, on the Moluccas;

Death penalty in the United States

B5-0613/2000 by Mrs Malmström, Mr Haarder and Mr Watson, on behalf of the Group of the Europe Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party, on the death penalty in the United States and the case of the Italian-American citizen Derek Rocco Barnabei;

B5-0619/2000 by Mr Dupuis and others, on behalf of the Technical Group of Independent Members - Mixed Group, on the forthcoming execution of Derek Rocco Barnabei in Virginia;

B5-0624/2000 by Mr Salafranca Sánchez-Neyra and others, on behalf of the Group of the Europe People' s Party (Christian Democrats) and European Democrats, on the death penalty in the United States;

B5-0631/2000 by Mr Cossutta and others, on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left/Nordic Green Left, on the death penalty in the United States and the case of Mr Derek Rocco Barnabei;

B5-0638/2000 by Mrs Maes and others, on behalf of the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance, on the death penalty;

B5-0648/2000 by Mr Veltroni and Mrs Díez González, on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists, on the death penalty in the United States and in particular the case of Rocco Barnabei;

B5-0625/2000 by Mr Van Hecke and others, on behalf of the Group of the Europe People' s Party (Christian Democrats) and European Democrats, on hooliganism during Euro 2000;

B5-0632/2000 by Mr Papayannakis, Mr Sylla and Mr Cossutta, on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left, on hooliganism during Euro 2000;

B5-0649/2000 by Mr Desama and Mr van den Berg, on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists, on hooliganism during Euro 2000;

B5-0614/2000 by Baroness Nicholson of Winterbourne, on behalf of the Group of the Europe Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party, on Iraq;

B5-0618/2000 by Mrs Muscardini and Mr Andrews, on behalf of the Union for a Europe of Nations Group, on Iraq;

B5-626/2000 by Mr Khanbhai and others, on behalf of the Group of the Europe People' s Party (Christian Democrats) and European Democrats, on Iraq;

B5-633/2000 by Mrs Morgantini and others, on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left/Nordic Green Left, on Iraq;

B5-0639/2000 by Mrs McKenna and others, on behalf of the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance, on the United Nations embargo in Iraq;

B5-0650/2000 by Mr Sakellariou, on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists, on the situation in Iraq;

Madam President, Commissioner, one could say a lot about this issue.

Firstly, I hope, in particular, that the Council and the Commission will be active when it comes to also taking up this issue in the Security Council when the action plan concerning children in armed conflicts will be debated at the end of this month.

Secondly, we have today noted with satisfaction that attempts are being made to reach a common solution to at least one other conflict regarding child soldiers.

This solution is the so-called diamond resolution in the Security Council.

Thirdly, we can confirm that we have made a certain amount of general progress with regard to child soldiers.

We have the voluntary Supplementary Protocol against Child Soldiers and the Activities in Africa.

I would ask the House to support this resolution.

I would also like the EU jointly to take up the issue in the Security Council at the end of this month during the follow-up to the general debate on children in armed conflicts.

Madam President, the situation in Northern Uganda and Southern Sudan is the setting for the drama of the child-soldiers.

The aim of my speech and of the resolution which has just been tabled is to prompt Parliament and the institutions to adopt ongoing initiatives which do more than just respond to moments of crisis.

There has been continuous armed conflict in this region for the last 30 years; civil society has been completely destroyed and different groups of rebels have been massacring the peoples of Northern Uganda for over 12 years.

Their favourite victims are children and adolescents because they are vulnerable and easily influenced.

To date, approximately 60% of the soldiers in the Lord's Resistance Army are children under the age of 16.

The strategy is precisely to manipulate the children and subject them to brutal force so that they will in turn be able to kill and torture others.

Adolescent girls are given to the rebels as wives, but the most noticeable thing is that not even the Nairobi Agreements between Uganda and the Sudan last December have caused the LRA to change its attitude.

During the last few days, I have had the opportunity to talk to one of the girls who has escaped from the fields of Southern Sudan, who confirmed that the LRA has no intention of changing its position.

Further evidence of this is the funeral of John Baptista Ochaia, the representative of the Chairman of Kitgum district council, who died the day before yesterday from wounds received during an LRA ambush, which took place today in Uganda.

It is therefore unacceptable that the European authorities and many commercial entities should maintain an attitude almost of tacit approval of this situation, without making any attempt to break the circle which is robbing a generation of its future.

Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, war is always cruel, and civil war even more so.

However, we have reached another level of barbarism and abjectness when children are used to fight and kill or be killed.

In this way, the LRA, the armed resistance, does not hesitate to kidnap seven-year-old boys and subject them to extreme brutality to train them to fight and terrorise villagers.

Nor does it hesitate to sexually exploit women and girls.

When these children survive, it must be said, they are in any case scarred for life.

It takes time, patience and love to restore their hope.

This is why we must increase aid and support for UNICEF, which has set up an action programme enabling children to return to a normal life.

Madam President, we must also stop pussyfooting around.

Sudan must stop supporting the LRA.

In my opinion, this amounts to collusion, which makes Sudan just as guilty.

And Parliament must intervene to urge the Ugandan Government to find a peaceful solution to this conflict in the north of Uganda, which, let me remind you, has been the cause of 100 000 deaths in 15 years. The whole population is waiting for this solution and all the children are hoping for it.

The Security Council must hear this plea.

Madam President, I am really pleased that this resolution has come about.

I hope that this will encourage the Commission and the Member States to act on this issue.

Some weeks ago, a documentary from Southern Sudan was shown on Swedish television.

This documentary claimed that foreign investors and oil companies, including an oil company from my home country, Sweden, are being protected by troops which make use of child soldiers.

These accusations have also been supported by Amnesty International, which has explained that certain oil revenues are also used to finance the civil war in Southern Sudan.

There, they use child soldiers from Uganda, who are forced into armed conflict.

We must put pressure on the international oil companies and on investors.

We must, as is stated in point 8 of the resolution, strongly urge these companies to cease their activities in Sudan until a peaceful solution to the conflict has been found.

Madam President, first of all I would like to express my gratitude to Mr Van Hecke and his wife Els De Temmerman for their efforts in ensuring that the child soldiers issue in Northern Uganda, and anything related to this, is published in an unambiguous manner for the benefit of Europe.

What is clear is that despite the 1999 Nairobi Agreement, it has not been possible to apply this agreement in an adequate manner.

This brings us to the question of the EU' s authority and the willingness on the part of the Member States to act as a united front in that region.

I would ask Commissioner Verheugen specifically whether he is absolutely clear about the point mentioned in the resolution, that of bringing the investments in both oil and oil pipelines in Sudan to a halt for the time being.

If we exert pressure to bring about peace and make sure we gain control in that northern region, this could lead to very concrete steps within a foreign policy which combines the aid component, the foreign component and the trade component.

Such action is a matter of great priority.

At the moment, we only see these figures and examples increase, and at the same time, we notice that we are exerting too little pressure, although we have more clout there than we have made use of to date.

This brings me to the wider issue of the United Nations.

The protocol was accepted in the General Assembly in May.

In July, a debate will be held in the Security Council.

This would, of course, be a wonderful example of a Europe which does not only hold forth internally, but also takes steps externally. We, all the European Member States together, are very much in favour of the eighteen years, swift conclusion by signature and effective, coordinated action by the different countries where matters such as education and the re-integration of child soldiers are concerned.

We do a great deal financially in this respect in different countries.

We have a good reputation there.

It would be beneficial if we could act under one banner and with one voice.

I would be interested to find out from Commissioner Verheugen how he rates our chance of success in July.

Madam President, I was in Uganda in January when some of the abducted little girls who were put into the army by the LRA were released.

Many of these young girls lose sight of their families and are gone for many years from their own homes.

As a result of rape and abuse they become mothers themselves, which further alienates them from the communities from which they have been so brutally taken.

However many finely-worded resolutions we have, as long as we in the Community fail to get to grips with the issues relating to children in our own community, we do not have a strong voice to raise our concerns about this.

Many of our policies affect children's rights and interests but this week Commissioner Prodi said he did not feel it was necessary to have a dedicated unit looking at children's rights within the Community.

This will weaken our voice if we attempt to raise it within the context of the UN Special Summit on Children next year, at which the issue of child soldiers will be a significant point.

Madam President, the Moluccas require our attention once again.

After a relatively quiet period, the recent arrival of a few thousand Jihad fighters who aim to enforce the Islam religion on the Moluccan islands has led to renewed escalations of violence.

The peaceful coexistence of Muslims and Christians, which lasted for years, seems to be broken for good.

The brave attitude of President Wahid should not go unmentioned.

Last week, he even dared criticise the position of the members of parliament.

If it were up to the Indonesian President, there would be hope for a peaceful future on the Moluccas.

However, the dark forces that still pervade the administrative apparatus, namely within the army, police and government, have a very destabilising effect on the situation.

It still requires a great deal of effort to identify the fundamentalist elements of whatever religious grouping.

I would like to make a few specific recommendations to the Indonesian Government.

Firstly, there must be an all-out effort to discontinue the supply of fighters and weapons by introducing strict border control.

In addition, the deployment of international peacekeeping forces deserves to be reconsidered.

The stark differences of opinion within the region' s own army and police seem to sabotage Indonesia' s efforts to end conflict off its own bat.

Finally, I would like to ask your attention for the victims of these conflicts, namely the ordinary citizens.

In this conflict, we should not only spend time pointing the finger, we should first and foremost supply adequate aid to the refugees.

A humanitarian corridor is essential in this respect.

We wholeheartedly back the request to the Commission and Member States to give generously.

The lack of political and economic interests in that region should not determine the level of aid.

This is about relieving the real suffering that is pervading the Moluccas.

Madam President, I wonder whether history is repeating itself in Indonesia.

The bloody confrontations between Muslims and Christians are jeopardising safety within the Moluccas.

Thousands of people have been killed or have taken refuge, and the new fragile democratisation process, which has been initiated so ambitiously by the Wahid government, is under enormous threat.

This is reminiscent of East Timor only a few months ago.

As an MEP visiting with the observation delegation, I saw for myself how harrowing the effects of this can be.

We need to realise that the violence within the Moluccas is threatening stability within the entire region.

It is therefore vital that the international community offer immediate financial and moral support in order to solve the problems in Indonesia.

The international community also has a duty to monitor the situation closely on a permanent basis and help the government there to end this human tragedy in whatever way it can.

Madam President, as rapporteur of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy reporting on Indonesia, I did hesitate for a moment before I tabled this resolution because we will certainly be having a huge debate on the relationship between the European Union and Indonesia in the autumn.

However, the situation on the Moluccas is so critical that we need to treat it as an urgent matter.

After a few months of peace and quiet in that area, violence has flared up again over the past few weeks, and once again, dozens of people have been killed and once again, thousand of people have fled.

The tragedy of the boat filled with refugees travelling from Duma on Halmahera has probably claimed the lives of up to five hundred people.

Only yesterday, the Jihad fighters burnt down two housing estates in Ambon.

In that area, more than three thousand have now been killed and more than one hundred thousand people have fled.

This is a catastrophe and many Moluccan families in the Netherlands are either worried sick or plunged in deep mourning.

Madam President, despite this tragedy, I believe we ought to pledge our support to President Wahid and Vice-President Sukarnoputri.

It is not they, but the opposition powers working against this government that seem to aggravate the situation within the Moluccas.

It seems that the Jihad militiamen are being financed and armed by these groups, and sometimes backed by regional military forces, which are, in fact, supposed to protect the population.

In our opinion, however, the Indonesian government should intervene more powerfully in order to protect the Moluccan population.

We also believe that international observers, journalists and aid workers should be granted access to the area in order to help the Moluccan citizens.

But more than anything, the EU should adopt a clear stance, just as the United States has done, and the EU should step up its aid efforts for the victims.

Madam President, our green colleagues have tabled a number of amendments which may have been compiled with the best of intentions but are to my mind counterproductive, because they might be playing into the hands of the powers working against the government, i.e. those who are helping to stage the violent attacks on the Moluccas.

I therefore reject the amendment to Article 7 (a) and would ask the MEPs of the other groups to do the same.

More than anything, however, the Union should be more pro-active.

This is also the thrust of the resolution and I would like a sound response from the European Commission.

Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, it is becoming increasingly clear that the violence on the Moluccas is not a chaotic, spontaneous fight between the local population, between local Muslims and Christians.

It is a brutal power struggle and well-directed fight between sections of the army, between the government and government opponents, at the expense of the local population.

On the one hand there is Laskar Jihad, a group of fanatical Muslims backed by sections of the army.

On the other hand there are special police troops, which back the Christians.

In other words, the security apparatus which should guarantee stability, is divided over two camps.

In my opinion, the message which the European Parliament should give President Wahid - and in this sense I hope I can reassure Mrs Maij-Weggen - is that we will remain critical of the progress and speed of reforms, the status of human rights and the way in which the government protects the citizens on the Moluccas.

However, we must also let him know that we support him in his fight against those sections of the army which are of course trying to undermine democratic reform, in his battle against people like Amien Rais, the chairman of the People' s Consultative Assembly who, for example, referred to young people devoted to the Laskar Jihad as the heart of the nation.

In that sense, he deserves our support, but I also want us to remain critical about issues which are not going so well yet in Indonesia.

Madam President, on behalf of the Socialist Group, I would like to endorse what Mrs Maij-Weggen stated.

It is vital to support the Wahid government at present.

In plain terms - and I think the European Commission and the Council are taking a sensible stance here- this support entails tracking down specific resources in order to support that government in its attempt to pacify and to actively intervene. This is our urgent request.

We are also very critical of the situation in that region and very concerned for the Moluccan community in the Netherlands.

We particularly empathise with the emotional turmoil and anxiety they are experiencing.

We are in favour of granting Wahid support, because the moment we involve international observers or commit other forms of aid without Wahid' s knowledge, we will be intervening and undermining his actions.

In this sense, I clearly endorse the PPE' s stance and would strongly urge this House to show great concern, and great willingness to provide support, but via Wahid, and also prescribe requirements to be met, again via him, because we need to play the game through him for the time being.

Madam President, I think that Mrs Maij-Weggen is quite right to call the situation catastrophic.

It is, in fact, a complex situation, in which many people have died.

The question that arises is why communities that had been co-existing relatively peacefully should suddenly shift to this level of tension and threats.

I think that certain forces are at work behind these actions, and there is a significant similarity between a certain type of behaviour that we are now seeing in the Moluccas and the events we recently witnessed in East Timor.

Behind these actions are forces that wish to sabotage President Wahid' s efforts at democratisation. We need to understand these forces and to combat them.

From this point of view, I think that the references in the compromise motion for a resolution, which deserves our total support, are most timely.

Death penalty in the United States

Madam President, in our resolution on the death penalty which we agreed with the other groups, we appealed to the Governor of Virginia to spare the life of a person sentenced to death.

The name of the Governor of Virginia has been missed off the list of recipients of the resolution.

Please would you ensure that the Governor of Virginia's name is inserted at the end of the text of our resolution, for our appeal is addressed precisely to him.

Yes, Mr Manisco, you are absolutely right.

In the text of the resolution, reference was made to this State.

Technically speaking, it would therefore be appropriate to communicate it to the Governor of Virginia and it will therefore be put to the vote with this amendment.

Madam President, we can all put our signatures to what is written in the resolution.

We know that the United Nations' Commission for Human Rights requested a moratorium in April last year.

This year, this demand was repeated.

They also requested all the States which still had the death penalty progressively to reduce the number of crimes for which the death penalty is imposed.

We have many shocking figures relating to the number of people that are still awaiting the death penalty in the United States. According to the information that I have, this involves 3 670 people.

In the resolution, we point to the prevailing legal uncertainty in the present cases.

There is therefore reason to require that all cases be investigated, that is to say that the cases of those who are awaiting punishment should be gone through and, for example, investigations made into whether they have received fair trials.

Therefore, a moratorium is necessary in all cases, even those that are not mentioned in the resolution.

We are also given hope by the fact that the issue of the death penalty in the United States has been given a completely new political importance.

I also value the work that the human rights organisations have done to bring this issue to the fore.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, Mrs Thors has already said this, there is unanimity in this House in support of this resolution.

We must also question the actions of the European Union and its ability to pursue this initiative in favour of the international moratorium alongside the United Nations and the international community.

We know the difficulties encountered by our institutions, mainly due to their odd nature, in particular with regard to foreign policy, an area under the responsibility of a Commissioner, a High Representative and fifteen Foreign Ministers.

To avoid repeating last year' s failure at the United Nations, we must urgently coordinate the actions of the European Union.

To this end, I have presented an amendment asking that this policy within the United Nations in favour of the establishment of a universal moratorium be coordinated by the High Representative for Common Foreign and Security Policy.

I therefore urge my fellow Members to support these amendments.

Mr President, this House is appealing to the Governor of Virginia to spare the life of a man, Derek Rocco Barnabei, sentenced to death, who is in all probability innocent.

As we debate our resolution, in a death cell in the same State, they are sterilising the needles which will be used to administer the lethal injection which, in a few hours' time, will kill Michael Clagget, probably guilty of multiple murders committed many years ago.

We have adopted countless resolutions during these last two parliamentary terms in a vain attempt to put an end to the death penalty in the United States and elsewhere.

What is certain is that many other executions will be performed at an increasingly high rate before August in Virginia and other States, in particular Texas, whose governor - who will almost certainly be the next President of the United States of America - holds the world record of having put 132 human beings to death in the last five years.

I do not know whether George W. Bush boasts of this record, but I do know - because he told me in a letter he sent me dated 22 March - that he is confident that he will be able to fulfil the highest obligations of a fair and errorless justice.

The resolution before Parliament notes the fresh debate which is currently in progress in the United States, not on the abolition of the death penalty at all but on a moratorium intended to ensure a more reliable but no less merciless system.

We may well have done the right thing, but I fear, as the American Herald Tribune said recently, that these endeavours of ours are destined to remain unheeded, a dead letter, and so, the time may well have come - not for boycotts and sanctions, which are abhorrent to us - but, for example, to promote European tourism only in the dozen States of America which do not inflict the death penalty.

There would be a serious, extremely serious risk of retaliation from the United States: if we stay away from Donald Duck or Disneyworld in Florida the Americans would boycott the Mona Lisa in the Louvre.

The time has come for us to take this risk in a last attempt to put an end to this barbaric practice which is such an insult to the human family.

Mr President, the United States, we recall, is the country of the world which has had, for the longest time, an entrenched and justiciable bill of rights.

It is therefore a horrible irony that the United States is one of the few countries in the developed world which still retains and practises the use of the death penalty.

We face today a particular case, that of Derek Rockwell Barnabei: each human being is an individual in her or his own right and must be stood up for as such.

We appeal for his life today, but he is also a symbol of a practice which we find appalling and which we know to be going on in many parts of the United States.

I am myself a great lover of the United States and many aspects of its way of life.

I have been a frequent visitor to the law school of the University of Texas and to other law schools in the United States.

I admire them very much, but I am really sad to see that state and its governor practising this so frequently and boasting of it in presidential campaigns.

Mr President, the case of Derek Rocco Barnabei makes our resolution all the more urgent.

In this specific case, there are reasons to suspect that there has been a miscarriage of justice.

Clearly, where the death penalty is involved a miscarriage of justice is particularly serious; let us not forget that miscarriages of justice in similar cases have subsequently been acknowledged, and it was no coincidence that the defendants in these cases were people who could not afford an expensive attorney.

I believe that the high quality of the law faculties in the United States is due to the fact that the attorneys are very highly paid, but they are only highly paid by those can afford to employ their services.

Therefore, we call for a repeal of this sentence and, in consideration of the petition signed by an extremely large number of Members over the last few days, we call upon the Presidency of Parliament to write to the authorities responsible immediately, insisting that they attend to the matter and, of course, insisting too that the death penalty is abolished in the United States, so admirable a country in so many other respects.

And it is precisely these merits that make the continuation of this barbaric ritual so very shocking.

Mr President, too many tragedies have taken place, both inside and outside stadiums: incidents which are evidence of the imbalance and social unease of individuals, a culture where strength is what matters and violence prevails over reason.

The resolution reiterates Parliament's concern over the spread of hooliganism, and calls for preventive measures which I support.

However, it is crucial that in this, of all situations, the difficulty of their task does not make the forces of the law lose their heads as well.

At this point, I would like to protest at the behaviour of the Dutch police towards some Italian journalists who were filming the humiliating treatment of a group of disabled people who were being carried up the steps because there were not enough free seats for them.

The journalists were prevented from doing their job and were beaten up, thrown to the ground and arrested.

The film shown this morning here in Parliament contained pictures which leave no doubt as to the express intention of the police to suppress the freedom of the press. Different interpretations have been given of the event, and so we call upon the Dutch authorities to hold an inquiry in order to find out who was responsible, and we demand that this sort of incident is never repeated.

Mr President, this debate is not entitled hooligans but Euro 2000, and this is great.

The whole of Europe managed to stage a huge festival of football where the Belgian and Dutch authorities were the first to back this idea and which attracted huge numbers of football supporters from Europe.

Everyone was terribly concerned about violence and trouble and such like.

In practice, the festival turned out to be a huge success all-round, and this resolution rightly mentions that we should congratulate the Dutch and Belgian authorities on this achievement.

There is also a small group of hooligans which has been operating for a while and which clearly aims to spoil this kind of festival.

They managed to do this to a very limited extent. And they still manage to do this at some level.

This costs a great deal of money, is a real nuisance and we therefore endorse this resolution.

We also back the initiative from the Belgian and Dutch Home Affairs Ministers, which attempts to introduce travel bans for this kind of hooligan when high-risk events are due to take place.

Thirdly, I should like to mention the Italian incident.

What is clear is that MEPs have received information from a variety of sources about the incident at De Kuip Stadium in Rotterdam and as a result, some have the impression that the situation got out of hand in a big way and that the incident was terrible, and they formed their opinions based on this information.

Others, who gained their information from other sources, have the impression that the situation got out hand there but not to such a reprehensible extent.

As a Dutchman, I would have liked to see the Netherlands become the European champions, of course, and I congratulate the French warmly on their victory. What I would say though is that if some delegates here got the impression, based on footage they saw, that certain incidents got out of hand, then I do not think - and the same goes for the Netherlands - that we should (a) tar the whole of Euro 2000 with the same brush, and (b) act as if the whole festival was ruined as a result.

What we should do is recognise that something is wrong and ask for all the facts to be made known.

I am therefore very much in favour of the Dutch authorities launching a thorough inquiry.

Fortunately, Prime Minister Kok has assented to this and I would like to pass my final verdict on the basis of these facts.

I should right away like to express my sympathy and concern for our Italian fellow MEPs at this stage.

This goes without saying, but I do want to wait until I have all these facts at my fingertips before I pass judgement.

Mr President, I will start by declaring an interest, because I have been a Class 1 football referee for 18 years now and I am attached to the English FA, and also by congratulating both France for winning the Euro 2000 championship in such a fantastic way, and alas, begrudgingly Germany for winning the World Cup bid for 2006.

I also want to make sure that we actually condemn hooligans in a very strong way in this House; all hooligans whatever country they come from and whatever their background.

I note what Mr Van Hecke said about the repatriation of a number of English football fans on C130 planes.

It was a great shame in fact that the Belgian police overreacted in such a way by clearing bars of decent ordinary football-loving supporters, taking them with the dross that are the football hooligans.

The question is: what message was sent out by the football authorities going back a number of months before the Euro 2000 championship?

We had a problem with two Leeds fans being murdered in a UEFA Cup game in Istanbul against Galatasaray, yet no action was taken against Galatasaray - they were not thrown out of the UEFA Cup.

In Denmark when Galatasaray played Arsenal, a number of Arsenal fans were arrested yet not charged with hooliganism.

Then we have the inaction by the British government, which chose not to impose any extra sanctions on stopping people from travelling, even though they knew they might cause trouble.

So all these factors actually led to a number of people thinking: "Well this Euro 2000 championship is a soft touch.

We should be allowed to go there, and we are going to go and have a good fight", instead of watching the wonderful festival of football that it should have been.

This Parliament and others on the outside should step back, because we have a breathing space now where we can take a reasoned view of what actions we should realistically take against football hooligans, and compare that with the rights of people to freely move about our continent.

Mr President, I would like to point out that this resolution is entitled 'Euro 2000', not 'Hooliganism' as it might seem.

And I would add that we have a great responsibility as politicians and Members of Parliament towards the sporting world, in particular the world of football: the responsibility never to lose sight of the fact that it is a merely a game.

We must therefore be concerned when the game is unduly weighed down by either economic interests or excessively emotive behaviour, neither of which must be encouraged in any way by the political world.

In my opinion, we must continually remind our young people, including those who are the most fervent fans, those who are most emotionally involved in these events, that football is a game. I would argue that whenever there is a good match, such as those we have seen during Euro 2000, we have all contributed to its success.

I also understand why these are particularly difficult events for the authorities to organise - I remember the Heysel stadium tragedy - and we can therefore congratulate ourselves on the organisation of Euro 2000.

However, against this positive backcloth let us consider the Rotterdam incident, for it took place in the extremely serious context of the provision of access to these events for disabled people.

This should be carried out calmly and the disabled people made to feel welcome. Moreover, we were astonished by the brutality of the police in beating up journalists who were drawing attention to an extremely serious issue regarding the provision of access and assistance for disabled people.

I would stress that we are confident that the authorities had in no way encouraged such incidents and that it was the result of seriously inappropriate behaviour on the part of the forces of the law. I therefore urge all the Members not to turn this into a national issue, for I consider that the content of the joint resolution is acceptable to all and can be adopted unanimously.

Since several of you have made repeated references to the title of the item on the agenda, so that you do not waste any more time on an error, I will waste some time with a clarification.

The item on the agenda as approved by the House is 'Hooligans' .

The title of the resolution may be the one which you have mentioned, of course, but on the agenda it appears as 'Hooligans' , within the section on human rights.

I will take this opportunity to insist, for the record, that, in Castilian, 'hooligans' is an anglicism for a type of specialised, usually British, troublemaker.

Mr President, the joint resolution which we are about to put to the vote is, in my opinion, particularly well-balanced.

Notably, the Rotterdam incident does not alter our view of the human rights record or the quality of democracy in Holland, which I consider to be among the most liberal countries in the world, although it was treated as serious, both in terms of the shameful treatment of the disabled people and because of the violence against the journalists who were merely doing their duty.

Their nationality is of little importance.

The European Union, through its highest expression of democracy, the European Parliament, condemns the occurrence of such an incident within its borders.

This is the best approach to take on the matter.

Any national aspects will, where necessary, be dealt with by the governments concerned and are nothing to do with us.

On the other hand, particularly in its urgent resolutions, the European Union does not hold back in expressing stringent positions on the conduct of other countries or events taking place in other parts of the world where human rights are violated.

Would it not lose all credibility if it did not also criticise similar events within its borders?

Mr President, I can be brief about the championship itself: France is a fine European champion and the fear that the situation was going to get out of hand on a massive scale has at any rate been exaggerated despite a number of very regrettable incidents referred to by Mr Van Hecke, involving mainly English supporters

After the final - and the entire debate seems to focus on this part of the championship now, but I suppose, unfortunately, this is how it is - a number of incidents occurred which, in my view, are just not on, and I am mainly referring to the rough treatment of the journalists, which at times was too rough.

As I see it, stressed out police and stewards clearly went beyond their remits.

But there is still a great deal of uncertainty as to what happened before this and what caused it. What exactly happened to the disabled Italian supporters?

Were people informed that so many would turn up?

I am saying this as a regular visitor to De Kuip Stadium and I know that there is space for disabled supporters at De Kuip, but not for an unlimited number. Did these handicapped supporters not want to be filmed or were they not allowed to be filmed?

These kinds of questions need to be investigated and the Dutch Government has assented to such an investigation.

Until such time, until the outcome of the investigation, I will refrain from passing judgement.

Accordingly, my group will vote against any part of the resolution in which such a judgement has been passed.

I would strongly urge the Italian delegates, and also the Italian press, but mainly the Italian MEPs to refrain from drawing any comparison with the Heysel tragedy.

It is absolutely not worth it.

In this way, serious matters which need to be investigated would be called into question.

My view is: something happened, which is now being investigated, but I would urge you to keep a sense of perspective.

, Mr President, thank you for reminding us that in fact the title of the item on the agenda that we are examining is hooliganism.

Two months ago, I addressed Parliament regarding the need to take action against the crimes that hooligans would undoubtedly commit during Euro 2000.

The measures taken by the Belgian authorities served to limit the clearly racist, xenophobic and homophobic violence of the hooligans.

It is therefore becoming imperative to consider measures to deal with the instigators of such violent crimes, who are often manipulated by extremist right-wing movements.

It is still too easy for hooligans to move around with complete impunity within the countries of the European Union.

Instant sanctions must be taken in the countries where they commit crimes.

Those who are identified and on file as having committed assault must be banned from entering stadiums during major sporting events.

Supporters' clubs and football clubs must be made to take greater responsibility, as it must be said that they sometimes fan the flames.

The campaign by the French Minister for Youth Affairs and Sport, Mrs Marie-Georges Buffet made them take greater responsibility and this action has borne fruit.

I therefore believe that Parliament can provide a real impetus for the Member States and the UEFA to implement such measures immediately, as the red card, Mr President, must admittedly be applied on the pitch, but must also be applied with regard to hooligans, both in and outside the stadium.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, needless to say, all forms of violence should be denounced, including the outrageous expressions of hooliganism during Euro 2000.

Despite this, I am still convinced that the reprehensible incidents were blown out of all proportion, partly by the press and partly by politicians.

Because of this, we have been unable to emphasise sufficiently how extraordinarily well-organised Euro 2000 was, indeed the standard of organisation will turn Euro 2000 into an unforgettable experience for millions of people.

As representative of one of the host nations, I would like to congratulate everyone who was involved on the organisational side and in the enforcement of law and order.

The success of Euro 2000 has shown that small nations are capable of great things and this should not be overshadowed by the wanton behaviour of a minority.

All Member States should, in consultation with each other, take appropriate measures.

Not only was Euro 2000 a superb festival of football, it was also a festival of solidarity among the citizens of the European Union, whom it brought closer together.

Mr President, on Monday, the Liberal Group voted against including this item on the agenda and if I now consider the resolution, I believe we were right to do so.

Extending congratulations in a resolution is very civilised, of course, but hardly the task of this Parliament.

The issue of hooligans cannot be termed urgent because this phenomenon has been around for years. I believe that, nevertheless, Parliament should look into this, but not as a matter of urgency.

I would now like to say a few words on the events which unfolded in Rotterdam.

Naturally, an investigation is necessary because the accusations are very serious.

If a television team was locked up all night, then this needs to be investigated thoroughly and there had better be a very good reason as to why this was done.

The Dutch Public Prosecutor is involved in this matter and so it is completely premature on the part of this Parliament to pass a verdict on the incident at this stage.

In my opinion, this is a long way off, and it is inappropriate to pass political judgement at a time when a Public Prosecutor is looking into a matter.

Consequently, I believe that the amendments pertaining to this matter should be rejected.

We could, of course, come back to them once it has become clear that human rights were violated, but I do think that passing such a verdict would be overstepping the mark at this stage.

Mr President, first of all, I would like to turn to Mr Heaton-Harris who, about a month ago now, thought that the sporting event at Charleroi would have to be cancelled: there would, he claimed, be terrible trouble.

I would say to him, very sportingly, as he was once a referee, that I was right to blow the whistle on him then.

Secondly, I believe that we should look at this matter in depth and that if, as the resolution indicates, we could achieve greater cooperation between the various Member States during an event such as Euro 2000, progress would be made.

If, in future, we could manage to prevent repeat offenders from attending other events, and if, finally, as Mr Fodé Sylla indicated earlier, we were able to monitor a subject such as that in order to develop new teaching on behaviour in stadiums, then sport, and not political concern, would win through.

I will end, Mr President, by hoping that the content and pace of my speech have been as you requested, that is, on a human scale.

Mr President, the United Nations has been emasculated by two members of the Security Council on the issue of sanctions on Iraq.

Kofi Annan is a good and honourable man.

However, he should resign in the knowledge that the world is utterly opposed to the disproportionate severity of these sanctions.

The EU must speak out against sanctions which amount to virtual genocide.

The alleged purpose of the sanctions is to get rid of Saddam Hussein.

He is still there ten years later.

In fact, the real purpose of the sanctions is to control oil and provide a training ground for US and British pilots so they can ensure the survival of the military-industrial complexes in both the US and Britain.

On my recent visit to Iraq I saw children die of respiratory infections, diarrhoea, leukaemia, gastro-enteritis and malnutrition.

We must remember that this is a country that has the second largest oil reserve in the world.

Operating theatres have raw sewage dripping in, and out-of-date equipment.

We are witnessing the slow strangulation of a wonderful nation and a wonderful people.

I am a friend of Islam and I think we should stop, in this European Union and the European Parliament, demonising the Arabs and demonising Islam.

Mr President, we had originally submitted a text on the same subject and with the same purport, but this text gives a far more balanced view than the text of the so-called joint resolution.

I would have far preferred discussing a text which strikes more of a balance.

Why is it then that this text has not been published?

We have withdrawn our signatures after all. In our opinion, the text we submitted originally would have formed a much better base for a discussion.

Mrs Maes, perhaps we do not understand each other very well, but if you have withdrawn your signature from the joint resolution, or have not signed it, the text remains alive and will be put to the vote in accordance with the rules in force.

Is it available, because I have noticed that many MEPs have not seen this text?

We were not aware that there was the least problem with distribution, but if you say so, we will check and we will have the text distributed.

Mr President, Iraq was at war with Iran from 1980 to 1989.

During this time the USA and EU supported Iraq since we perceived Iran as the real threat to the Middle East.

Iraq invaded Kuwait on 2 August 1990.

The UN responded by passing Resolution 661 to impose sanctions on Iraq.

The USA and Britain imposed a no-fly zone in April 1991.

In 1994, Iraq recognised the territorial integrity of Kuwait.

From 1991 to 1997, UN inspectors - UNSCOM - systematically and comprehensively inspected, destroyed and verified Iraq's capacity to produce weapons of mass destruction.

The UN representative reported to the UN in 1997 that UNSCOM's work had covered virtually everything about Iraq.

In 1998 the International Atomic Energy Agency declared that Iraq no longer had a nuclear capacity.

The oil for food programme started in 1996 has been excessively bureaucratic and incompetent, resulting in long delays in procuring essential medicines and food supplies.

Of the USD 28 billion worth of oil revenue over three years, only USD 7 billion has been utilised for imports and USD 12 billion remains frozen in a bank in New York.

If the sanctions were intended to destroy Iraq's military capacity, then they have done the job.

If the sanctions were intended to dislodge Saddam Hussein, this has not still been achieved after ten years.

However, ten years of sanctions have caused enormous suffering and hardship for the 22 million people of Iraq.

High infant mortality, decreasing life expectancy, increased incidence of cancer and treatable diseases, continue to devastate the social fabric of a country that once enjoyed a high standard of living.

The intellectual embargo has deprived doctors, teachers and other professionals of the advances in science and technology.

I believe the European Union must reassess its position in helping those suffering acute hardship.

There are six EU States - Germany, France, Italy, Spain, Portugal and Greece - represented diplomatically in Iraq today.

These diplomats share the view of the UN Office in Iraq, WHO, Red Cross, and other NGOs that the EU can, through its diplomacy, achieve a breakthrough.

Our parliamentarians and Commission officials should go on fact-finding missions to Iraq to meet members of the Iraqi Parliament, EU diplomats, international agencies and NGOs.

Such dialogue will help to establish the facts as they are today and help identify how this deadlock can be broken so that sanctions can be lifted for non-military suppliers.

I hope that this House will vote in favour of this resolution.

Mr President, if anyone needs any kind of proof that there is something seriously wrong with the continuing sanctions against Iraq, we just have to look at the number of resignations of high-profile people within the United Nations.

We can also note the words of Mary Robinson who has strongly condemned what is going on in relation to the sanctions.

What is happening is that victims, innocent people, women and children, people without any power, without any kind of control whatsoever, are being persecuted.

There is a war against the Iraqi people on which little concern has been focused, and I am glad that some people from Parliament have actually visited Iraq to see for themselves.

The illegal bombing by the US and Britain, which is not covered by any UN Security Council resolution, has no mandate whatsoever and is absolutely outrageous: it should not be allowed to continue.

How we can allow illegal bombing like this to continue is just beyond credibility.

The infrastructure in Iraq has been completely decimated.

Again, the victims here are innocent people who have no power whatsoever.

I also have to congratulate here some organisations in our communities who are doing something or are trying to raise awareness, and here I would mention those voices in the wilderness who are the sanction breakers - I think they are playing a major role and I would like to voice my support here for them.

We also have to look at the fact that in any kind of future measures against Iraq we should focus on the enhancement of human rights and democracy, and we should also look at the protection of the Kurds and in the north and the Shi'ites in the south in terms of guaranteeing them some sort of autonomy.

We cannot lose sight of them either.

Mr President, on 15 April this year, following a full debate with the Council and the Commission, we adopted a resolution that was endorsed by an overwhelming majority of this House.

In that resolution we called on the Council and the Commission to do their utmost to protect the life and health of the Iraqi people and to put an end to its suffering.

We called for the embargo on food and medicines to be lifted, because it hits the Iraqi people and not Saddam Hussein.

We called for an immediate stop to the bombing the USA and the United Kingdom is engaged on without a mandate from the UN Security Council, because again this hits and punishes not the culprits but the victims in Iraq.

At the beginning of that resolution we of course confirmed and underlined the Iraqi Government' s obligation to accept and encourage the United Nations' controls with a view to the destruction of ABC weapons and to trace the disappeared Kuwaiti citizens.

With today' s debate and this new resolution we are seeking to achieve three further objectives.

First, we want to address not just the Council and the Commission but also the United Nations Security Council.

Secondly, we propose that our Parliament should take the initiative in sending a fact-finding mission on the ground.

Thirdly, we reiterate the need for the United Nations, the World Health Organisation and the Red Cross to ensure that the most deprived and vulnerable people in Iraq can benefit from the oil for food programme.

Mr President, like Mr Andrews I speak this afternoon as one who regards himself as a friend of the Arab and Islamic world.

This resolution can only be supported if recital A and paragraph 1 are regarded as being at its absolute core.

We are saying that any relaxation of sanctions must depend upon Iraq respecting United Nations resolutions.

In particular we must ask Iraq to cooperate with the International Committee of the Red Cross on tracing the 604 Kuwaiti citizens who disappeared as a result of the illegal Iraqi occupation of Kuwait.

If there is to be any EU visit to Iraq it must include a visit to those families in Kuwait who are still waiting to know ten years later what happened to their loved ones.

Any weaker position on the part of the EU will not help the people of Iraq, but will condemn them to perpetual tyranny.

Mr President, one minute is a very short time for such a serious topic.

I say serious, because we are talking about nothing less than the survival of a nation, and what must be called an international attack on immigrants, as it was once termed by Mr Chevènement, a French Defence Minister, against a nation which was trying to escape the new world order.

This attack does not bode well for the future.

This new world order, an expression coined by Mr Bush to conceal the interests of the multinationals and in this case the large American oil companies, is becoming increasingly intolerable for us.

In this respect, the silence of humanitarian organisations in the face of the situation of the Iraqis who are suffering and over a million of whom have already died by our doing is astonishing.

What a contrast and what hypocrisy between so-called humanitarianism and this holocaust that we are collectively carrying out due to simple cowardice in the face of American power, that great empire that this House in particular and Europe in general are incapable of opposing on any subject, as yesterday' s vote on Echelon showed once again.

The most serious thing, and I will end here, as there is undoubtedly far too much to be said here, is that for once, a Southern country was managing to develop, and the Northern countries, lined up behind Washington, have been unremitting in destroying it.

This is immensely dangerous and worrying for the new century.

Mr President, who could not feel sorry for the sorely tried population of Iraq?

I would therefore like to think that it was this sympathy that was the driving force behind those submitting the joint resolution.

The political ramifications of their intention are, however, a missed opportunity.

What is more, they are a complete disaster for the liberated Kurdish part of ancient Mesopotamia.

Allow me to be more specific.

Contrary to what is assumed in recitals B and C, Saddam Hussein, a latter-day Nebuchadnesar, took it upon himself to raze this old civilisation he admired so much to the ground.

This is evident from the first and second Gulf War and another five years, the 1991-1996 period, during which Baghdad categorically refused to cooperate in the oil-for-food programme, which led to a completely unnecessary lengthening of human suffering.

At present, the Iraqi Government is even allowed to export unlimited quantities of oil in order to procure humanitarian aid.

In other words, what is stopping Saddam from alleviating the suffering of his people?

In fact, what will happen with the reserved 13% for the Kurds in the unlikely event that the sanctions are lifted?

In my view, the use of the strange term "intellectual embargo" in recital D is bizarre. After all, the Iraqi intelligentsia has for decades strained under the intellectual embargo of Saddam' s Baath party.

The tyrant of the Tigris is only interested in one type of scientist: the developer of weapons of mass destruction.

It is precisely this obsession of Saddam Hussein' s which reveals the very risky naivety of Paragraph 3 of the joint resolution, because the lifting of the no-fly zone in the North of Iraq - remember this is the international guarantee for the Kurds against their arch enemy Saddam - will probably drive millions of Kurds to take flight once again.

They know all too well what Saddam' s pledges are really worth.

Those tabling this resolution cannot possibly have it in mind to raise this awful spectre.

Mr President, let me say that I am shocked and horrified at the Commission reply on the issue of Iraq and the dismissive way in which they dealt with it.

Just let me quote to the Commissioner, and to the Commission, the saying of Oscar Wilde that in our dealings with life, destiny never closes her book.

Iraq deserves better than the Commission reply.

I wish to express total dissatisfaction with the reply of the Commission.

If you are going to be fair Mr President, let me say I express total satisfaction with the reply of the Commission.

Perfect, that is one in favour and one against.

We thank the Commissioner who does not want to speak.

Let us be brief and we will all move on.

The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.

The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions:

B5-0615/2000 by Mr Di Pietro and Mr Sánchez García, on behalf of the ELDR Group, on Venezuela;

B5-0627/2000 by Mr Salafranca Sánchez-Neyra and others, on behalf of the PPE-DE Group, on the reconstruction and rehabilitation of the areas affected by the catastrophic floods of December 1999 in Venezuela;

B5-0634/2000 by Mr Wurtz and others, on behalf of the GUE/NGL Group, on Venezuela;

B5-0642/2000 by Mrs Frassoni and Mr Knörr-Borràs, on behalf of the Verts/ALE Group, on the reconstruction of the areas affected by the floods in Venezuela in December 1999;

B5-0652/2000 by Mr Linkohr and Mr Menéndez del Valle, on behalf of the PSE Group, on the reconstruction of the areas affected by the floods in Venezuela in December 1999.

Mr President, today we have the opportunity to show our solidarity with the Venezuelan people, who last December experienced the consequences of a natural disaster which affected the coasts of the States of Vargas and Miranda and caused the deaths of 50 000 people.

We therefore insist on the importance of approving this resolution which, in summary, is the logical consequence of the report of the special committee which travelled to Venezuela to get to know the reality on the ground of this natural disaster, and also reflects the coherence of the European Union' s political commitments.

I hope it will thereby be possible to finance, in a significant way, the programme for recovery of the areas affected and that it will be drawn up according to the models for this type of action.

Furthermore, we should take account, for the purposes of coordination, of the programmes of financial aid of the Member States and the Community regions.

Mr President, as Mr Sánchez García has just reminded us, this resolution comes within the scope of the decision taken by the Conference of Presidents to send an ad hoc mission to Venezuela to assess the tragic consequences of December' s floods in that country.

This issue of Venezuela is serious and urgent.

It is serious because the losses have not yet been sufficiently quantified - but this tragedy has caused the deaths of more than 30 000 people.

It is urgent, Mr President, because the European Parliament' s mission took place last February and so far we have not been able to reach any final conclusions.

I believe this Parliament is stretching the bounds of its credibility.

I would like to take advantage of the presence of the Commission to ask the Commissioner how it has fulfilled the mandate which it received from this Parliament in the resolution adopted in January to assess the Community' s response to the tragedy in Venezuela.

I hope the Commission is capable of mobilising the necessary human resources to deal with the priorities indicated by this Parliament and I am sure that, if the Commission, as it has proposed in its preliminary draft budget for 2001, is going to be able to spend EUR 815 million in the Balkans, it will also be able to spend EUR 50 million in Venezuela.

Mr President, this issue raises a problem which goes much further than the resolution on Venezuela.

The problem involves the preservation of Parliament' s capacity to respond to this type of situation.

We have to make it very clear what we want. Do we want a real Parliament or do we want a cardboard cut-out Parliament?

Do we want a Parliament which fully assumes its duties or do we want a Parliament which simply endorses the priorities of other institutions?

Do we want a Parliament which does its duty or do we want a Parliament which simply signs cheques relating to the commitments of other institutions?

This is the debate surrounding the 2001 budget and it was the debate surrounding the 2000 budget.

Mr President, I simply mean that where there is a will there is always a way and that this resolution demonstrates a decisive commitment on the part of this House to show its will to help and cooperate. It aims to show that the European Union wishes to cooperate with the Venezuelan people and society.

Mr President. I am convinced that, on the basis of this will, we will find in this budget, which consists of EUR 100 000 million this year and will involve a similar amount in subsequent years, a way to provide for the needs of the victims of this tragedy.

Mr President, the three points which the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left wishes to make on the aid which the European Union can and must give to Venezuela as a result of the terrible flood disaster are: first, we should throw ourselves economically and technically into resolving the consequences suffered, and not reduce this aid, as the Commission intends, in order to fund another catastrophe, this time artificial, caused by us in the Balkans, in Kosovo and in Yugoslavia.

Secondly, we must ratify and apply the Kyoto commitments in order to reduce the emission of pollutants into the atmosphere, which lead to the greenhouse effect and, therefore, climate change and its adverse consequences.

Thirdly, the European Union must show solidarity with Venezuela, and with Latin America in general, so that we can counteract the negative effects of the great influence of the north of the continent on the rest of it.

Mr President, with regard to this resolution which speaks of solidarity with the Venezuelan people, I wish to express my total agreement with certain ideas.

Firstly, I would ask that aid should reach the people and groups who are most in need of it.

As a group we are clearly not opposed to this talk of SMBs and industries in general, but this eagerness to talk of these sectors seems excessive while we do not talk of other more needy groups.

In particular - as Mr Salafranca has pointed out - the effectiveness of the aid measures must not suffer as a result of a lack of human resources.

Secondly, we denounce the fact that something so essential to our group as incorporating the people affected into the drawing up and application of aid measures has not been accepted. This is necessary so that we do not find that things have been done which are not needed or not wanted.

Finally, last but not least, we should reflect on our methods of production and our consumption of natural resources, because this lies behind these catastrophes, and we should not be regularly lamenting them.

Mr President, I do not mean to give the impression that just because there is a particular sensitivity towards Latin America in this House, this should prevent us from also supporting the Commission' s efforts regarding Central and Eastern Europe and the reconstruction of the Balkans.

What does concern us at the moment is the abandonment of that area, which we have begun to notice over the last year, with the new Commission.

It seems as if Latin America has suddenly disappeared from the map of the Commission' s concerns.

Of course, we have had good experiences with the European Union' s contribution to Central America after the Mitch disaster, and we also saw a good initial reaction on the part of the Commission, which quickly allocated EUR 400 000 for emergency humanitarian aid to Venezuela when the disaster mentioned by previous speakers happened.

At the moment we know that the Commission has the possibility, the means and the resources, to provide more aid.

This type of disaster is unfortunately happening frequently and I have the impression that Latin America makes good use of Community aid.

We have the instruments, the means, the good representation and also a European presence in those areas.

We must remember for example that the European Union is the main foreign investor in Venezuela and that we have many cultural and social ties with those countries.

Therefore, I hope that the Commission views this Parliament' s requests with the best possible will so that, with the resources available, and with those which can be mobilised quickly, these requests can be granted and that a plan may be drawn up which is not limited to essential humanitarian aid, but which will help this country, which is making a great effort to rebuild itself for its own benefit, and probably also for our benefit, because the development of Latin America probably benefits the continent of Europe more than any other.

Mr President, more than six months have now passed since the tragic floods in Venezuela.

As a member of the European Parliament' s ad hoc delegation, I was able to witness the terrible effects of what is considered to be the worst natural disaster that has ever occurred in Latin America.

It was something that you had to see with your own eyes to believe.

As striking as the photographs and television pictures in the media were, they merely hinted at the true scale of the disaster.

We were also able to see the fantastic cooperation work that the NGOs are carrying out with people affected by the floods.

This emergency humanitarian aid provided by the NGOs could not have occurred without the Commission' s financial support and I therefore wish to praise all those who made it possible.

However, the priority now must be to reconstruct the whole area affected and to stimulate economic recovery.

A new plan for the region must include the rebuilding of homes and every kind of infrastructure and the provision of incentives for small and medium-sized enterprises, which were completely destroyed and many of which will have to start again from scratch.

I am aware that the task of reconstruction is colossal and that is perhaps why it has been so slow.

Only a few roads have been cleared.

Water and electricity supplies have been restored to some extent, but little more has been done, and the people who have been affected are despairing of the delay.

Thousands of them are still dependent on food aid to survive.

It is vital to replace the thousands of jobs destroyed by the floods.

The Venezuelan Government will need a great deal of support if it is to succeed in this Herculean task.

With regard to the task of reconstruction, which cannot be delayed, the Commission must offer the same level of support it provided in terms of emergency humanitarian aid for countries affected by Hurricane Mitch, or something similar.

We therefore urge the Commission to provide a significant financial contribution over the next five years.

Apart from a basic obligation to show solidarity, the historical ties that bind us to Venezuela and the stability of democracy in that country demand this.

First, let me stress that quite contrary to what has been suggested here, the Commission is very much aware of the political importance of Latin America and that in fact it has recently taken a number of initiatives that underline its great political importance for Europe.

Secondly, let me point out that in the case of the disaster in Venezuela, it is still worth considering cause and effect as well as responsibility.

And the Union did in fact provide extensive aid from the start and will continue to do so in future.

This aid is directed at two things.

First, it is aimed at supporting reconstruction in the federal state of Vargas. It is already becoming a little easier to identify the needs here, which was not the case in the beginning.

I can understand people being impatient because progress is so slow in some areas.

But the Venezuelan Government has not proposed any projects to us.

That is not meant as some kind of covert criticism.

It is probably difficult for the Venezuelan Government to decide very quickly what the priorities should be.

So we first had to send a committee of experts to Venezuela to establish the priorities for ourselves.

The results are now before us.

In a few days' time we will forward a communication to the Council on the measures to be supported and the funding to be provided.

The second aspect - which in my view is even more important than reconstruction aid - is aid for the prevention of disasters. That means we want to play our part in defining and initiating management programmes in relation to the natural risks in the federal states of Falcon Miranda and Jarakui.

The disaster-prevention measures are very much in need of improvement, as we have indeed learned from this disaster in Venezuela.

I believe the best way we can help the people in the long term is for us to concentrate on that.

As for funding these two measures, that is a very difficult question, because it really is a problem for the Commission to be constantly confronted by the Council and Parliament with their wishes as to what it should do and where it should help; but unfortunately no-one tells the Commission where it is to get the money from.

After all, we cannot print it ourselves, as you know.

We will find a way to finance these measures too and will make realistic proposals, incidentally also proposals that will take account of what the country itself can contribute in view of the sharp rise in its revenue from oil exports.

The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.

European Monitoring Centre on Racism and Xenophobia

The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions:

B5­0628/2000 by Mr Van Velzen, on behalf of the PPE/DE Group, on the controversy involving the European Monitoring Centre on Racism and Xenophobia;

B5­0635/2000 by Mr Wurtz and others, on behalf of the GUE/NGL Group, on the resignation of Mr Pelinka, the Austrian representative on the Management Board of the European Monitoring Centre on Racism and Xenophobia;

B5­0651/2000 by Mr Ford and others, on behalf of the PSE Group, on the resignation of Mr Pelinka, the Austrian representative on the Management Board of the European Monitoring Centre on Racism and Xenophobia;

Mr President, I agree with Mr Watson, the Chairman of the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs, who said in an interview that the urgency tabled by Mr Swoboda was the wrong course to choose and that he expected a rather more mature approach.

I agree with him because in an explanatory statement, which he presented to the House, Mr Swoboda refers to conflicts between the government in Austria and the head of the Monitoring Centre on racism that date back quite some time.

It was the time when Viktor Klima, an SPÖ member, was head of the Austrian Government and the government was SPÖ-dominated.

It is a delicate matter when a Socialist from Austria does this, but by no means urgent.

I endorse what Mr Watson said because here Mr Swoboda is also confirming to the present government that better relations are now being established with this Monitoring Centre.

He should be pleased about that, as I and many others are.

That again is no reason for urgency; and there is even less reason for urgency when I quote you what the head of this Monitoring Centre says in an interview she authorised.

She specifically praises Austria' s new policy towards foreigners and concedes to the government that there has, of course, not been a single xenophobic initiative, whereas there is much progress.

She says, much progress, which was not possible under the red-green government; and of course she also says that she is not being hindered in any way in her work.

So what is the point of all this, Mr Swoboda?

As an Austrian Socialist you are obviously just trying to create a platform for polemics against Austrian.

That is shameful for an Austrian and should be condemned in the strongest possible terms!

Mr President, I apologise to the translators if I spoke too quickly earlier on.

I would like to talk to you about the resignation of Mr Pelinka from the Management Board of the European Monitoring Centre, Vienna.

I believe that what happened to Mr Pelinka, a renowned academic respected by the scientific community, is indicative of the true nature of the coalition in power in Austria.

The far right, particularly when it is in power, is highly skilled in the art of pushing its opponents to the limit.

What happened in the case of Mr Pelinka did not come about by chance or coincidence.

It began with slander, he was persecuted by means of an unfair judgement, given by a court answering to the FPÖ, as the current Justice Minister of the FPÖ was Jörg Haider' s lawyer when he sued Mr Pelinka for libel.

The work of the Monitoring Centre was then made unbearable by a public pressure campaign against its members.

I believe that Haider is, and we must recognise this, expressing his contempt for the sanctions that the European Union is currently imposing on him as it was when the Portuguese Presidency took the initiative of proposing the nomination of three wise men that he decided to retaliate by demanding a referendum on lifting sanctions, a completely demagogic, populist and anti-European referendum.

We are also talking about a challenge issued by Haider to the Community as a whole.

He reminds us that the Monitoring Centre is a creation of the European Union and that our President attended its inauguration three months ago.

This is proof, for those who might still have doubts, that we must not negotiate with the far right, as every small victory it achieves strengthens it and makes it more commonplace.

If the European Union were to relax its position on Austria, this would not miraculously lead Haider and his friends to defend human rights and relinquish their ideology.

In response, we must give Mr Pelinka our total support.

We must also help the Monitoring Centre on a human, political and financial level and finally, the Member States must continue to isolate the Austrian Government and, while supporting the Austrian people, isolate the coalition, which is unacceptable and unfair.

Mr President, I had the honour of representing the European Parliament on the management committee of the European Monitoring Centre on Racism and Xenophobia and one of my colleagues there was Professor Doctor Anton Pelinka, representing the Austrian government.

He played an important role in our deliberations, counselling moderation when others wanted to move too far and too fast, resisting cheap easy stereotyping of those we were investigating and imposing fact in preference to fantasy.

All in all, he was a frustrating friend for those of us who wanted to move further and faster.

I was therefore shocked to discover that state victimisation has been taking place against Professor Pelinka, first when Haider's lawyer, acting as prosecutor and judge in the case of libel against Mr Haider, whom Professor Pelinka described as responsible for having made National Socialist positions and statements politically acceptable.

Second, when he was constructively dismissed from his position as vice-president of the management committee of the Monitoring Centre through administrative harassment by sections of the current Austrian government.

This resolution charges our Committee on Civil Liberties, as Mr Watson requested on Monday, to follow these developments closely.

Perhaps we should not be surprised at what has happened.

Mr Haider said in 1992 of Professor Pelinka, after the latter had pointed out the Nazi past of Hans Steinecker, a precursor of the Freedom Party: "The time is up for falsifiers of history and those who insult Austria.

Pelinka has a disturbed relationship with Carinthia and his manner of permanently propagating falsehoods is unacceptable."

In March this year the Freedom Party said: "The newspapers were right once again.

Now he (Häider) is threatening us."

But he is not threatening anybody.

When I feed a dog and it bites me then I will not feed it any more because otherwise it may bite me again.

The wise men have a hard task in front of them over the coming six months.

Mr President, Commissioner, first of all I want to firmly reject Mr Sylla' s comment that we have a politically-led judiciary in our country, in the Republic of Austria.

Secondly I want to note that there are many urgent resolutions that deserve to be discussed in this House.

The urgency on the European Monitoring Centre on Racism and Xenophobia based in Vienna, tabled by Dr Swoboda, does not deserve any urgent discussion.

It was prompted by a purely personal matter concerning Professor Pelinka.

He resigned from the Centre' s Management Board voluntarily.

The real reason was that he refused to do something which is a matter of course, which is the duty of every Austrian citizen, namely to render account of his activity if he is being paid for it by the Austrian Government.

Let someone tell me what that has to do with the European Parliament.

So it is easy to understand why we will not endorse recital A of this motion for a resolution and cannot share the concern about this matter.

It should also be noted that the Monitoring Centre on racism is based in Vienna, not least thanks to the commitment of the present Chancellor and then Foreign Minister Wolfgang Schüssel, and that we are proud to give a home in Vienna to this kind of institution that keeps a watchful eye on xenophobia and racism in all the European countries. For the Centre' s report indicates that no one country is immune from such tendencies.

For the rest, Austria has very strict regulations against neo-Nazism and its reactivation.

Perhaps it needs pointing out that one sad case, the Omufuma case, was a case that a Socialist minister of the interior had to answer for.

Clearly Dr Swoboda was also aware of the embarrassing nature of his first motion, otherwise the basically reasonable and considerably weaker motion for a resolution we can all support would not have come into being.

Mr President, I am deliberately refraining from entering into these cheap polemics, especially on the part of Mr Pirker, but want to keep the discussion at a certain level and stick to the facts.

It is a fact that the Monitoring Centre on Racism and Xenophobia did indeed face difficulties in the first weeks, which were politically motivated, and that Mr Pirker in particular grossly insulted the head of the Centre, whom he has cited today as a witness to show how well things are going.

It is a fact - and I noted that in my first statement today; the ladies and gentlemen who talk so big were not even there on Monday - that things have, thank God, improved because Dr Winkler, the head of the Centre, has endeavoured, as has the new Austrian Government representative, to straighten it all out.

But it is also a fact that the situation remains precarious; and here I, like Dr Winkler, must also state that unfortunately not just the Austrian Government but also some other governments do not give the Monitoring Centre sufficient support.

There certainly is an urgent need to call on all the governments - as I propose - to support the Monitoring Centre.

But it is also a fact that, sad to say, the referendum announced for Austria, which representatives of the European and in particular the Austrian People' s Party who are sitting here in this Chamber opposed only a few days ago, could dangerously aggravate the situation and mood in Austria again; for it is reviving anti-European feelings that will certainly not do the work of this Monitoring Centre any good.

And that is why I want to state my view here and call on the government, on those responsible in that government, not to hold that referendum, so as not to stir up new hatred, not to reawaken an anti-European mood again - something a party like the Austrian People' s Party, which was always pro-European, is in fact unlikely to want.

I am firmly against that kind of anti-European mood and I place my hopes in this House.

Mr President, I will tell you immediately that the ELDR group refused to sign the joint resolution for a very simple reason: we find it a little over-emotional, while not forceful enough, and does not offer the possibility of a more political and more balanced choice in the name of Parliament.

It is because this resolution is too weak that we will not vote for it.

We consider that the problem associated with the resignation of Mr Pelinka is important enough not to be tackled by a resolution that is emotional but does not actually say anything and is extremely watered-down.

Allow me to address a comment to the GUE Group and the PSE Group.

I do not understand their agreement on the text in its current form, in relation to the initial text that they themselves introduced.

Consequently, we within the liberal group would like, and this is the wish of Mr Watson, his committee to be able to effectively take control of the matter and we would like to have very clear information on whether the Austrian Government has infringed Article 10 of the Treaty, that is, whether or not it has fulfilled its obligations with regard to the Monitoring Centre.

If it has not fulfilled its obligations, it is up to Parliament to take the appropriate action with regard to the Commission and the Council.

The main thing is to make it clear and today we are not clear.

Mr President, my group also supports the proposal by the chairman of the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs to treat this whole affair carefully in that committee.

Nonetheless, we will vote for this resolution because, unlike the earlier ones, it is an extremely moderate and responsible reaction to the statements by the head of the Monitoring Centre to the Committee on Home Affairs

The EPP Group also took part in the discussions and decisions on the present resolution.

So I am extremely surprised that the members of the Austrian People' s Party are unable to endorse this resolution, which merely expresses an initial concern and is an initial call on the Austrian Government, and have chosen instead to give us a taste of the way the Austrian Government treats its government critics.

Mr Pirker reads out some statements by the head of the Monitoring Centre but keeps silent about the terrible statements she made in committee, where Mr Pirker himself launched violent attacks on her, about the defamation of the Centre in the Austrian Parliament, about the systematic harassment, the lack of security provisions, the lack of support.

I am sad to see the ÖVP members also giving us a sample here of the way they deal with government critics in their own country; in fact attempting to present them as traitors to their country.

If you listened to Mr Pirker' s allegations that any criticism is criticism directed against Austria, you will see that this really is an appalling attempt to invent a conflict between the defence of human rights and patriotism.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, we are debating a motion for a resolution that is lacking in substance.

It is difficult to identify exactly what the complaints are, which means we do not know precisely what we are discussing.

Who has actually seen Mr Pelinka' s letter of resignation?

Who knows the real circumstances of his resignation?

What is known in Austria about Mr Pelinka' s resignation is the fact that various versions are being circulated by various people.

What I know is the fact that legal proceedings are pending between Mr Pelinka and Mr Haider.

Under no circumstances is it the business of politics or of any parliament to go so far as to criticise proceedings before an independent court that have not yet concluded.

Every state governed by the rule of law provides for constitutional legal measures.

A policy that does not respect the independence of the judiciary does not, in the final analysis, respect the principle of the separation of powers and thus violates a basic principle of democracy.

Racism and xenophobia are a serious problem throughout the Union and one that must be taken seriously.

It must be combated by every means available wherever it arises.

What I expect of the Monitoring Centre is to take stock of the situation objectively and to look at it in comparative terms, so as to allow the policy-makers to react to it.

What I do not expect of the Monitoring Centre is interference in day-to-day political matters and to exercise its mandate with an ideological bias.

Because underlying the concept of racism and xenophobia there are people and their destinies, and they should not be used to put on some kind of political show.

What I oppose is that this simplistic motion for a resolution is also tabled by those Austrian Members who pretend to support my home country.

Mr President, the Commission is grateful for the valuable contribution Professor Pelinka has made as a member of the Management Board towards setting up the European Monitoring Centre on Racism and Xenophobia.

Yet it is the Commission' s common practice not to express an opinion on legal proceedings concerning individuals in the Member States.

That applies particularly to this case, which falls outside the scope of EU legislation.

Moreover, the Commission cannot express any views on the reasons that led Professor Pelinka to resign from the Monitoring Centre' s Management Board.

The Commission services have already requested the Austrian authorities to appoint a new member of the Management Board.

The Commission emphasises the importance of the independence of members of the Management Board, as provided for in the regulation on setting up the Centre.

I do not believe I need give you an assurance here, since everyone knows that so far, the Commission has done all in its power to support the Monitoring Centre in Vienna and will continue to do so in future.

We are firmly convinced that the Monitoring Centre plays an important role in combating racism, xenophobia and anti-Semitism.

Let me specifically underline once again that the Commission attaches the greatest importance to ensuring that the Monitoring Centre will under all circumstances remain an independent body, enjoying the utmost autonomy in the performance of its tasks.

That concludes the debate on topical and urgent subjects of major importance.

We shall now proceed to the vote.

Before the vote on child soldiers in Uganda:

Mr President, we agreed a joint motion for a resolution, on which five groups collaborated.

Once the document was finished, a sixth group joined in.

I think it is contrary to our Rules of Procedure for a group to join in signing this motion without asking the others.

My group regards that as a breach of our Rules of Procedure and I would ask you, Mr President, to examine this matter.

Given that we collaborated on it, we will in fact vote for this resolution, yet I would ask you to ensure that the sixth group' s signature is deleted from this motion for a resolution.

We have had a look at this and as far as we are aware there is no rule which stops anybody signing another resolution.

But I would suggest that this be looked into for the future.

Mr President, the same applies here as to the one I just spoke about.

I insist that you have this checked because it was just during this part-session that a member of our group wanted to add his signature to a motion for a resolution by other groups but first had to obtain written authorisation from the other groups.

We cannot have two different procedures being applied in the same week.

So I would ask you to investigate this matter and inform us of the results.

For the rest, we support this resolution because we helped draft it.

I fully understand what you are saying.

We will look into the matter, but there does not appear to be a rule at the present time.

Mr President, as you say, Mr Sakellariou, at the beginning of the part-session, presented us with four requests for amendments to the agenda which were all rejected, and now he wants to end his part-session with another request which, as you have already said, is completely inadmissible.

We could carry on this way, but we would be wasting time.

It seems to me that he is absolutely right.

I do not want any further debate.

We will look into this matter.

Mr President, I simply wish to express our enormous sadness at the news we have just received concerning a horrendous accident on the Spanish roads, in which a lorry has collided with a school bus transporting Catalan school children, with an initial toll of 20 dead and 30 injured, some of whom are very seriously injured.

Mr President, as rapporteur for the previous item, I have the task of explaining on behalf of the members of the Group of the Europe People's Party and European Democrats that we abstained from voting on the legislative resolution because Amendment 6 to Article 2 of the directive has been adopted.

A written explanation of vote will be submitted.

Report (A5-0152/2000) by Mr Redondo Jiménez, on behalf of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, on

the proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation (EC) amending Regulation (EEC) No 3528/86 on the protection of the Community's forests against atmospheric pollution (COM(1999) 379 - C5-0076/1999 -1999/0159(COD))

the proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation (EC) amending Regulation (EEC) No 2158/86 on the protection of the Community's forests against fire (COM(1999) 379 - C5-0077/1999 - 1999/0160(COD))

Report (A5-0186/2000) by Mrs Hieronymi, on behalf of the Committee on Culture, Youth, Education, the Media and Sport, on the proposal for a decision of the European Parliament and of the Council on the implementation of a training programme for professionals in the European audiovisual programme industry (MEDIA - Training) (2001-2005) (COM(1999) 658 - C5-0059/2000 - 1999/0275(COD))

on the proposal for a Council decision on the implementation of a programme to encourage the development, distribution and promotion of European audiovisual works (MEDIA Plus - Development, Distribution and Promotion) (2001-2005) (COM(1999) 658 - C5-0119/2000 - 1999/0276(CNS))

Report (A5-0185/2000) by Mrs Sanders-ten Holte on behalf of the Committee on Culture, Youth, Education, the Media and Sport, on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council recommendation on European cooperation in quality evaluation in school education (COM(1999) 709 - C5-0053/2000 - 2000/0022(COD))

Mr President, on a point of order.

Following the debates with the Council last night I was wondering whether this report is actually close enough to the original proposal for first reading procedure to be possible.

There are certainly a number of amendments where we need further clarification.

If we vote for them would this actually take the report further away from what this House is allowed to vote on?

This concerns Amendments Nos 4, 5, 6, 18, 21, 33, 36, 40, 42 and 46, some of which directly imply policy down to individual schools in Member States.

I would like to hear whether this is actually a legal procedure for us to be voting on now.

All the amendments have been checked and approved by the services so we will vote on them now.

Report (A5-0180/2000) by Mr Mombaur on behalf of the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy, on the Commission's second report to the Council and the European Parliament on the state of liberalisation of the energy markets (COM(1999) 198 - COM(1999) 164 - COM(1999) 612 - COM (2000) 297 - C5-0163/2000 - 2000/2097(COS))

Report (A5-0169/2000) by Mr Radwan on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, on the 1999 Annual Report of the European Central Bank (C5-0195/2000 - 2000/2118(COS))

Report (A5-0170/2000) by Mr Karas, on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, on the Commission communication on communications strategy in the last phases of the completion of EMU (COM(2000) 57 - C5-0104/2000 - 2000/2019(COS))

Report (A5-0162/2000) by Mr Lambert, on behalf of the Committee on Petitions, on the deliberations of the Committee on Petitions during the parliamentary year 1999-2000

Report (A5-0181/2000) by Mrs Thors, on behalf of the Committee on Petitions, on the activities of the European Ombudsman for 1999 (C5-0303/2000)

Report (A5-0141/2000) by Mr Atkins, on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism, on the Commission communication to the Council and the European Parliament - The creation of the single European sky (COM(1999) 614 - C5-0085/2000 - 2000/2053(COS))

Report (A5-0155/2000) by Mrs Damião, on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs, on the Commission report on the implementation of Council Directive 92/85/EEC of 19 October 1992 on the introduction of measures to encourage improvements in the health and safety at work of pregnant workers and workers who have recently given birth or are breastfeeding (COM(1999) 100 - C5-0158/1999 - 1999/2151(COS)) Draftsman "Hughes procedure": Emilia Franziska Müller, Committee on Women's Rights and Equal Opportunities.

Mr President, I simply wish to update the information I communicated to the House a few moments ago.

The accident which has taken place in Spain is really very serious.

The number of children who have died has risen to 27, and their families, to whom we wish to send our condolences, are from Cerdanyola del Vallés and from Viladecans, in Barcelona.

I will make sure that the President is fully apprised of that and that is so done.

Mr President, I do not know the extent of this tragedy, but if children are dead, I would perhaps suggest to the House that we observe a minute' s silence.

We need to have more information about the full extent of the tragedy.

EXPLANATIONS OF VOTE - Redondo Jiménez report (A5-0152/2000)

Mr President, I voted for the Redondo report which regulates European Union interventions in the event of fires and atmospheric pollution.

This is certainly a positive measure.

I voted for the motion but I would prefer it if, in future, in implementing the proposal, we took into consideration the fact that many pensioners and elderly people live near forests and they are often the only people left in remote and countryside areas.

Fires are frequent in these areas and it would therefore be a good idea, or rather appropriate to use these people to help prevent fires.

. (PT) This report contains amendments to the current regulations on the protection of Community forests against atmospheric pollution and forest fires.

The amendments to the regulation on protecting forests against fires are particularly important for Portugal.

In fact, we must pay considerably greater attention to the Mediterranean woodlands that have been affected by forest fires, and this requires considerable financial resources for reforestation and for the necessary fire prevention measures.

For Portugal, where fires have destroyed large areas of forest, it is vital to increase appropriations in order to supplement national investment in building infrastructure, for example, and to help local authorities, private landowners' associations or wasteland management bodies to buy fire prevention equipment.

This is why the increase to EUR 77 million in Community appropriations proposed by the rapporteur as opposed to the EUR 50 million proposed by the Commission is so important.

It is also important to create a Community information system on forest fires so that the situation at any given time is more widely known. This will enable us to fight more effectively against forest fires and their causes.

I shall give my own personal view of the report on forests.

I know the Committee on Agriculture tells us that we are having the wrong debate in defending an increase in the budget in the context of these reports.

Personally, I consider that we have a political responsibility to send strong political signals to the Commission, the Council and the citizens.

In December 1999, part of the European Union was hit by terrible storms which devastated a large proportion of the forests in southern and eastern France and created despair among the victims, in particular small-holders.

I also know that we cannot rob Peter to pay Paul.

By voting for the rapporteur' s proposals, I wanted to contribute to the implementation of a true forestry policy in the European Union, as despite the vast CAP budget, forests, which are an integral part of agriculture, remain the poor relation.

(FR) We are discussing the two Council regulations establishing a form of systematic surveillance of forestry ecosystems which is unique in the world.

Regulation No 3582/86 is about the protection of forests against atmospheric pollution and Regulation No 2158/92 has established a framework for the protection of forests against fires.

The rapporteur proposes increasing the sums allocated to both of these programmes, whereas the Commission proposal seeks to cut them drastically.

The rapporteur' s attitude is an appropriate one.

It does seem logical to take account of the virtual doubling of the Community' s forested surface area since the last round of enlargement in 1998 and to fulfil the requirements of the European Union' s forestry strategy.

Admittedly, there is no legal basis in the Treaty for a common forestry policy.

We are not using this report to start up the debate again but simply to point out that the European Union' s forestry strategy is based on subsidiarity.

In other words, action is only proposed if it offers added value in relation to national action.

The problem is identifying whether there actually is added value.

Subsidiarity works in favour of Community action in this specific context.

It is true that the issues in all the forests of the Fifteen Member States are not identical.

So, the Nordic countries, which since 1998 have comprised most of Europe' s forested areas, are affected most of all by atmospheric pollution, stresses due to climatic factors and soil acidification whereas the countries of southern Europe are more subject to the effects of desertification, drought and fires.

These disparities must not, however, preclude the need to operate a monitoring system of this type at Community level, at this time when the interdependence of the stress factors acting on forestry ecosystems in general and as a whole has been acknowledged.

Increasing the financial allocation would, moreover, come at an opportune moment, because our forestry areas are threatened by fire following the terrible storms last December, and indeed many outbreaks of fire have already been reported.

If we are to prevent disasters of this type, then we must improve fire safety.

Now, when the Commission' s communication of 2 February 2000 advocates resorting to the all-out precautionary principle and a Community action programme in favour of civil protection instituted by the Council Decision of 9 December 1999 is waiting only to be implemented, is not the time to cut off funding for Regulation No 2158/92.

Combating atmospheric pollution takes on a new dimension in the light of the guidelines established by the Commission regarding climate change, biodiversity and sustainable management.

Ecosystem surveillance promises to be a multidisciplinary activity. If atmospheric pollution has lost something of its extremely topical nature in the face of these priorities, it may be consistently integrated into the list of planet-wide challenges.

The heart of the problem is political, however.

Some Member States have expressed doubts as to the importance of forests, even though the forestry industry employs 2.2 million people in Europe, and forests cover 36% of the surface area of the European Union!

We have this vicious circle scenario. The regulations in question need political support.

In order to receive political support, however, the networks must be capable of detecting changes and indeed risks, and financial support is needed in order to prove the existence of such risks in scientific terms!

While awaiting the matter of extending these programmes beyond 2001, it is our political responsibility to provide them with financial support. For the data gathered is intended to be used as technical justification for political decisions in areas where 'nothing to report' means 'no action necessary' .

- (EL) Forests play a huge role in maintaining fundamental ecological balances in the ecosystem of life itself.

Unfortunately, the protection and attention which they are afforded is not commensurate with their importance.

The major catastrophes which forests have suffered over recent years and the failure to react adequately in dealing with them are seriously jeopardising the ecological balance, as well as health, safety and numerous cultural and social values inextricably bound up with our forest heritage.

Mountain and forest areas, especially in the Mediterranean, have been seriously damaged by deforestation, fire, erosion desertification, abandonment, abuse and inadequate reforestation, with the result that tens of thousands of acres of forest land have been lost.

Allow me to bring to your attention the dramatic problem in Greece, which is at the top of the European league in terms of the numbers of acres burnt for every fire.

Only 10% of the surface area destroyed in Greece is reforested.

The remaining 90% is either abandoned or, more usually, is swallowed up and developed by economic interests (such as the tourist businesses generally encouraged by the government of the day), which take advantage of the fires - and/or are perhaps guilty of arson in starting them - the unresolved problem of land ownership and the fact that there are no forest land register or records of government-owned forests in order to improve their profits.

We have a wide variety of forests within the Community (northern, temperate, Mediterranean and tropical) and an equally wide variety of general and specific problems.

Not only has the EU's forest policy to date failed as a result of fragmented, one-off, inconsistent and incoherent action and the wholly inadequate funds provided; the Commission has now proposed further cuts in the already minimal funds available to protect forests from fire and atmospheric pollution.

The reason given for the proposed cuts is the reduced take-up of funds during the last period!

But the problems have not been solved.

On the contrary, they have multiplied.

Such a policy is not merely hypocritical. It is aiding and abetting fire.

We call on the European Parliament to stand by its repeated votes and positions on the need to strengthen measures to prevent and fight fires and protect and enhance the value of our forest heritage in all areas of the Union.

We believe that the Community funds allocated to forests were and still are totally inadequate and we call for them to be increased in line with real needs and the importance of forests.

We really must take suitable initiatives in collaboration with national and local authorities and the agencies responsible and set out an efficient forest policy and develop direct and coordinated action so that the forests destroyed can be revived and reforested on the basis of the latest scientific data and methods, taking account of the biological, climatic and ecological conditions in each region and, we repeat, the EU and the national governments must provide the funds needed in order to create the necessary infrastructure and recruit sufficient personnel which, if Greece is anything to go by, are woefully lacking.

In doing so we shall be helping to ensure that the forests in these countries are protected, developed, restored ecologically and used productively.

Mr President, I abstained from the vote on the Arvidsson report on restrictions on the use of phthalates.

I abstained to toe the line of the Group of the European People's Party and European Democrats, but also because I was uncertain for another reason: just before I came into the Chamber to vote I started to wonder what would happen to the firms which produce phthalates if we ban the use of phthalates, not everywhere on Community territory and in all cases, but only when they are used in toys.

Surely they will not use these phthalates for other purposes?

For objects that might be used by pensioners or the elderly?

I would be extremely concerned if this were the case.

I will not continue Mr President, because this is a public debate and I prefer to stop here.

(SV) If Amendment 6 to Article 2 of the directive is adopted, the following explanation of vote from Parliament's Group of the Europe People's Party and European Democrats will apply.

The members of the Group of the Europe People's Party and European Democrats choose to abstain from voting on the legislative resolution because Amendment 6 to Article 2 has been adopted.

Reason: Marking toys designed for children between 3 and 6 years of age and childcare articles manufactured completely or partially from soft PVC plastic containing phthalates, and their packaging, with a warning label is very difficult and in reality is likely to be tantamount to an indirect, extended ban.

The content of the decision on labelling, therefore, goes beyond the scientific grounds for the directive.

(FR) I have a special interest in the matter of toy safety.

I was a rapporteur on this subject in 1992 and I am particularly interested in following legislative developments on the subject.

As for phthalates, the chemical substances used to plasticise PVC, I have always campaigned for proactive measures with a view to protecting, as indeed we ought, this particularly vulnerable group of consumers, i.e. children.

Experiments on animals have shown the toxic and carcinogenic nature of some phthalates, which can cause liver, kidney and testicular ailments in children that suck or chew on dummies, rattles or teething rings.

This identification of the risks gave parents legitimate cause for concern, and should have led to firm measures being adopted, meeting the requirements of the precautionary principle.

The least that can be said, however, is that the Commission' s reaction, albeit relatively prompt (referral to the scientific committee for an opinion, studies into toxicity, ecotoxicity and impact on the environment, the emergency ban decision and proposal to amend the directives concerned), was rather lukewarm in view of the issues at stake and in view of the objective of guaranteeing a high level of consumer protection and protection of human health.

What has the European Commission proposed?

It has proposed banning toys containing one of the six offending phthalates that are intended to be put into the mouths of children under the age of three, and to put a warning on toys containing one of the 6 offending phthalates and likely to be put into the mouths of children under the age of three, and to revise the directive in four years' time.

This is, of course, completely inadequate.

It is ridiculous to provide for a ban only on toys and childcare articles intended to be placed in the mouth.

As every parent knows, young children put absolutely everything in their mouths.

We must therefore ban toys and objects containing phthalates which are likely to be put either totally or partially into children' s mouths.

The lack of reliable scientific information on the movement of these chemical substances within the body should lead us to implement the precautionary principle.

I should also like to point out that we should be particularly vigilant with regard to the substances used as substitutes for phthalates.

It is essential, furthermore, to bring the labelling of toys and childcare articles containing phthalates which are likely to be put in children' s mouths into general use.

To avoid encouraging children to suck or chew on their toys, we should add a clause to prevent flavouring substances being added.

We should envisage revising the directive in order to bring it up to date in the light of developments in scientific knowledge.

I am convinced that, given the information currently available, we should adopt an approach of the utmost caution.

I supported the amendments tabled by the Socialist members of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy.

I shall conclude by pointing out that, as far as the case of toy safety is concerned, the regulations regarding EC markings are too ambiguous and should be clarified as soon as possible.

The threat that phthalates may pose to human health has not been proven scientifically.

For example, according to research undertaken in the United States by the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, only rarely, if at all, among children is there a risk of exposure to harmful chemicals, as the quantities of phthalates in toys do not exceed that level which could be considered harmful.

As the quantity of phthalates that might possibly get into a child' s system from toys is so small, the study group is not recommending that phthalates be banned.

I myself do not support the principle of 'excessive force' and an extensive ban that is not justifiable in the light of scientific facts.

The toxic effects of phthalates are insignificant, and they do not irritate the mucous membrane or the skin.

Although it was found in the 1980s that very large quantities of phthalates caused liver tumours in rats and mice, official agencies in Europe and the United States have not confirmed that phthalates present a risk of cancer in humans.

In addition, I am sceptical about substituting phthalates with substances whose effects there is no research data on.

However, I support the idea of further research into those phthalates whose effects we cannot be absolutely sure about.

In practice the problem is a minor one, however, as the European toy industry has, in the main, stopped using phthalates.

Mr President, I voted for the MEDIA report but I feel that, since pensioners and the elderly watch television more than anyone else and are therefore extremely interested in this European Union aid, it would be beneficial if they were able to watch a European television channel broadcasting European programmes.

This would make us more successful in preserving the culture of our nations, which is well-known in Europe, rather than only ever importing films from other States, especially the United States of America.

I therefore hope that my proposal will be taken into account when the document is implemented.

- (SV) The Swedish Christian Democrats have fundamental objections, based on the principle of subsidiarity as laid down in the Maastricht and Amsterdam Treaties, to EU funds being used in any way to develop, produce or market what are known as European films and film training.

These funds would be much better spent on the reconstruction of Kosovo, a European contribution of aid that has still not received its budgetary settlement after a year of internal budgetary opposition within the EU.

The idea of offsetting American dominance in film and the arts is understandable and lawful.

However, this is a job for the private film industry and the Member States themselves.

The European Union must instead resolutely dispense with tasks that do not relate to its key concerns.

Mr President, I should like to ask if the members could explain their vote in writing if reports are being discussed or, at least, to wait until the end if they are explaining them orally, as they are entitled to do.

Written explanations of votes at this time are not an expression of respect for the House for any of us.

We take note of your observation, Mr Mastorakis.

(FR) We abstained from the vote on this proposal even though we are firmly convinced that a policy of exchange and cooperation between different countries in the field of education would contribute to improving the quality of education by promoting the intermixing of cultures and exchanges between the peoples living in Europe.

Such a policy would only be a factor in progress, however, if it were based on an education policy within the various states which aims to earmark greater resources for public education accessible to all.

At no point in the texts, though, is this priority stated, but more especially, in none of the countries of the European Union is it applied.

We are concerned that a number of phrases are indicative of a restrictive and utilitarian concept of a form of cooperation whose objectives would be dictated by the constraints of the market and initiatives by firms or private bodies looking for a workforce they could train and qualify according to their requirements.

Introducing the laws of the market into education, however, means keeping the best quality for a minority and allowing the quality for the majority to deteriorate.

We therefore voted in favour of the amendments warning against allowing the market to play too great a part in education.

. (PT) It is a well-known fact that defining the quality of education is a very complex political issue that depends specifically on the objectives set, the means to achieve them and the conditions that determine whether they can be achieved.

Cooperation at European level on quality assessment and on quality indicators should not therefore generate assessment models, since it is essential for us to maintain a variety of methods and approaches, bearing in mind the different national contexts and varying historical, social, cultural and political situations in each country.

Potential cooperation based on exchanges of experience in assessing the quality of primary and secondary education must therefore take account of the fact that this is a particularly sensitive area. It must fully respect the responsibility of Member States for the content of their education and for organising their education and training systems, as well as their cultural and linguistic diversity.

Mr President, I voted for the motion partly because one of the recitals states that competition does not prevent the States from imposing public service obligations in the general interest on the parties involved.

I would like to hope that, when this recital is implemented with regard to the provision of gas for domestic use, there will be a requirement to take into account the many people who have a very low income - including pensioners who do not have enough to live on - and that provision will be made for the free supply of a certain quantity of gas or another type of energy.

(FR) Overall, and in each of its comments, this report does nothing but extol the virtues of competition and the market economy.

Its author' s sole concern, under the guise of unifying energy markets in Europe, is to deliver this entire sector into the hands of private profit.

Or, more exactly, by separating electricity production and management of the distribution network, the author is prepared to allow states to manage all the areas that require a great deal of investment and offer very little profit, on condition that they hand the profitable areas over to the private sector.

Unification of energy production and distribution throughout the European Union, and the planning and rationalisation of these activities, may represent progress, but only on condition that the whole sector continues to be a public service exclusively concerned with satisfying needs rather than maximising private profit.

The rapporteur' s attitude is the exact opposite of this.

Were the 'liberalisation process' he advocates to come into force, this would be tantamount to a step backwards.

We have therefore voted against this report.

(FR) As a new Member of the European Parliament, let me say how shocked I am.

I did not take part in the previous legislature, which experienced the sell-off with regard to the notion of 'French style' public service, and I really do mean a wholesale sell-off similar to what happened to the transport, postal or even the telecommunications sectors.

In proposing to outline the situation as regards the transposition of the Directive of December 1996, on electricity, and of June 1998, on gas, the Mombaur report is patently expressing the ultraliberal philosophy of the Commission which, under cover of bringing about an internal energy market that is of the greatest advantage to the consumer, is demanding that these markets be opened one hundred percent to competition.

The process is always the same.

The Commission puts forward a minimalist directive on the basis of the argument that liberalisation can only be profitable in a context of deregulation. Next the supporters of 'ever more Europe' transpose the directive and go even further (at the start of the year, 65% of the European market had been liberalised although the directive required only 30%!) and, finally, the Commission comes back a second time to 'regularise' the de facto situation in a much more restrictive fashion!

It is all the more unacceptable, given that there are still problems!

What is the point of bringing about a single energy market when electricity and gas are not compatible (in terms of production and distribution, development of the market, or notions of public service)?

How can one reasonably ask a service provider to ensure continuity of a public service, which is available on a fair basis, if this is not economically profitable?

By the same token, how can we ask the former monopolies to now become totally competitive, when they still have major investments to pay off, the product of yesterday' s political choices?

How can one reasonably demand ever lower prices in the sacred name of competition without challenging current requirements regarding nuclear safety?

How can the national concept of public service be replaced by the Community concept of a general interest activity, which is far more restrictive?

I could carry on like this at great length.

Let me point out that it took decades of republican tradition to enable the gradual build-up of our public services. Is it only going to take a transition period of four years to demolish them?

We were consequently unable to vote in favour of this report which expresses the will of the all-powerful Commission to go ever further and ever faster along the road of liberalisation.

Liberalism may well be worthwhile, but only gradually, in small doses, without definitively ruling out state interventionism, lest we tomorrow suffer the financial consequences of giving it up!

(PT) In the follow-up to the Lisbon European Summit of 23 and 24 March, which decided to speed up liberalisation in areas such as gas, electricity, postal services and transport, the European Commissioner responsible for Energy presented a set of measures seeking to speed up liberalisation in the electricity sector. These included the implementation of mechanisms for cooperation in overcoming problems that might potentially stall liberalisation, and negotiating access to the Community market with third countries.

As you will be aware, at the Santa Maria da Feira European Council, the Commission was asked to present a report by March 2001 on developments in the energy markets under the Lisbon strategy, so that we could assess progress in the liberalisation of the electricity market at the Stockholm Summit in March 2001. With the support of various governments, mechanisms were strengthened during the Portuguese Presidency with the aim of speeding up the process that was already underway with the December 1996 electricity directive.

This directive stipulated the gradual opening up of this market by 2003, whereas the 1998 natural gas directive stipulates that the final phase of the opening up of this sector should be completed in 2008. This has serious consequences for Portugal, and specifically for the State Electricity Corporation, its employees and for Portuguese consumers.

This action sidelines both the issue of employees' jobs in this sector and the interests of individual Member States, including the protection of a high-quality public service that serves the interests of consumers. We should therefore totally oppose this report.

(EL) The purpose of this report is to justify liberalising the energy markets - mainly the electricity but also the natural gas market.

Basically, this means taking this strategically important industry away from the public sector and giving it to private-sector companies to run so that they can increase their profits.

The state then merely regulates the private monopolies and ensures that guidelines issued by the European Union are complied with and it is the country's economy and its people that pay the price.

The whole thrust of the report is geared away from serving the interests of the people - the interests of the man in the street - and growth in the national economy and towards serving the interests of large monopolies.

The report contains quite a few inaccuracies in its bid to present the liberalisation of the energy market in an attractive light.

For example, it is not true that competition has reduced prices and created jobs in Great Britain.

In the 4-5 years since electricity was privatised, prices have increased substantially, jobs have been lost and there is no longer a national, long-term electricity development programme.

Elsewhere, the same report admits that jobs have been lost as a result of liberalisation, but considers that new jobs will be created in non-productive sectors, on the stock exchange, in advertising, in financial services and so forth

According to a study by the Public Power Corporation in Greece, the present staff of 32,000 will be cut to 20,000 and numerous services which are crucial to both the PPC and the economy of Greece, such as the production of new technologies, power station studies etc. will be abolished as a result of the liberalisation of the electricity market.

Privatisation and liberalisation will push up prices, especially to consumers on the small Aegean islands, who pay a price per kilowatt/hour several times below cost.

It is also unacceptable that a public-sector corporation should be forced to allow private-sector companies to use its highly valuable transmission and distribution grid in the name of so-called competition.

If the EU really wanted healthy competition, as it itself understands the term, it would force the private sector to create its own grid and generating stations and compete with public corporations, rather than force the public corporations to "offer" their grid to their competitors.

This is simply a way of making it easier to shift assets to large companies.

It is for precisely this reason that an attempt is being made to separate sectors, thereby preventing public-sector corporations from operating with a view to optimising vertically integrated activities and become competitive.

Generating electricity is not the same as producing a simple commodity.

The energy sector is crucial to the economic development of a country and vital to its defence.

Consequently, liberalising the energy markets jeopardises both the security of a country and its economic growth.

This risk can clearly be discerned; as the report stresses, "In a frontier-free Europe, public utilities must operate in the single market.

These firms are no longer strictly national; nor are their shareholders".

The GUE/NGL MEPs have therefore voted against Mr Mombaur's report.

It is gratifying that the efforts to create a liberalised energy sector now look seriously as if they are to bear fruit.

Most countries are by now well under way with implementing extensive changes to the structures of their markets.

Some countries have already implemented full liberalisation, and I am especially pleased that Denmark is in the vanguard.

Denmark ought to make use of this favourable position and complete the liberalisation, as has already happened in Sweden, for example.

It is therefore unfortunate that the Danish Government does not apparently have any plans for the time being to take the final step towards full liberalisation.

Mr Mombauer' s excellent report hits home regarding several points.

In particular, it should be emphasised how important it is to take account right now of the candidate States' situation.

Liberalisation of the energy markets in the countries of Eastern Europe will require special arrangements, and particular account must be taken of the environment.

It is also important to draw attention to the fact that all electricity production should be transparent, and that special support for this must in no circumstances constitute a distortion of competition.

Mr President, the 1999 annual report of the European Central Bank is not terribly forthcoming on the subject of the main question that all observers are asking: why has the euro, which was presented as a strong currency, turned out in the end to be a weak currency?

Out of nigh on two hundred pages, the bank devotes just a single page to this subject, plus a tiny graph showing only the observed decline in the strength of the euro.

The only explanation given is the difference in economic health and structures between Europe and the United States.

Although that is true, it is not a sufficient reason.

It should be mentioned, first of all, that Europe is not a single country, with one people, one state, and one economic government and that, consequently, the euro is generally considered to be more vulnerable than a national currency.

Furthermore, it was launched at too high a level at the outset, precisely because it was evaluated in relation to the existing rates for genuine national currencies, even though it has none of their intrinsic qualities.

How do European leaders intend to combat this depreciation?

Firstly, indirectly, by means of policies to promote growth, an approach we can only endorse.

At the same time, however, we see the European Central Bank raising interest rates, officially in order to combat a non-existent risk of inflation, but in reality in order to support the parity of the euro.

It is a double-edged sword, because, if it is used at the wrong moment in the cycle, it may cancel out the growth that they are trying to stimulate by other means.

The other dubious solution is the headlong rush to strengthen the eleven members of the euro zone, which is supposed to lead gradually to a single European economic government.

This will not change a great deal in the short term.

In order to deal with the root of the matter, we should have to deny the nations of Europe any autonomy whatsoever, but this is patently impossible.

In any event, a deadlock is being imposed on the system at the same time.

As I explained at a recent symposium of the French National Assembly, the Charter of Fundamental Rights is intended to serve, among other things, to put an even greater stranglehold on the peoples of Europe in relation to Community law and hence also in relation to the single currency.

This venture is helping to take us to a point where we lose our freedoms.

Mr President, surely you agree that these are not explanations of vote, but simply a continuation of the debate.

I still do not know how Mr Berthu voted, not that I am interested, but this is not an explanation of vote, this is just a continuation of the debate.

I voted for the Radwan report despite the fact that point 9 on page 8 calls upon Member States to speed up the structural reforms of the social insurance systems in wording which does not convince me.

Is it the usual request which, with these words, so often disguises the request to cut down on citizens' pensions in order to reduce the budgetary expenditure of national governments?

If this is the aim of the report, I would stress that it should rather be interpreted as rationalisation to avoid wastage in social security benefits, for if they were administered more efficiently it would not be necessary to continually cut benefits and the pensions of the elderly throughout Europe.

The report we are now considering attempts to defend the monetarist policies of the European Central Bank, particularly on price stability, whilst forgetting that we do not currently have a continually falling interest rate. On the contrary, we are in a phase of constant increases, which have very serious repercussions on the incomes of less well-off families who use bank loans to buy their own homes, which is what happens in Portugal.

The rapporteur, who is delighted with the conduct of the ECB, considers that what is crucial is strict observation of the nominal convergence criteria in the Stability Pact, for applicant countries too, together with the policies linked with these criteria. These policies include wage moderation, the flexibility of the labour market and of social security systems and speeding up the liberalisation of the services and capital sectors.

The rapporteur even goes so far as to criticise euro area countries that have reduced working hours since, as he sees it, this attitude contributes to "rendering labour markets more rigid instead of more flexible" .

The rapporteur therefore puts himself in the position of defending the most refined form of capitalist neo-liberalism, at which we must protest most vehemently by voting against the report.

Mr President, we are discussing the European Parliament report on the information strategy to be adopted in the final phase of application of monetary union.

I would like to make it clear to Mrs Peijs that I voted against this report.

This report reflects the concern felt by many leaders in the face of the public' s virtually total lack of interest in the implementation of the euro.

We are, however, eighteen months away from a crucial deadline: the withdrawal of national currencies and the start of the physical circulation of euro notes and coins.

So far, admittedly, progress has been relatively smooth for the euro, as the initial phase has principally involved technical experts, bankers, investment experts and stock market traders, who have all had adequate warning and who, moreover, are favourable to the idea on the whole.

In such circumstances, it is not surprising that the euro has been easy to establish in this phase.

From now on, however, progress promises to be a lot less smooth, since the euro is about to come up against the citizens who, more often than not, have not yet fully understood what is going to be expected of them and who are going to find themselves cornered by decisions which have already been taken.

In order to make up for this omission, the European Parliament is demanding that the information policy be stepped up, increasing appropriations by approximately 30%, to EUR 38 million per annum.

In order to deal with the complexes of decision-makers who might be experiencing doubts, it adds, somewhat ingenuously, that, to quote the resolution voted on, "according to Article 37(b) of the Interinstitutional Agreement of 6 May 1999, information policy is an autonomous action which needs no legal basis" .

In such circumstances, indeed, why should we hold back?

Let me mention, incidentally, that we have always challenged the Commission' s option to make expenditure commitments without a legal basis, and we also challenged this interinstitutional agreement which the Council was weak enough to accept in contravention of the customary principles of proper management of public monies.

