The negotiating results are balanced, ambitious and offer a window of opportunity for both sides.

All important areas are included, notably trade in goods, services, procurement, intellectual property rights, competition, capital movement, investment and dispute settlement.

EC operators will be very rapidly able to compete on the Mexican market on an equal footing with industries elsewhere, notably the United States.

As in all negotiations, compromises had to be found in certain areas but the results are a balanced package assuring market access while preserving specific sensitivities.

Last, but not least, I would like to express the Commission's high appreciation of the very short time period of one month in which the Parliament will be delivering its opinion.

It is very important because it will pave the way for organising a meeting of the EC-Mexico Joint Council on the margins of the Lisbon Council next week.

This will allow for the rapid entry into force of the results which, as you recognise, are in both our and Mexico's interest.

Thank you very much, Mr Liikanen.

The vote will take place at 12 noon.

The next item is the report (A5-0067/2000) by Mrs Read, on behalf of the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy, on the communication from the Commission on a Commission initiative for the Special European Council of Lisbon, 23 and 24 March 2000: Europe - An information society for all [COM(1999) 687 - C5-0063/2000 - 2000/2034(COS)].

Mr President, may I start by thanking the Commission for its timely, well-judged and well-forecasted document.

This is, of course, timed to coincide with the summit in Lisbon next week, and Parliament has had to work extremely speedily, for which I thank so many colleagues who have helped with this and, of course, the secretariat.

When I was a young child, a library was opened in a village where I was born and brought up; when the head teacher of the village school opened the library, he said that there were over 4 000 books in the library, and I thought with all the wisdom of a six-year old child: well, that is all the books in the world.

Now, I personally own over 4 000 books, and, although this is hardly a knowledge revolution in itself, it is some indication, on a personal level extrapolated to a political level, of the pace of change in how knowledge is accessed, distributed, applied and refined.

We ought to put this into some sort of context, though, and remind ourselves that the majority of people in the world have never made and probably never will make even one phone call.

The Commission proposals and Parliament's response give a clear acknowledgement that the market can and should be the motor for much of this change, but not in every case.

The challenge is to work out when the European Union should let the market do the driving, and when we should intervene and regulate - when we should intervene, in whose interests and for how long.

We should remember - and the Commission proposal and Parliament's response highlight the fact - that third-generation mobile telephones, on which so much of our future depends, are an area where clearly the European Union has an important lead, and that this lead is partly, though not wholly, explained by intervention.

The adoption of the GSM standard has meant that the European Union has a tremendous advantage.

Our report mentions matters relating to social protection and the social implications of this change, and I am indebted to the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs and particularly Mr Cercas, draftsman of the opinion from that committee - the only committee that has been able to complete an opinion in the short space of time available - for his hard work.

If I can explain procedurally and very briefly, the Social Affairs Committee voted on Monday evening at the same time as the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy and, with the agreement of the draftsman, I have taken over some of his proposals and put them down in my own political group's name.

I hope that there will be support for those, because they go into a considerable amount of important detail.

Other amendments are looking at matters relating to disability rights.

I have consulted widely about the need to ensure that certain fundamental principles about the rights of disabled users and disabled people at work are incorporated into this report, and I hope into future legislation under the 1999 review of telecommunications legislation, at a sufficiently early stage.

We have amendments about consumer protection - so important in the establishment of trust in e-commerce - on the future of taxation, on the implications for healthcare and for transport.

Particularly important are going to be the employment consequences already seen and I tried hard to obtain a balance: not to be too alarmist because, of course, some of these changes will mean unemployment, but, on the other hand, to look at the opportunities for new sorts of work that the changes will bring.

Whilst I was researching for these comments to make to you today, I looked for examples, because I think these illustrate so well to the citizens of the European Union how these developments will bring benefits to their lives.

It is important, too, that we in Parliament and in the institutions of the European Union also apply modern methods, methods characterised by transparency and openness, in our own deliberations.

I should like to use my final few seconds to draw to your attention three projects in my own area.

One of these is in Rutland, the smallest county in England, where a virtual Rutnet was set up, bringing together people in rural, isolated communities for purposes of leisure, transport, employment and social life generally.

Further north, the Nottingham rural community council have set up a similar project in an area of serious mining deprivation, and this is bringing enormous benefits to many of the people in that area.

On a broader basis, M-net, the European East Midlands network helping small businesses and craft enterprises and linking in with universities and colleges, is also important.

Finally, some comments, Mr President, on what the future holds.

It is interesting to try to look into the future, and I should like to quote from the words of a famous Louis Armstrong song, 'What a wonderful world' : 'Babies are born, we watch them grow, they'll learn much more than I'll ever know' .

I think for all of us the future for our children and grandchildren is a future of great opportunity, though also of great uncertainty.

It is praiseworthy that the Commission is looking to play a leading, pivotal role in this, and I commend the Commission proposals and my own report to you.

Mr President, Commissioner Liikanen, ladies and gentlemen, before starting on my speech on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs, I want to express our very sincere and warm thanks to the rapporteur, Mrs Read.

We have been working against the clock and we have been dealing with an excellent and supportive fellow Member, who has been very open to accepting all the points our committee wanted to raise in this important debate.

Many thanks for your report and your skill, Mrs Read.

The Committee on Employment and Social Affairs has welcomed the Commission' s very important initiative, e-Europe, for the Special European Council to be held in Lisbon on 23 and 24 March, with support and optimism.

We naturally applaud the Commission' s aim of making the information society benefit all sectors and all regions but now, with the Commissioner here, we also have the opportunity to consider the citizens' viewpoint and remind the Commission and the public that rhetoric in announcing objectives and expressing desires is not enough. We want these words transformed as firmly as possible into specific objectives and precise financial commitments, because that is the only way to get a real strategy covering every aspect of the information society.

And the strategy will only be of use to the weakest groups and individuals, and those who are most at risk of exclusion from the new society, if there are concrete commitments.

No doubt the Commission has the noblest intentions, but, looked at from the viewpoint of the workers and the least advantaged people, it still has not answered the questions this Parliament has raised in many documents, for example, the report on the Green Paper entitled "Living and Working in the Information Society: People First" . We still do not have much idea of who is going to finance the massive programme to teach basic digital literacy which Europe needs to close the gap with the United States.

We do not have much idea of how the responsibilities can be divided between governments and Commission, or what role trade unions and civil society can play.

So we want supplementary analyses taken into account, we want firmer commitments, we want a specific point about strengthening employment and social cohesion in the information society - because there is nothing about that in the Commission' s communication - and we want a strategy with guidelines, recommendations and indicators.

We want adults mentioned, not just young people, we want disadvantaged groups mentioned and we want you to remember equality of opportunity too.

The new society must not exacerbate inequality between men and women.

Commissioner, there are great opportunities here, but they must reach all the people.

And we want the European social model to be defended.

So we are asking for a step forward, with more specific commitments and far more adequate political and financial efforts.

Mr President, Commissioner Liikanen, the e-Europe initiative by the European Commission is to be welcomed in principle.

We all agree that new technologies will lead to extensive change, not only in our business life but in all aspects of our social life.

It is also true that the evolution from industrial society to information society cannot be halted and that it therefore makes political sense to prepare Europe for the information society as best we can.

I therefore expressly welcome the statement in the e-Europe initiative that its prime objective is to accelerate the positive transformation to the information society in the European Union and gear the transformation towards social and regional integration.

The European Commission sets out ten measures in its communication on the e-Europe initiative, which should level the playing field in the run up to the information society in Europe.

As welcome as the individual measures are, they need to be structured as a whole and clear priorities need to be set for our policy.

This includes clearly differentiating which tasks the European Union can and must take care of itself and which tasks come within the jurisdiction of the individual Member States, taking account of the fact that some Member States and regions have been promoting the new technologies and fostering their acceptance by their citizens for years now.

In this respect, the summit in Lisbon should table recommendations to the individual states, without imposing comprehensive obligations or heavy financial burdens.

What must the European Union do within the framework of the e-Europe initiative?

In my opinion, the following priorities should be taken care of by the Union and should have been addressed as core points in Mrs Read' s report, for which I should like, at this point, to thank her.

First: we must create an open, modern, high-performance multimedia infrastructure.

The policy objective must be to ensure that Europe has a modern, high-performance infrastructure which allows valuable quality telecommunications services to be supplied and demanded from the telephone via the PC and television.

This includes cheaper Internet access for all the citizens of Europe, which means fostering even more competition in local networks, for example by unbundling customer access.

It also means that all platforms must be made accessible to service providers at competitive prices; this might include making television cables available.

It also means that the policy regarding frequencies in Europe will need to be reviewed and we will need to take a more strategic approach based on economic principles, as you have suggested, Commissioner.

But, in so doing, we must not, of course, forget commercial applications which are generally provided in the public interest, such as public service radio.

On the contrary, this must be taken into account when frequencies are being allocated so that it can fulfil its purpose as an opinion-forming institution which provides a platform for a variety of opinions.

Secondly: we must quickly create a legal framework for electronic commerce.

This means that we must deal swiftly with legislative proposals pending, such as the e-commerce directive or the directive amending copyright protection.

However, caution is required in the legislative area in that we must not over-regulate; in other words, the first question with future legislative proposals should always be, do we actually need this?

Thirdly: we need an e-Europe test bench for European initiatives.

I have already referred to the fact that the changes in information technology and the new media affect all areas of life.

Consequently, it is advisable to set all initiatives at European level on the e-Europe test bench. In other words...

(The President cut the speaker off) Mr President, I apologise.

Please be so kind as to allow me to finish my sentence.

I have inadvertently run over time, but allow me to use my closing sentence to stress once again that I welcome the e-Europe initiative and to say that the suggestions which I had made would have been taken into account in my intervention.

Mr President, congratulations are in order today of course to Mrs Read on her excellent report and to Commissioner Liikanen.

This is a positive debate, very positive for Europe, and widespread interest has been shown, as evidenced by the large number of amendments.

Let me pick out the points that we think are most important: infrastructure, legal certainty - people must know where they are - and the skills offensive, which ought, please, to be targeted not simply at our schoolchildren and students but at groups which have been neglected, such as women and older people, who represent an enormous source of skill if it were to be exploited.

It is a disgrace that large countries in the past have not foreseen the need to train, and countries like Germany and the United Kingdom should not be having to bring in workers from elsewhere.

I know that we will have a very good advertising and information campaign, and that we will capture the imagination of the citizens of Europe.

We must not forget people with disabilities.

There is also the fact that the documentation is not available to partially sighted people, and that is an oversight which could be put right in future.

We must prevent divisions, divisions between the regions of Europe, between the households of Europe and between the individuals of Europe.

Business-to-business communications are doing well but we must enhance communications between business and consumers in the European Union, where we lag behind the United States.

Of course, to do that we have to ensure that people - customers - are convinced of privacy and security, and your measures will help to bring about that confidence.

Business-to-consumer communications are particularly important for the elderly, the housebound and for those with family responsibilities who are finding it difficult to juggle work and career, overwhelmingly women.

There are ethical issues which we must give regard to, but I am very optimistic, and I think that Mrs Read will continue her work alongside you, and we will find in this House many missionaries for the 'e-Europe' communication.

Mr President, Commissioner, the present initiative is important for the purpose of making decision makers in general more aware of developments, but also because levels of development differ very greatly from one European country to another.

We can also see this from the follow-up document prepared by the Commission.

The initiative is important if we are to stop having to say that the United States is the overall leader within this developing field.

According to the "2000 IDC/World Times Information Society Index" , published in February, Sweden has overtaken the United States as the leading information economy.

The United States occupies second place.

Finland, Norway and Denmark follow, in that order.

People may hold different views as to the value of this type of investigation, but I think it is important to emphasise that the US model is not the only one which leads to success in the IT society, something which far too many people have said in this House.

Scandinavia is acquitting itself well with its social infrastructure and also, perhaps, with its pensions systems.

We ought to bear this in mind, something I am convinced the Commission has done.

We should also remember that the EU countries are very different from one another and that developments are very rapid.

This must be reflected in the action plan.

It is also important that the countries which are forging ahead most quickly should not be checked in their development.

It is important that we should clarify what is being done at EU level and what is being done with EU resources and that we should be prepared to make changes to regional policy and redirect some resources for research in ways that benefit "e-Europe" .

In view of countries' different levels of development in the IT sphere, I am also sceptical about information plans and campaigns at EU level. "e-Europe" means more than just "e-commerce" .

The Directive on electronic commerce deals for the most part with things other than trading on the part of consumers.

I should like to appeal to the Commission to pay attention to the question which is being discussed in an adjoining room with Federal Trade Commissioner Thompson: that of how we are to increase consumer confidence.

The consumer has to be king when it comes to electronic commerce. Otherwise, it will not properly take off.

When alternative ways of solving disputes are discussed, we ought to collaborate globally with the United States.

Nonetheless, we should also support the OECD in its work.

The issues of broadband communications and of good infrastructure are on the agenda in the majority of countries.

There is a need for diversity, but now more standards are being sought for Digital Subscriber Lines with the help of which it will be possible to upgrade the network.

It is widely maintained that telephone companies are not making use of the available technology because standards are lacking.

Smart cards, encryption, mobile phones and "e-Europe" constitute our strength.

We shall persist with developments in these areas but, when it comes to standards, we need to pursue further development.

It is not we politicians who should decide on these standards. Instead, we should allow industry to reach an agreement concerning standards where there is a demand for these.

Our task is to legislate more quickly and to make for new patterns of legislation where possible.

I am glad that this point is made in the report.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, Commissioner, rapporteur, allow me to thank you for the open debate and, of course, the report.

I should like to turn my attention first to the policy approach of the e-Europe initiative and to the approach taken by the Read report.

The Internet, e-mail and mobile telephones will apparently do away with unemployment.

But the reality of the matter is somewhat different.

The IT boom is confronted by mergers and redundancies.

History teaches us that this approach has failed.

Industrialisation, atomic energy and biotechnology have not brought freedom and prosperity for all.

Initiatives and reports are informed by the concept that the playing field should be levelled for the youngest and best.

Unfortunately, this concept totally ignores the fact that this group already represents the winners, while the general mass goes away empty-handed.

What we need to do is to allow everyone to profit from technical innovation, irrespective of how old or how rich they are or in which region they live.

We should hold our principle of equal opportunity up to the light of truth.

A universal service points the right way, but the idea should not be implemented by providers which censor the Internet by using technical devices to deny their customers access to parts of the Net.

The Commission' s proposal aims to create equality through market liberalisation.

That alone is nonsensical enough because liberalisation always starts from the premise that the strong will become stronger, while the state should only give the weak minimum support.

In the case of information technology, however, we start with a totally different set of coordinates.

For example, there are numerous initiatives to promote the Internet and computers in schools.

But if no account is taken of the fact that each class contains at least one pupil who knows more than the teacher, then the initiative cannot but fail.

The fact that strong anti-American arguments had to be used at numerous points of the Read report as an excuse for the liberalisation policy again illustrates the extent to which the interests of private industry have dictated the text.

That brings me to my next controversial point: civil rights.

What we in fact need is a concept for universal data protection.

Instead, the Commission and parts of the European Parliament visualise a smart card on which all your data would be stored.

Your medical health fund would know that you are homosexual and your employer would know all about your previous and expected future illnesses and your forefathers.

It means a step in the direction of see-through man and yet more state interference in our private lives.

It is being used to deliberately plan and implement a further massive restriction of fundamental rights at European level.

It is being sold as an innovative policy at the same time as Parliament is arguing with other institutions for a Charter of Fundamental Rights.

How can these two things be reconciled?

In the light of "echelon" , I am calling for a rethink of this matter.

Data protection and encoding are what we need.

For the rest, the citizens must control the state, not the other way around.

Mr President, in the original paper in English, the Commission uses the words 'information society' and not 'knowledge society' .

Information is only a raw material of knowledge. Information is chaos, while knowledge is order: order out of chaos.

The information society is the chaos society.

The knowledge society is more than that, and it may also be a society of social order, cultural diversity and human solidarity.

The information society has to date made its presence felt in the form of price quotations on a chaotic stock market.

The prices of shares in technology have risen in a such a way which cannot be justified economically.

Neither has the money often gone into new investment for business but to the owners, who have become millionaires and billionaires.

In that way the information society emerges as a bubble economy, a symbol of social inequality and imbalance.

The information society has been a matter of millionaires causing a social revolution: they have innovatively destroyed the old structures of society.

Their revolution has been to sell computers and software to everyone.

The rest of us should start a counter-revolution.

We should set our aims higher than the Commission has done.

We have to demand a knowledge society for all rather than the chaotic information society we are getting.

It cannot just be a question of whether everyone has a mobile phone, how e-mail gets sent and what to buy over the Internet.

At its best the knowledge society can be a social dimension of the new capitalism.

The information society for all is too undemanding, too commercial and too culturally restricted a goal.

We should want a knowledge society for all: that is democracy.

Mr President, 'the best is the enemy of the good' , as they say in France, and I do fear Mrs Read' s report is a striking illustration of that saying.

Indeed no one will deny that means of communication, and in particular the Internet, are most important to the future development of our societies, or that the EU Member States are currently trailing behind the United States in this respect, or that we need to legislate to control the potentially anarchic development of these means in order to limit the excesses to which they can give rise and ensure that they are as successful as possible for our people.

Yet I fear that the catalogue of good intentions before us today may, in fact, make it more difficult to achieve the objective we are seeking.

Rather than moving ahead one step at a time and setting the Member States a concrete and quantifiable short or medium-term objective, Parliament is sending out a confused and confusing signal, largely, it is true, because of the rather bizarre committee work.

We would have liked to see more precise details about the specific nature of the European approach to this subject and, in particular, on how the Commission proposes to help the Member States to check the headlong race towards standardisation, an exact blueprint of the American model, which is bound to encourage the development of these tools on the basis of purely technical and commercial considerations.

The educational and social concerns set out in the report are, no doubt, laudable ones, but in the end they will have little impact given the immediate repercussions that the extension of this tool will have for the people of Europe.

In what way is the Commission' s document compatible with the existence of tax provisions in the field of commerce and employment specific to the various Member States?

How can we ensure respect for our concepts of the freedom of the individual and freedom of expression, which have not yet been harmonised at world level?

What guarantees are there for the security of our states in the context of the development of a technology operated chiefly by a big power which, while teaching the whole world the lessons of liberalism, never forgets to ensure that its own enterprises scrupulously respect its concept of the national interest?

It is rather surprising, Mrs Ferrer, to read in paragraph 55 of your report that this Parliament expressly supports ...

(The President cut the speaker off)

Mr President, Commissioner, it is a very positive sign that Lisbon will see focused discussion on the development of the information society in Europe.

The 'new economy' is here to stay, in Europe too.

The European response to new challenges and exploiting opportunities has, however, been a long time coming.

For that reason, the e-Europe initiative is in a more crucially important position than ever before with regard to Union competitiveness and, consequently, from the point of view of our citizens also.

The proposals for reform in the initiative are ambitious, but do not even necessarily go far enough.

The goals are too modest, especially for my home country of Finland, where, in many respects, we are ahead of our European partners in networking.

The initiative should also be supplemented by the future challenges facing those countries with a more advanced information society.

Commissioner, I appreciate the amount of work that you, to your credit, have carried out regarding these issues relating to the information society.

We Members of the European Parliament cannot stand by either, while Europe continually lags behind its global competitors in the world of the Internet.

The clear lead Europe enjoys in the world of wireless communications is not enough for us to stop caring about the future of the European information society and about whether we really can keep up with the competition.

Being in a key position when creating the information society encourages real competition in telecommunications networks.

Competition cuts costs, and we have to bring down these very costs of communications, so that consumers and SMEs can derive full benefit from the electronic revolution.

Apart from reduced costs, the growth in electronic commerce also means that questions of security should be able to be resolved to the satisfaction of consumers and that defects in legislation should be corrected.

I think it is particularly important to take measures to increase venture capital projects for SMEs in the high technology sector.

The EUR 20 billion currently being used in venture capital projects in Europe each year is only one quarter of what the United States spends over the same period.

The amount is much too small.

Fortunately, the Commission has shown initiative in this matter, however, and has focused attention on accelerating developments here.

Speedy developments in the information society will drastically change our environment and our working and living conditions.

As European legislators, we have before us an immense challenge, if we intend to keep legislation abreast of the times.

The legislator does not always even have to interfere in developments: in certain matters industry and the players themselves may quickly resolve problems through cooperation.

Examples would be the positive experience that was gained from the common standardisation of second generation mobile phone systems and which is directly visible now in the strengthened competitive position with regard to third generation output.

Control of the new operational environment will also require increased technical and pedagogic facilities and resources in training schemes.

Consequently, there will have to be more focus on the training of teaching staff in European educational and training programmes.

Finally I would like to say that I support the introduction of benchmarking with regard to the development of the information society.

With regard to the concrete proposals contained in the e-Europe communiqué, I can only wonder why the Council has not discussed them before, so as to ensure commitment on the part of Member States.

Mr President, Commissioners, if every possible attempt is made - and rightly so - to establish ways of creating an information society for everyone, we should make just as great an effort to ensure that we do not end up recreating a dual society with IT literates on one side and IT illiterates on the other.

Moreover, I set great store by protecting small and medium-sized businesses, with special emphasis on the small businesses.

In this connection, it is important to ensure that guarantees are provided for advertising purposes.

Indeed, due to a lack of a harmonised policy on commercial communication, obstacles could well surface which cannot be negotiated, particularly by small businesses.

Far-reaching harmonisation concerning commercial communication is therefore urgently needed.

In the last instance, I would also like to underline how important it is that at least the parties involved, i.e. the consumer and entrepreneur, must always be able to make prior arrangements regarding the applicable legal system.

After all, if it is stipulated that consumers can take legal action within their own jurisdiction, then this situation will be untenable for small businesses, which will need legal assistance in 14 other Member States. Needless to say, small businesses cannot afford to make this kind of arrangement.

Mr President, with the e-Europe initiative, the Commission is reminding us that Europe is lagging behind in the development of the information society.

That means it is lagging behind the United States which, indeed, no one would deny.

But having said that, we should evaluate the quality of this backwardness: economic, political and social. How do we measure it?

The Commission says it wants to launch a political initiative, so let us take it at its word.

Yes, Europe is backward in terms of access to the information society as a tool, a tool of knowledge, a tool of creativity, a tool for exchanging information.

Yes, it is backward in terms of the development of e-commerce made possible by the Internet.

But are these two forms of backwardness the same?

Some might say 'no matter' , we must strive for the wholesale development of the magnificent tool of digital information and that is an end in itself.

That is the impression the Commission' s initiative could give.

But is it enough to set out a list of objectives, where the development of small enterprises is put on the same footing as the development of the public services, where electronic commerce vies with university education?

The question that has not been asked is about the content of the information that is supposed to circulate thanks to this digital tool.

Will that content be standardised or will it reflect the cultural and linguistic diversity of Europe?

Will it be a social content or purely market-related?

Even now, the information society is creating social networks, giving rise to new cultural experiences, producing sites for political debate and exchanges of view.

We need to evaluate them properly.

The Commission refers to Europe' s backwardness and the need to make up for it.

Between considerations of backwardness and urgency, we must not confine ourselves to speeding up this process but must instead consider the democratic and political conditions under which it takes place.

Technological progress is an all-too familiar slogan.

In fact, the transformation we are witnessing is reminiscent of what happened with the invention of printing.

We need to reflect very seriously about the challenges and changes it is bringing about.

If the objectives are to strengthen employment and improve democratic access, as so clearly elucidated in Mrs Read' s report, it would be a pity to evaluate them solely in terms of the market and of economic development.

Mr President, it is difficult to summarise in three minutes the thoughts and feelings which naturally present themselves when one is to comment on such a broadly based and interesting initiative such as that which Mr Liikanen has prepared.

The new technologies which we are debating here have, for the most part, radically altered the bases of production, service, distribution, trade, research, use of information etc. in our societies.

Productivity is increasing, as is the quality of various products. Moreover, one of the reasons why we have relatively high growth in the world economy and, at the same time, low inflation lies precisely in these new technologies.

I think we are all fascinated by all the new products and applications which are being made available.

It is nonetheless important that, in our capacity as politicians, we should pay attention to the prior conditions which are being created for using these new technologies to help solve urgent problems for society with which the market economy will not automatically concern itself.

One such example is, of course, the area of education.

We live at a time when education is becoming ever more important as a factor in production.

One aspect to which little attention is paid in this area is that knowledge, unlike other production factors (such as capital, minerals, and agricultural and other land), is not a scarce resource.

Knowledge has a clear tendency to increase or to expand when it is used.

It opens the door to incredibly exciting developments where democracy and justice are concerned.

We are all born with the potential to learn and acquire knowledge.

This cannot, however, occur without good prior conditions for education and learning.

That is why the proposal in this report, according to which resources for education and learning would be made available, is so important.

It is not, however, just a question of technical equipment. It is also a question of developing new teaching methods and distance learning.

This is important in our own part of the world but is also, of course, especially important in poor countries.

I hope that the experience which will be gained by the EU in this area will also be used as part of our collaborative work on development.

I would urge Mr Liikanen to have a detailed discussion with Mr Nielson on that issue.

Another area which is just as important is that of the opportunities for using the new technologies to make the use of energy and materials more efficient.

Commendably, in my view, the present programme refers to the area of transport.

Do not forget, however, that it is also possible, to a significant degree, to achieve an actual physical reduction in transport needs, which is something we should be trying to come to grips with.

Finally, where e-commerce is concerned, it is extremely important that a framework should be created which ensures that consumers can feel secure in engaging in this form of trade, that commerce within the EU is facilitated and that due attention is paid to the tax issue and to the risks concerning integrity.

We are only at the beginning of an important discussion, and I look forward to further stimulating dialogue.

Thank you, Mr Liikanen and Mrs Read, for an interesting report.

Mr President, Commissioner, metaphorically-speaking, what we have in the new I+C technologies is new fuel for our economic locomotive to re-heat our eco-system.

However, I should like to raise three points which perhaps merit our attention.

First: Article 6 of the Treaty of Amsterdam clearly calls for the principle of sustainability to be integrated into all policies.

To be honest, Commissioner, on reading the communication, I find too little account has been taken of sustainability, the question of ecological products, incentives for an ecological lifestyle or the question of the impact which I+C technologies have on environmental protection.

Secondly: how will our working life and employment relations change?

Will people be able to influence how they are organised?

We need to consider if we need new joint-decision structures in the face of these revolutionary developments, new structures for listening to employees and making decisions.

Greater account needs to be taken of this.

Thirdly: the Fifth Framework Programme on research contains a great deal of socio-economic research, the purpose of which is to analyse what holds Europe together in the area of I+C technologies. We cannot fill and heat our locomotive with ordinary fuel and, at the same time, carry out socio-economic flanking research under the framework programme which makes no reference to this communication.

In short, we need to heat the locomotive but not to allow it to travel anywhere it pleases. This locomotive needs rails.

Mr President, colleagues, not since the spread of universal suffrage in the last century has our society faced such a big potential transfer of power.

The information society has potential to transfer power from government to individual, from bureaucrat to citizen and, of course, from business to consumer.

It opens up a global market place and almost limitless information to anyone with access to a computer screen.

It is the biggest engine to break down barriers between communities and nationalities that we have ever seen - bigger than any EU directive can possibly be.

It offers more power, more choice, lower prices to citizens across Europe and indeed across the world, and in my view the best thing that governments can do in cyberspace is to stay out of it as much as they possibly can and let consumers, businesses and citizens get on with their businesses and their lives.

Legislators cannot keep up with this technology even if they try to.

Technology and industry are better equipped to respond to consumer concerns in what is an immensely competitive market.

It is that competitive market which will ensure that consumers are protected, not heavy-handed legislation which might stunt e-commerce and leave others around the world to reap the benefits of a revolution in our economy which is unparalleled since the industrial revolution of the nineteenth century.

But we all know that we need a base line of government involvement.

We need a basic legislative framework for e-commerce.

I hope it will be a light-touch framework, but we need to drive it through quickly because the e-clock is ticking and there are many organisations around the world fighting for this business.

It is in our interest to make sure that we get the answers and our legislation right, but also to get them through quickly.

We in this House should drive through the e-commerce directive with its country of origin principle as fast as we possibly can.

We should adopt new rules on jurisdiction which trust consumers to make an informed choice about which jurisdiction they want to opt for.

We should drive through the liberalisation of the telecoms package, because it is only with a low-cost competitive telecoms market that we can deliver this power, these low prices and these big opportunities to our consumers, because that is the only way to get low prices for our consumers.

We want to build on Europe's lead on mobile telephony and adopt the examples of such great global players as Finland's Nokia.

Member States should build on the IT skills concepts in their schools, but we must do this quickly because if we do not, others will take the prize on offer here, which is dominance in the global e-commerce market.

Mr President, Commissioner, first of all let me thank Mrs Read for this report and point out at once that I will simply concentrate on the social aspects which, in our view, deserve a closer look.

With the Lisbon Summit coming up in a few days, I think the European Parliament needs to send out a clear signal to the Member State governments that Europe' s entry into the digital age, and therefore into a new economic area with very considerable potential, must not be at the price of social cohesion.

The need for solid social foundations and for consideration of the people' s real needs are, in my view, the sine qua non of the success of the information society, as we understand it in Europe, i.e. a society that cannot be built only on market forces.

We must take the utmost care to ensure that all sectors of society benefit from the information society and that we do not create a society in which social inclusion or exclusion depend on access to the new technologies and the use of their potential.

I think three points need to be noted, as well as the risks and concerns to which they give rise.

The first relates to the users and the risk of a gap emerging between the various victims of social exclusion.

The cost of Internet access, the sidelining of entire sectors of society (the young unemployed, housewives, the elderly) and the shortcomings in education and vocational training are serious obstacles to an information society meant to benefit everyone.

The second relates to the individuals working in this sector; given the flexibility that is a feature of the sector, organisational structures must be set up for the employees, together with guarantees of their rights, in relation to social security, pensions or the necessary job-security provisions.

My third and last point relates to the question of public service and improving the democratic systems to develop procedures...

(The President cut the speaker off)

Mr President, Commissioner, e-Europe is a really important programme for everyone en route from the industrial society to the information society.

I would therefore like to congratulate the Portuguese presidency on its decision to make this issue the focus of the special summit.

I should like to congratulate the Commission on its proposal and the rapporteur on her report and I should like to explain why I have praised you and why I should like to take you all at your word.

The focal point of the report and the prime objective of the Commission' s proposal make it clear that we need to achieve equal opportunities for, and equal participation of, all citizens in the information society.

According to the text, e-Europe should, first and foremost, show each citizen, each household, each school, each company and each administration the way to the digital age and the Internet.

This goal, in my view, does not justify the concerns raised here about a possible division in society between the haves and have-nots as far as access to information is concerned.

I have highlighted this objective because I believe that it illustrates to particularly good effect how the citizens stand to benefit from European Union intervention in the information society, but, of course, only if we keep our word and fulfil the promises which we have made them.

If we really do ensure by the end of 2002 that all schools - and this is in the programme - have high-speed access to the Internet and to multimedia resources in the classroom, if we really do ensure that by 2003 every citizen, rich or poor, has comprehensively guaranteed access to our health system and if we really do promptly take the action urgently needed in order to promote our SMEs, i.e. hedge the joint risks for venture capital in the Community.

That is a task for the Council, Parliament and the Commission.

I wish us all a great deal of success in the interests of our citizens.

Mr President, Commissioner, I would like to congratulate the rapporteur for the successful work that has been done in so short a period of time.

An information society for all is certainly an area of focus for the Commissioner in this process.

It is important, and I thank her for it.

Agreement should be reached at Lisbon on the principles of the sustainable funding of social security on account of this notion.

We also have to reach agreement with management and labour, for example, on the subject of remote working and vocational training, if what we are talking about is an information society for all.

It will not be so if the basic rights of employees are not safeguarded.

There is a threat that, because of the Internet, services will become self-services, and that again is a major employment issue.

Another matter is that we have been deregulating the telecommunications industry for around ten years, and now, with these massive Internet players merging there is a fear that they will once again start regulating the market.

This, I think, should be stopped.

It cannot be allowed to happen and I expect the Commission to sit up and listen and take the necessary action.

Thirdly, the quoted share value for a certain Internet company rose by a sudden 4 000% in one month, and this came about merely because unsubstantiated information was given about it for the stock market.

With many companies in the same position, or almost the same position, there is going to be a bubble effect in the industry, and when the crash comes I hope the taxpayer will not be footing the bill.

Has the Commissioner a remedy in mind for if and when the air balloon companies in this sector burst so that the taxpayer does not have to pay out, as is the case with crises in the banks, for example?

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I think it is very important for the European Parliament to take part in the debate on the European Union' s attitude to the opportunities opened up by the information society, an item on the agenda for the Lisbon Summit.

While stressing that many people had hoped for clearer answers in this area from the employment summit, I do not undervalue the relevance of the issue and the need to define a European strategy for the sector.

We all know the Union is lagging far behind the United States in this sensitive area, which is so vital to our future.

I concur with Mrs Read' s report and, borrowing an expression used here by the President of the Council, António Guterres, I want to highlight the three main deficits in the sector.

First there is the pragmatic deficit.

As the Read report correctly points out, the document put forward by the Commission is full of general guidelines and laudable intentions, but it is weak on concrete measures and ensuing actions.

I would not like to believe the Council' s conclusions will be restricted to this list.

On this issue, as on others, we do not need more statements and speeches, we need measures and decisions that can reduce the huge lead the United States has on us.

Then there is the democratic deficit - which has been greater, admittedly - but it is important to combat the division between those who have access to the Internet, the new technologies and the benefits of the information society, and those deprived of them either for economic reasons, or because of insufficient technological information and education.

Our first concern must be to prioritise our commitment to the educational system and in the carrier and telecommunications structures which make access to the Internet cheaper, faster and more powerful.

And finally there is the investment deficit.

As the report rightly affirms, the response to these problems cannot be left to the market alone.

A great deal can and must be done in the health system, in public administration, in relations between governments and people, and in public services generally to ensure that Europe takes the qualitative leap we all recognise to be necessary today.

Mr President, the point of the special summit in Lisbon next week is to define the European way in the future world of employment.

How can we become more competitive?

How can we create new markets?

How can we create permanent, more highly-qualified jobs?

We can take one of the leading roles in tomorrow' s global information society, provided that we learn the script.

Occasionally we lack competent directors to motivate us.

I personally feel that it is important for broad target groups to take an active part in these serious changes.

They need to familiarise themselves with the Internet and data bases from an early age.

Schools without computers must become the exception.

We need a qualification offensive with computer-aided learning and active use of networks.

The European Parliament' s Committee on Employment and Social Affairs is calling for the information society to become the common property of all citizens, including the socially weak, the disabled and older people.

The pace of change is hotting up in the European economy.

Undertakings are subject to constant restructuring, new holdings, strategic alliances and friendly or hostile takeovers.

The consequences for both employees and managers is the same: greater mobility and faster and faster adjustment.

Independence is increasing, as is pseudo-independence.

Teams have shorter and shorter sell-by dates.

That has repercussions for the internal composition and the representation of the interests of employees.

Many companies are too small to set up works councils or are so large that relationships are not even forged and employee representatives become roving ambassadors.

People in ICT professions who have a great deal of freedom, analysts, engineers and creative planners, want to be their own bosses.

They are fighting for new working time regulations and new variable contract-based tariff and remuneration systems.

In addition, trade unions in other areas fear that unregulated structures will spread and social standards will drop.

Citizens must be familiar with new forms of work and working relations in the information and communications industry, be they in the hardware sector, the software sector, services or consultancy.

Once they are able to share in innovation, once they can be won over by the information society, then it must be made clear that this is a success or an advantage not just for private- and public-sector undertakings, but for consumers and employees alike.

Mr President, I want to begin by thanking Mrs Read for all the work she has put into the present report.

It is wonderful that there should be such a lot of interest in this area.

I believe it is important that, here in the European Parliament, we should now promote further knowledge of these complex and exciting developments and create a readiness to implement the necessary changes.

Commissioner Liikanen, with his personal commitment, and the Commission' s "e-Europe" document represent a positive vision of the new economy and a growth-orientated policy which I wholeheartedly support.

It is unfortunate that certain Members see the burgeoning information society as a threat, rather than appreciate the opportunities it involves.

The significance of e-commerce is difficult to overestimate.

Until now, the single market has only been a reality for major companies. e-commerce means that the single market will become accessible in a quite different way to smaller companies and, above all, to individuals, customers and consumers, who can now finally benefit from the whole of the European single market.

In the wake of technological change, there will not only be changes to patterns of trade, but new opportunities will also be created where the arts, entertainment and personal contacts are concerned.

In order to best support the new economy, it is important that we as politicians should not believe that we can foresee companies' and people' s every need.

We must allow the market, that is to say purchasers and vendors, to choose for themselves.

In view of the way this part of society and of the economy looks, it is even more important not to engage in a fever of regulation by controlling activities in every detail.

Instead, we must further deregulate markets so as to increase competition with a view to reducing prices.

That is definitely the best way of making information services available to all citizens.

An important part of creating growth in the new economy is to increase the flow of venture capital for newly started-up and expanding businesses.

We must increase competitiveness and the development of ideas in our part of the world, that is to say in Europe.

The most important thing that heads of State and government can do in Lisbon is to begin reducing taxes on capital in their various countries, for it is these which now constitute the greatest obstacle to an increased flow of venture capital.

To the left-hand side of this House, I would say, following the present debate: try to affirm the opportunities available to people because of the information revolution.

Avoid being so fearful and negative.

Take Mrs Villiers' insights on board.

Adopt Mr Wijkman' s global and positive attitude, and learn from young Mrs Kauppi' s experiences.

I do not think we should underestimate the problem of making the relevant adjustments, but do not bury this initiative in your old conceptual world.

That would be Europe' s loss.

Mr President, I want first to thank Mrs Read and Parliament for the report, which has been produced extremely rapidly and is very important, because the extraordinary summit will take place next week and the e-Europe initiative is one of the fundamental documents there.

The subtitle of the e-Europe initiative, "An Information Society for All" , or we could also say as Mr Seppänen has said here, "A Knowledge-based Society for All" , is an indication of the far-reaching objectives of this initiative.

We welcome the contribution of Parliament to this very important policy debate.

The Commission is currently contributing to the preparation of next week's summit in Lisbon.

To this end, the Commission has adopted several communications including a progress report on e-Europe last week and a paper setting out an agenda for economic and social renewal for Europe two weeks ago.

I find it very important that Parliament is participating through today's debate in the discussions before the Lisbon Summit.

The debate has been really illuminating and has shown the great interest and also the expertise of Parliament on this issue.

We hope that the Lisbon European Council will endorse concrete, focused policy actions providing a strong signal that European leaders are determined to transform Europe into a dynamic and competitive economy.

As to the content of your reports, I note that you have expressed concern that mechanisms through which the targets of e-Europe are to be achieved are not made explicit in our initial document.

In this context, the progress report submitted by the Commission to the Lisbon Council last week and also submitted to you last week will provide further details.

In addition, there will be an e-Europe action plan by June as requested at the Helsinki Summit.

I hope that these documents will answer many of your concerns in relation to the realisation of the goals of e-Europe, but it may be that some of the issues will not be addressed, because we must try to remain focused in this initiative.

I am particularly pleased to see that the report shares the Commission's view on the key elements of e-Europe.

It is essential to create a modern multimedia high-performance e-infrastructure, to create legal certainty in e-commerce, to counteract the skills shortage and to improve the availability of risk capital to stimulate innovation.

Your support to move forward on these key elements of e-Europe is most welcome.

I find the idea of organising an e-government conference highly interesting.

It is important that we in the European institutions, along with Member States, develop effective means of exploiting the potential of regional technologies, to increase both the efficiency and transparency of our interactions with citizens.

I can report to you that this will be one of the main topics of a ministerial conference organised by the Portuguese presidency in Lisbon in early April.

I would also like to add that the White Paper on the Commission's internal reform contains an "e-Commission" action.

The aim is to enhance the Commission's IT and communications infrastructure in order to provide better service by means of the Internet.

I would like to briefly respond to some items where the emphasis of the discussion has perhaps been a little different from the Commission document.

The Commission is asked to include an eleventh action line on employment and social cohesion.

I fully accept that these are very high priorities, and for that very reason particular communications have been accepted on these subjects.

I would like to mention especially the communication "Strategies for Jobs in the Information Society" .

I also agree with you that the information society is perhaps the biggest opportunity for structural policies and policies for cohesion that we have had, because it means the death of distance.

The "e-Europe" communication focuses on the actions necessary to accelerate the transition to the information society.

These actions will result in increasing numbers of jobs and will thereby reduce the principal cause of social exclusion, namely unemployment.

Your report expresses concern about the smart card action.

I would like to assure you that this action is not intended to intervene in an area that, the report rightly notes, is market-driven.

The Commission's role is purely a facilitating one, bringing together the key actors and enabling them to move towards agreement on standard approaches.

The aim is not to disadvantage other technologies.

It is not clear how the Commission can guarantee ethical security of services, but I fully share the view that we should take all measures to ensure respect for human rights; existing actions, primarily the Internet action plan, address this issue.

Finally, I would like to close by thanking you once again for your work in this area.

The efforts which you have made confirm that you share with us a sense of the importance and urgency of this issue for Europe.

The vote will take place at 12 noon.

Mr President, the debate on my report on the European Union' s action plans on asylum-seekers and migrants has been postponed until this evening at 6 p.m., and the vote until tomorrow at 9 a.m.

I would like to see the importance of the issue reflected in the debate and vote in this House.

So I would ask you to put it to the House that the debate be deferred to the next part-session in Brussels.

Before these votes are taken, I think it is important for this House and the Bureau to decide, finally, whether the Strasbourg sittings finish on Thursday or if there should still be sittings on Fridays.

It does not make any sense for us to be amending the agenda here for the convenience of people' s travel plans only to pack the agenda for the Brussels mini-sessions which are always very full as it is.

Report (A5-0064/2000) by Mr Duff and Mr Voggenhuber, on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs, on the drafting of a European Union Charter of Fundamental Rights (C5-0058/1999 - 1999/2064(COS))

Mr President, I have asked to take the floor simply because the Italian translation of paragraph 6c is very strange.

We have sent a note in this regard, but nothing has been done about it, and so I would ask you now to investigate the matter.

The text appears to be saying that violations of fundamental rights are permitted if the European Parliament is in agreement, which seems rather absurd to me.

Mr President, I would like to draw attention to the text of paragraph 6(c), in line with the doubts raised by Mrs Frassoni.

We have made a quick check here and the Portuguese text seems to have the same meaning as the French text, implying that the majority of this House believes fundamental rights can be violated if the European Parliament agrees to it.

I do not know if this is a language problem or a political problem, given the speeches we have heard here about Austrian political rights.

However, this is a very sensitive issue, and I want to raise it with the Bureau, so that the matter can be clarified, because if that is what we are supposed to have voted for, I think an extremely grave political precedent has been created.

We always have a check on the language versions to make sure they conform to the original language version at the end of the votes.

Mr President, one other brief point.

I must respect the fact that we have just deferred the report by Mr Hernandez Mollar by a majority, but I would ask that we refrain in the future from simply changing the agenda between two reports during the vote without any speakers for or against and without thinking through the consequences.

It violates the Rules of Procedure and should not happen again.

I have some sympathy with that remark.

Perhaps we should ask the Rules of Procedure Committee to look at the precise procedural methods we use here.

It is very clear that if a report has come from a committee, the committee can request referral back.

But when it has been set on the agenda at the beginning of the week I am not clear that Members can move deferral.

I was not sure, so we should refer it to the Rules Committee.

Mr President, before we vote on the Jackson resolution on the Structural Fund programmes, may I draw Parliament' s attention to the French Council of State decree dated 27 September 1999 which cancels the notification of 500 sites that could be designated as special conservation sites and therefore pose a problem.

The Commission has not expressed its opinion on that.

The Council of State ruled that the procedure had not been respected, i.e. that the mayors and regional and local authorities, organisations and associations concerned had not been consulted.

We do not know exactly what the situation is at present.

To ensure that Member States are not unjustly penalised, I move that the vote on this report be deferred until the Commission has delivered its reasoned opinion on action to be taken following the Council of State decree.

I also think Parliament cannot be both judge and judged.

We could have a long debate about this but rather than get into a procedural wrangle, you are not, strictly speaking, entitled to move this.

I am not going to debate it.

The easier thing is to put it to the vote.

Mr President, let me repeat what I said yesterday, namely that the French Socialists will not take part in the vote because they believe that this is not the correct procedure, since the only environmental directives referred to are those on wild birds and on Natura 2000 and a more balanced approach should have been taken.

My second point is that we do not believe it is in the remit of the legislative authority to decide whether the laws have been transposed. That is up to the Commission and also the Court of Justice.

Mr President, I simply wanted to say that if Mrs Lienemann was so worried it is a pity she did not take part in the debate and make her points to the Commissioner during the debate.

Mr President, I agree with that remark, for I am surprised at some of the statements made here.

This is in fact the first time this kind of observation, which was not heard in committee, has been made, and I regret it.

Today we are to vote on this resolution, which is why we are asking for a vote on the work done in committee.

I think it is excellent that we are trying to adhere to the Rules of Procedure and, on the basis of what was stated by Mrs Lienemann a moment ago, it is quite obvious that there are circumstances which have not been dealt with in committee. With reference to the Rules of Procedure, I would therefore take the liberty of proposing that the matter be postponed and referred back to committee.

Mr President, I wish to make a personal statement and remind Mrs Jackson, who certainly has a lot of work as chairman of the committee, that, at the first committee meeting at which we discussed this subject, I said I disagreed with the biased way certain directives were selected and not others.

Moreover, Mrs Jackson, I tabled numerous amendments calling for the series of paragraphs you had proposed to be deleted.

My amendments were not adopted in committee and I therefore felt it was not acceptable for us to continue on these bases.

Mrs Isler Béguin was not in committee on the days we discussed these subjects.

You will find exactly the same arguments I have put forward today in the Minutes of the committee meeting and in my amendments.

I know we have a great deal of work in committee and that colleagues cannot always remember amendments in detail, which I fully understand.

However, I wanted to point this out.

Mr President, I am sorry, I have been trying to catch your attention but you are going very fast, on which I congratulate you.

On Mrs Jackson' s report, I just want to say that I did not take part in the vote for similar reasons to Mrs Lienemann.

I believe respect for Community law must be general and cannot be based on selective, and therefore necessarily arbitrary, interpretations.

I ask for it to be recorded in the Minutes that I did not take part in the vote.

Annual report (A5-0050/2000) by Mr Haarder, on behalf of the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs, on respect for human rights in the European Union (1988-1999) (11350/1999 - C5-0265/1999 - 1999/2001(INI))

Mr President, before we vote on paragraph 45, I would like the rapporteur to hear what I have to say.

The Italian version of the second part of the paragraph refers firstly to physical, psychological and sexual abuse of children, and then the final part reads "urges them not to imprison child abusers, except as a last resort" .

I would like to know whether this clause has the same meaning in his language.

Would the rapporteur be so kind as to inform us whether his version is the authentic version, for, if so, the meaning is the complete opposite to the Italian.

Mr President, I believe I can shed some light on the matter.

I have read the French version of the text, and it is completely different from the Italian version at this point.

The Italian says "not to imprison child abusers", which seems absurd to me, whereas the French reads: "not to imprison young people who commit offences" which, I think, must be the original meaning.

I feel sure that the Italian is a mistranslation.

The original version probably said "not to imprison young people who commit offences, except in special cases" .

I think this is the root of the problem.

I am able to confirm that it is Mr Imbeni' s interpretation which is the correct one.

The French, Danish and English versions are correct.

The phrase is to be understood as Mr Imbeni said.

Mr President, if we change the meaning of the paragraph, the debate will start all over again.

It is a common occurrence in this Parliament for texts not to correspond.

Do you remember when, a few months ago, we were told to distribute condoms to priests?

This time, according to some versions, we are told to protect child abusers.

If we change the English version as well, Mr President, we will have to start the debate afresh and, seeing as your plane leaves at 4.30 this afternoon, this does not seem appropriate.

Maybe it would be better to stop at the comma, after "physical and psychological abuse and all kinds of discrimination" .

We could then deal with the behaviour of young people who commit offences later on, in one of the many other reports which are churned out by Parliament.

Mr President, the rapporteur clearly explained the meaning of the text in the sense referred to by Mr Imbeni.

You have read the English version of the text, which is accepted by the overwhelming majority of those present.

I really must ask you to allow us to continue the vote, especially as these little semantic games always come from the people who take no part in the technical work in committee.

If the House could agree we could overcome all the difficulties that we have with the language versions by putting in as a separate paragraph itself - either as a sub-paragraph of 45 or as a new 45(a) - which says "and urges them not to imprison young people who commit offences, except as a last resort" .

That would overcome all the difficulty.

There is no ambiguity, there is no uncertainty.

Mr President, a number of words have been omitted from paragraph 61 of the Danish version.

It is the English version which is correct.

In the Danish version, the following words should be added after the words "trade unions" : "as well as the rights of individuals vis-à-vis trade unions" .

It is, then, not only a question of the right to form trade unions but also of rights vis-à-vis these trade unions.

Mr President, I should like to make a point of order.

We voted on this report in committee, a committee on which all groups are represented.

We dealt with 170 amendments to this report in committee.

We have now been presented with 66 amendments in plenary.

This is not a legislative report.

If the House continues to organise its business in this way we will not only be a laughing-stock but we will fail to get through the very serious business that we have.

We ask the appropriate bodies in this House to look again at the way in which we organise our work.

As it happens, we have a report by Mr Provan in which the Bureau is looking at how the plenary functions.

We had a debate on that in the Bureau on Tuesday and I made exactly the point you have just made.

So I agree with you one hundred percent.

Mr President, this is only the fourth point of order I have raised in nearly eleven years as an MEP, so I hope you will listen.

I want to ask you and those others who preside over these sessions to be much more strict about points of order.

We lost nearly half-an-hour this morning and many of the points of order that were raised then, and are often raised here, are things that Members have just thought of that they would like to share with others.

That hardly constitutes a point of order.

I suppose I feel particularly peeved because my own report on e-Europe, which is the only thing from this Parliament before the Lisbon Summit, has been squeezed off to a time when there will be a relatively poor attendance.

I ask you - and I echo Mr Watson's point of order - to take those points back to your President and co-Vice-Presidents and ask them to be much tougher.

It might make you unpopular in the short-run but I think it would make you loved and admired in the long-run.

I am usually accused of being too brusque with Members who want to make a point of order.

The trouble is that when people ask for the floor on a point of order you do not know if it is a valid point until they have made it.

Mr President, you mentioned that you wanted to break off now.

I urgently request that you continue the vote.

We are fed up with constant changes to the agenda and postponements at short notice.

I therefore ask that you quickly resume and complete the vote on the Ludford report and the rest of the agenda.

I agree with Mr Pirker, and it is probably the only thing I will agree with him on if we do vote on the Ludford report.

It is going to be an interesting vote.

It is unreasonable at this stage to postpone it to a time when a lot of people will have left.

If you are intending to postpone it to 5.30 p.m., it will totally distort the vote on this report.

I urge that we carry on now, understanding all the difficulties that you have mentioned.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I understand what is being asked here.

But what I have to say to you is this: take a look around the House, it has already voted, with its feet!

We cannot work seriously if we follow the procedure which you have suggested, Mr President; nor can we do so if we work here with random majorities.

Now more members may have left from one group than from other and that may well distort the vote on the Ludford report. Even the rapporteur does not want that.

For the rest, we can still vote at 5.30 this evening.

I think we should work here with a properly-ordered procedure.

We have already overrun by 45 minutes.

I suggest that we vote this evening.

Mr President, if every time there are amendments to be made to the Rules of Procedure the whole of Parliament is going to act as you have done, giving me the floor at the end and treating small groups as you have done, then I would rather everything remained exactly the way it is.

In fact, every time Parliament decides to deal with the issue of long voting sessions it ends up suppressing the rights of the individual Members.

The point is, that part-sessions run from Monday to Friday, and if you have to leave earlier for some reason, then that is your problem, not the fault of the voting session.

Mr President, I should like to request that it not be taken this evening.

The vote will be totally distorted.

We know that a lot of people will leave this afternoon.

They do not expect this kind of vote on a Thursday afternoon.

Could we not postpone it until the April plenary session in Strasbourg?

I am afraid that would have to be decided before we take the vote this evening.

Mr President, there are other categories of worker whose jobs are much more tiring than ours and whose work compels them to postpone their mealtimes, and yet they do not complain and they do not leave their work unfinished, as we are about to do.

We have been here for less than two hours and we have already had enough.

What would sailors, pilots, drivers, petrol station workers and doctors say?

I find it absolutely absurd that we are not able to work for more than two hours at a time.

You are just making the point that I made when I said we could not carry on with the votes.

Mr President, I think the translation of Mr Speroni' s speech may not have been entirely correct. He appeared to me to be saying the complete opposite regarding the decision taken.

If the Members had been prepared to wait half an hour longer before eating, this would not appear to have been too great a sacrifice.

Effectively, it does cause problems when you randomly move important measures to a Friday sitting. For example, we voted on drugs, which is a highly disputed issue, on a Friday.

We will vote on these measures either this evening or on Friday. This appears to us to be a political manoeuvre to influence the majorities in this Chamber.

You arrange our agenda and our timetable according to whether you want a particular measure to be adopted. Mr President, in order to be completely fair, you should have called for one intervention for the decision to suspend the sitting or continue and adhere to the scheduled voting time and one intervention against.

Once again, the wishes of the Chamber have been disregarded. Democracy only exists on paper: it is not applied within this Parliament.

Mr President, I am sorry but I asked for the floor at the start.

First, I wanted to vote for, not against proposed amendment 24.

Secondly, I should like to say that there is a rule here, that it is standard practice to vote up to 1.30 p.m. on Thursdays and to leave the rest until 6.00 p.m., after the urgent votes.

We have done so for years and we can be flexible one way or the other pretty much as we please.

Perhaps all the members should be reminded of that.

Members are supposed to work here through to Friday, so that we can use the afternoons to see our visitors.

Mr President, perhaps I can be of help here.

The rapporteur has stated that she agrees with your suggestion, i.e. with the President' s suggestion.

Allow me to recapitulate: the President said that we are to vote at 5.30 this evening on whether or not to postpone the vote until the next plenary session.

Sarah Ludford has stated that she agrees with that.

So, we vote at 5.30 p.m. on postponing the Ludford report to the next plenary session.

There is absolutely no problem with that.

It is well within the Rules.

It can be done immediately before the vote.

That is why I cannot take it now.

The Rules say you move postponement before the vote on the matter.

EXPLANATIONS OF VOTE - Graefe zu Baringdorf report (A5-0044/2000)

We need to pay close attention to the issue of animal health, particularly that of bovine animals and swine, hence the importance of sanitary inspections in intra-Community trade in these species.

This approach must also take account of the need to put more effort into the total eradication of diseases like leucosis, tuberculosis and brucellosis, and into adequate health procedures.

But it is also vital to remember that producers need proper support, with special attention being paid to small farms and family farming given that, as in Portugal, the already low incomes of small farmers are often profoundly affected by these diseases and this is not generally made up for by the low level of compensation.

So it is essential that intervention in future makes it possible to protect both the interests of consumers and the interests of producers, especially of small farmers.

- (DA) We cannot vote in favour of the report since there are gross abuses of human rights in Mexico.

That has most recently been demonstrated in an Amnesty report from December 1999 which draws attention to, among other things, the serious problems in the Chiapas region.

We think it is splendid that the trade agreement has had built into it a demand to promote democracy in Mexico - including the observance of human rights - but, as long as this demand is not followed up by concrete action, it is merely a case of empty words.

A democracy clause was also built into the old trade agreement with Mexico, but this was not complied with.

Pressure must therefore be exerted upon Mexico through international organisations such as the UN and via individual nations. Only after that, and when there have been significant improvements in the area of human rights, do we think that we can enter into a new trade agreement with Mexico.

- (FR) At its meeting of 7 May 1999, the European Parliament adopted the EU-Mexico Global Agreement even though none of its Members knew the terms of negotiation of its trade aspects.

Furthermore, we continue to see cases of impunity, violations of human rights, the repression of social protest movements and an undeclared war against the indigenous people of Chiapas. All this has been condemned by, among others, the UN High Commission for Human Rights and the Inter-American Commission for Human Rights, and these practices conflict with the undertakings the Mexican authorities entered into under this agreement (Title I, Article 1).

The association agreement was designed to serve the interests of the large transnational firms on either side of the Atlantic, as shown by the wording of its Title IV, which refers to capital movements and related payments.

Under the heading of trade, we find a repeat of several of the most dangerous points of the MAI (Multilateral Agreement on Investments).

Finally, this agreement ignores most of the proposals put forward by social, trade union, human rights and environmental organisations in Mexico and the European Union which, for their part, aim to ensure that social, cultural and political cooperation take precedence over mercenary aspects.

For all those reasons, we shall vote against ratifying this agreement.

- (DE) I voted against the EU­Mexico agreement, not because I am against more intensive cooperation between the European Union and Mexico in principle, but because the agreement, in its form for the purpose of the vote, is unbalanced and flawed from a development policy point of view.

Never before has Mexico made so many concessions to a much stronger trading partner as it is now making to the European Union.

The impact on Mexico cannot be quantified, although the NAFTA agreement has already resulted in the impoverishment of large sections of the Mexican population and the demise of small undertakings.

The rules of the agreement on which we have voted go even further than those of the NAFTA agreement.

For example, the liberalisation of investments which is championed covers all sectors of the economy.

In other words it is a mini-MAI.

The drop in the standard of living and the inequalities between the European Union and Mexico which already exist will be exacerbated yet further.

Whereas Mexico has been required to make numerous concessions to Europe (such as in the agricultural, investment and public procurement sectors), the EU has included derogations and restrictions for itself in order to keep competition at bay.

It is obvious that the European side, especially Europe' s large corporate groups, will profit from the agreement with Mexico.

It is a gift to large-scale European industry.

However, it will do nothing to improve the living and working conditions of the Mexicans, on the contrary.

There is no mention in the agreement of employee rights or social standards.

It contradicts development policy objectives and for this reason among others Mexican NGOs and other parties have asked their Senate not to sign this agreement.

The EU is trying to use individual agreements with developing and newly-industrialised countries in order to implement what it failed to achieve at the WTO conference of ministers in Seattle, partly due to the resistance of developing countries.

Its main objective in the present case is to gain access to the lucrative NAFTA area via Mexico. The living conditions of the people have been disregarded.

This agreement does not bring about the progress needed in relations between Europe and Mexico, nor is it a suitable model for similar agreements to be concluded in the future, for example with Mercosur.

Agreements with developing countries must serve their interests first and foremost, not the interests of European corporate groups.

Joint resolution on the annual legislative programme

Mr President, I want to give the explanation on behalf of the Liberal Group in respect of the Commission's legislative programme.

We abstained as a group throughout this vote.

The reason, as we made clear during the debate on Tuesday, is because we believe the process to be flawed, not because we necessarily have any quarrel with the content.

Having put this marker down for this time, in the future we would like to see the process reviewed so that it amounts to more than just ourselves as a Parliament swapping lists with the Commission.

We want something more substantial and meaningful.

- (FR) We voted against the joint motion for a resolution because it means granting a full discharge to the European Commission in advance and we disapprove of that in terms of both form and content.

We abstained on the GUE resolution because, although we agree with a number of its criticisms of the Commission, in the recitals the Commission is described as an "indispensable interinstitutional instrument" , which is not how we see it.

Mr President, we heard many speakers from the federalist majority of this Parliament say here yesterday that the Charter of Fundamental Human Rights under preparation would give a big boost to citizens' rights.

However, the conditions under which this initiative was put forward tend more to reflect contempt for the life of the citizens and give us cause for serious concern about what will happen next.

First of all, a few months ago, we discovered, tucked away in the Cologne conclusions, in paragraphs 44 and 45, the decision to start drafting a Charter of Fundamental Rights.

No one, and certainly not the national parliaments, who had never heard of it.

All the same, however, we must remember that basically fundamental rights come within the remit of the national parliaments and, as a whole, of the various peoples of Europe.

Of course, some people will say this was merely a new formulation of existing rights, but it is clear that this operation will go much further, with the European Parliament already calling for an innovative Charter.

In any case, whatever its final form, the national parliaments should not have been sidelined.

They are now involved in the Convention to draft the Charter, but only as one partner among others, which will guarantee an imperfect job.

Worse still, they will not even be involved in the final stage, since the Cologne conclusions provide that the Charter will be proclaimed jointly by the Council, the European Parliament and the Commission.

Yes, I did say "the Commission" .

So the national parliaments find themselves sidelined and replaced by a body of officials who will 'proclaim the Charter' .

Democracy is sidelined, supposedly for the good of the citizens. But then is that not how Europe usually works?

Mr President, I voted for the report despite many misgivings because it included Mrs Morgan' s excellent proposed amendment on minority languages and cultures.

I would also like to have seen support for Mr Vidal' s proposal.

But I think that we have taken an important step here towards greater protection of minorities traditionally present in the European Union.

We cannot keep setting criteria for candidate countries which we fail to meet ourselves.

Mr President, my party, the Socialist Party in the Netherlands, is in favour of democratic cooperation from the bottom up among the European peoples, but not of a large European superstate modelled on the United States of America.

A European constitution could provide the initial impetus for a superstate of this kind.

I have, therefore, supported a number of amendments tabled by the UEN Group and the EDD Group with regard to the Duff-Voggenhuber report.

This does not apply to similar amendments tabled by the TDI Group, although I completely share the criticism expressed therein regarding the fact that national parliaments are being overlooked, the lack of referenda, and the attempts to turn the European Union into a superstate.

If the parties of the TDI Group had taken a consistent line on the equivalence of all people and on democracy, I would certainly have supported their amendments.

However, I had to consider their view of the world in my deliberations.

Of all the groups represented here, it is their view that takes least account of equivalence, democracy and human rights.

This is why I was unable to support their proposals.

Mr President, this week Parliament has dealt with the European Union Charter of Fundamental Rights and we have specified - adequately I believe - the civil rights of individuals.

For me, however, as a representative of the Basque Country, collective rights are still lacking - and I hope they will soon be included - for example, the right of self-determination for European peoples and nations with a collective consciousness as such, so that, if a majority of their citizens so decide, they can join the European Union directly and not just through the existing Member States.

We also approved the inclusion of the right to protection of the diversity of European languages and cultures, especially the less widespread and less used national and regional languages, which also gives due recognition to the official languages of the autonomous communities and regions, like the Basque language.

In this increasingly global world, some people want to impose homogeneity on us, as if we were all soldiers or units in a production chain.

So I want to claim the right to an individual and collective identity, the right to diversity and difference.

That is definitely a fundamental right worth defending in the European Union.

- (DA) The Danish and Swedish Social Democrats have today voted in favour of the report by Mr Andrew Nicholas Duff and Mr Johannes Voggenhuber regarding drawing up a European Union Charter of Fundamental Rights.

We are in favour of the drawing up of a Charter of Fundamental Rights in the form of a political document.

In this period of reforms of the EU, including its enlargement, it is important to focus upon the fact that the EU' s raison d' être is to protect individual citizens.

A Charter could make a positive contribution to this.

In drawing up a Charter of Fundamental Rights, there is always a certain danger of citizens' viewing it simply as a meaningless piece of paper, to be waved on state occasions but destined to disappoint.

A majority of the European Parliament is therefore calling for the Charter to be of binding effect and to be incorporated into the Treaty, in other words for the agenda of the current Intergovernmental Conference to be extended.

In connection with previous votes on this subject, we have clearly expressed our view that there should be no more issues on the agenda than it will be possible to resolve at the Nice Summit in December.

We have already emphasised that no more obstacles should be put in the way of enlargement of the Union.

Drawing up a set of binding, fundamental rights would raise a series of very difficult questions of principle, in terms both of the content of these rights and of their relationship to other sets of fundamental rights, for example the European Convention on Human Rights.

It is therefore unrealistic to expect the issues to have been resolved by December.

For that reason alone, we do not think that fundamental rights should be on the agenda of the current Intergovernmental Conference.

We have made this known in the individual votes en route to the report.

If we nonetheless choose to vote in favour of the whole report, that is because we believe that fundamental human rights are one of the foundations upon which the EU is built and because we want a Charter concerning these to be drawn up in the form of a political document.

Whether it is subsequently to be incorporated into the Treaty in a form that is binding will depend upon an assessment of whether the content of the Charter would provide citizens with better protection than that which they have at present.

- (SV) The most important development for the EU' s future right now is that the Intergovernmental Conference should reach agreement concerning the reforms which are required in order to facilitate the enlargement of the Union in accordance with a fixed timetable.

It is therefore a matter of urgency that the Nice Summit should be able to make decisions concerning the Amsterdam leftovers.

We have voted in favour of the EU' s Charter of Fundamental Rights being introduced as a matter to be considered by the Intergovernmental Conference, thereby guaranteeing, among other things, citizens' rights in relation to the EU' s institutions.

The Charter is an expression of the EU' s ambition to bring the EU closer to its citizens.

Our point of departure is that the work on reviewing the treaties must progress following the Nice Summit and that the EU' s Charter of Fundamental Rights should form part of this on-going process.

- (DA) The European Parliament' s report on the Charter is characterised by one pervasive idea: the desire for EU citizenship in a supranational State, whether one likes that term or not.

This way of thinking is fundamentally different from our own vision of a European Community.

The Union is, and should remain, a union of States.

It must therefore be ensured that the Charter does not in any way interfere with the Member States' national constitutions or equivalent arrangements for establishing fundamental rights.

This is not to support the view that those in power can do as they like within a given country' s borders, but an expression of the view that human rights are nothing less than universal and require universal tools by way of protection.

Moreover, we do not wish to see two sets of rights on the European continent - one for citizens of EU countries and another for citizens of non-EU countries.

It is therefore crucial for any EU Charter not to affect existing international conventions and declarations of rights, but merely to require that EU countries sign these.

Growing problems arise when the EU acquires more and more powers as a State but cannot be bound in relation to, for example, the European Convention on Human Rights.

We do not, however, see it as a solution for the EU to accede to the Convention on Human Rights as a juristic "person" , since we do not share the view that the EU is, or should be, identified as having the status of a separate politico-governmental body.

Nor do we support the constitutional process of which the adoption of a Charter is an integral part.

We prefer the Treaty to state that the EU' s authorities respect the competence and decisions of the Court of Human Rights.

Legal practice of this kind makes it possible to condemn an aspect of Community law which is open to criticism and which has arisen through a Member State' s use of that law.

The European Court of Justice should not have jurisdiction over areas already covered by the Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg or by other international bodies.

If the existing conventions are found to be inadequate, for example, because bio-technological developments give rise to new problems, then this is an international problem to which international solutions should be sought.

It is not solely a concern of the EU, and we must seek international and global consensus in international forums.

We are therefore voting against the whole report.

- (FR) Our abstention from the vote on the Charter certainly does not mean we are opposed to its European character.

On the contrary, we are persuaded that in future we shall see a Europe without frontiers between unified nations, from one end of the continent to the other.

However, the European institutions, like the national institutions, tend far more to represent the interests of big capital than the interests of the people as a whole, and especially of the working people.

Democratic rights and freedoms, like democracy itself, can only be genuinely expressed so long as they do not conflict with the interests of large industrial and financial groups.

Whichever of the two institutional trends implicitly reflected in the debate about the Charter we look at, these groups can take entirely sovereign economic decisions that spell disaster for an entire population, leading, for example, to factories closing down and to the ruin or pollution of an entire region.

We therefore believe that a genuinely unified and democratic Europe is possible only if we can rid it of the de facto power of the large industrial and financial groups, which is the necessary condition for real and democratic control by the people over their institutions.

- (FR) I was very happy to learn, last June, that the Cologne European Council had decided to convene a Convention (made up of representatives of the Heads of State and Government, the European Parliament, the national parliaments and the Commission) that would be responsible for drafting a Charter of Fundamental Rights.

That Charter will be a vital step towards the political deepening of the European Union, under the appropriate conditions.

It will, in fact, enable us to make up for shortcomings that have existed ever since the growth in the powers of the European Union and the European Community, with the European institutions taking decisions that affect the life of the people of Europe more and more directly.

These people need a document to which they can refer when they take their case before the European Court of Justice.

So we must provide for direct resort to that Court in accordance with certain procedures.

The Charter will also help define a 'collective patrimony of values and principles and a shared system of fundamental rights which bind citizens together and underpin the Union' s internal policies' , a patrimony we must constantly defend against the racist and xenophobic tendencies that have, alas, not disappeared.

As the representative of the people of the European Union, our Parliament must take a very careful look at the contents of this document.

The people of Europe expect us to take a very bold approach here.

The Charter must have fully binding legal status by being incorporated in the Treaty.

To that end, the Committee on Constitutional Affairs calls on the Council to put the Charter on the ICG agenda.

Any amendment of the Charter must come under the same procedure as its original drafting procedure, which means it would require the assent of the European Parliament.

The European Parliament must approve any secondary legislation that might have a bearing on these fundamental rights.

The indivisibility of these fundamental rights must be recognised by making the Charter applicable to all the European Union' s institutions and bodies and all its policies, including those contained in the second and third pillars, in the context of the powers and functions conferred upon it by the Treaty.

The Charter must be binding upon the Member States when applying or transposing provisions of Community law.

Turning to the actual content of the Charter, it would seem advisable to divide up these rights into three categories.

The Charter would enshrine the civil rights directly related to European citizenship, such as the right to vote, the right of petition, the right to appeal to the ombudsman; the rights of the individual, i.e. all the rights protected by the various international organisations and the new rights (bioethics, protection of personal data); and the social rights, i.e. the right to a minimum wage, the right to strike, the right to unemployment benefit.

Let me conclude by saying that this Charter must form the key component of a process leading to the drafting of a European Union constitution.

- I wish to state the reasons why I felt obliged to abstain on the final vote, even though, in common with other Members, I am totally in favour of the protection of fundamental freedoms and rights, and with ensuring that future social developments can be taken account of.

Already, within the European Union, Member States have ratified and transposed into their legal systems the European Convention on Human Rights, which, although the document is nearly 50 years old, has shown itself capable of evolving in line with changing conditions as well as developing new rights.

I believe that what is now proposed with this 'Charter' will eventually lead to conflict between the interpretation of rights under the different documents, which could create a legal vacuum and, ironically, reduce the rights available.

We need more time and debate on these potential conflicts.

- (SV) At the Council' s meeting in Cologne, it was decided that an EU Charter of Fundamental Rights should be prepared.

The Charter was to assemble and establish the rights which are to be found in the treaties and make them clearer and better known.

We welcome such a Charter of Fundamental Rights which can also, of course, include rights under existing international conventions signed by the Member States.

At the same time, human rights must be regarded as an international and global issue and not only as a matter for EU citizens.

We are, however, hesitant about making such a Charter legally binding before it has been fully clarified what that would mean in practice.

The relationship between the European Court of Justice and the European Court of Human Rights appears, for example, to be legally complicated and could undermine the European Convention on Human Rights.

We believe that there are a number of questions which ought to be investigated before one particular model is opted for exclusively.

We are therefore abstaining from voting in the final vote.

- (DA) The Danish Liberal Party' s five Members of the European Parliament, Bertel Haarder, Anne E. Jensen, Ole Andreasen and Niels Busk have today voted against paragraph 14a of the report, since they wish to keep the issue of the Charter off the agenda of the Intergovernmental Conference.

- This report confirms our worst fears about the intentions of some people in relation to the Charter and that is why we have voted against it.

We are not voting against a Charter itself, but so far the process seems to suggest a wasted opportunity to protect the citizens of Europe from the overburdening powers of the European Institutions.

There is a gap to be filled in providing fundamental rights to citizens of the Member States concerning European regulation and legislation.

This report turns its back on this need and thereby devalues the potential of the Charter.

In the process of voting against, we have, of course, tried to improve the contents in the interests of the members of the nation states of Europe who might be affected, and some of the amendments which we have supported are aimed to do this.

Conservative MEPs will continue to examine the progress of the proposed Charter through our representative on that body, Timothy Kirkhope, MEP, (Yorkshire), and in discussions with our colleagues in the European Parliament, and we will be as positive as possible in this exercise.

However, we do not hold out too much hope of converting this whole exercise into something which could be really positive in turning back the tide of legislative bureaucracy and over-regulation, and genuinely protecting the human rights of the citizens of Europe.

- (FR) The discussion about the Charter of Fundamental Rights shows the lack of legitimacy and transparency in the construction of Europe, for today the laws of competition and profit are quite evidently taking precedence over human rights.

We prefer a different approach, under which economic aspects must always come second to the satisfaction of human and environmental needs.

The Charter should be drafted on the basis of a broad public debate among all the people, including those in the candidate states, and also involve the unions, the associations, the women's movements and the unemployed, in a constituent process.

A Charter of this kind should be based on the most progressive acquis and combine social and democratic rights.

A radical reduction in working hours which must lead to more recruitment and not flexibility; a ban on redundancies; requisitioning empty housing; equality and the right to choose for women; the right to vote and freedom of movement for immigrants: that is what should have featured in this text.

A Charter of that kind would offer support to all those men and women who are fighting against a Europe that lays off workers or expels immigrants who do not have the proper identity papers.

- (DE) I did not vote for the resolution, despite the fact that I am in favour of a charter of fundamental rights, because it contains demands which overshoot the mark and risk causing considerable confusion by formulating the same rights differently and, more importantly, jeopardising the universality of human rights.

I do not take the view that this charter should contain enforceable economic and social rights.

These are subject to the employment law of the Member States and the autonomy of the social partners.

Those who want to overload the cart, for example, with new basic rights in the information, bio-technology and environmental protection areas, are doing little to promote the endearing concept of a Union charter containing subjectively enforceable basic rights.

I would much rather see the European Union and, of course, all the Member States, quickly accede to the 1950 Human Rights Convention as opposed to the inevitable dispute regarding the new wording of the fundamental rights of Union citizens.

In order to safeguard uniform case law and prevent differing interpretations, case law should continue to be the preserve of the European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg which, thanks to the quality of its case law on the 1950 Convention over the past 40 years, has provided a dynamic instrument which takes full account of the social, economic and ethical developments within our society.

The discrepancies or inconsistencies which might result from various ideologically informed views can be seen in the position of the Committee on Women' s Rights which is calling, for example, for the Charter of Fundamental Rights to contain a clause banning discrimination on the grounds of sexual orientation but maintains that family rights as such do not exist.

We need to be wary of perhaps well-meant, generous proposals if we want to prevent decision processes in the EU being crippled by a plethora of recourse proceedings which would mean more than doubling the number of judges at the European Court of Justice, and nobody would know where to enforce their basic rights any more or how long they must wait for a judgement.

- (SV) We welcome the work which has now begun on preparing an EU Charter of Fundamental Rights.

A Charter of this kind will have a very important symbolic value and will strengthen the confidence of our citizens in the EU and in European integration.

The Charter of Fundamental Rights should be seen as complementing the European Convention on Human Rights, which we believe should be incorporated into the Treaty.

The Charter should concentrate on the relationship between citizens and the European institutions.

Its primary objective should be to guarantee that the Union is governed openly.

The Charter should be legally binding through its also being incorporated into the EU' s Treaty.

The Charter must not only be a declaration, but also entail obligations of some kind on the part of the EU' s institutions and Member States.

We would emphasise the subsidiarity principle and the fact that the Charter should concentrate on the fundamental freedoms and rights of citizens, as presented in accordance with the Member States' common constitutional traditions.

We would emphasise the importance of the social dimension in the EU' s activities but consider that social policy is mainly a question for each individual Member State to decide upon.

- (FR) The Charter of Fundamental Rights is the latest manifestation of the drift of Community legislation towards a constitution.

In fact, the significance of this document is obvious if it is regarded as a potential preamble to a European constitution; conversely, it would be redundant in those Member States that already include these rights in their own constitution and legal traditions and confirm them by ratifying international texts such as the European Convention and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.

It is easy enough to think of ways to improve the application of the existing texts; but the technocratic nature of the process of European integration becomes quite obvious again today from the decision to draft an additional document, which could hardly be anything but repetitive.

Yet what worries me most is the content that is to be given to these rights.

Indeed, at this same part-session we are discussing reports by the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms which reflect a libertarian vision of society.

Their aim is not so much to defend and promote human rights as to make a clean sweep of all the points of reference on which our societies are founded and replace them with an individualist jumble 'with neither lord nor master' .

This kind of Europe is based on a new totalitarianism in which man finds himself alone facing a Community administration that is as remote as it is impersonal, in which the intermediate structures - and in particular the most vital one of all, the family - have been gradually destroyed.

Our society will no longer have a common destiny; instead it will be based on a juxtaposition of 'minorities' which each have their own rights but no common obligation.

The conclusion I draw from these texts is that the just fight for human rights has become the ideological plaything of irresponsible and selfish individuals.

What they are proposing to us today spells the death of the common good and, over and above that, of the very meaning of life; for they are concerned only with human rights and have forgotten what man is first and foremost, and what his roots and aspirations are.

- British Labour Members fully support a Charter of Fundamental Rights which makes visible citizens' rights across the EU.

However, we are at a very early stage in the process of determining the Charter.

It is therefore too early to say what should be legally binding.

This decision will be made at a later stage as recognised by the report itself in Paragraph 6.

That Paragraph also states that any legally binding status recognises that Fundamental Rights are indivisible by making the Charter applicable to all the European Union's institutions and bodies and all its policies.

This is a recognisable aim which British Labour Members would support.

As the final Charter text is not available, we are supporting the Charter in principle but awaiting the final version.

This is a complex process which needs clarity and precision at all stages to ensure that the end result is a positive and visible step forward for people in all EU countries.

Our abstention on this report on the European Union Charter of Fundamental Rights derives primarily from our view that it might be part of some federalist rationale which we oppose, and which could find clear and definitive expression in providing the European Union with a constitution, as proclaimed in the report, with this Charter as an important component.

At the same time, as we agree with many of the rights targeted for inclusion in the Charter which, by the way, are part of the Constitution of the Portuguese Republic, we decided we could not vote against the report, although we do think the set of rights under consideration could and should unequivocally include the social domain, as would be ensured by approval of the amendments tabled along those lines by the Confederal Group of the European United Left/Nordic Green Left.

- (DA) The European Union rests upon fundamental principles of freedom, democracy and respect for human rights.

If, however, I have misgivings about introducing a new set of human rights into the EU Treaties, this has to do with the confusing signals which would in that way be sent out and with the fear that existing instruments which are operating well would be put at risk.

In my view, a declaration would be more appropriate.

The European Convention on Human Rights is an excellent tool for protecting human rights in Europe.

It involves enforcing these rights on the basis of judgements given by the Court of Human Rights, which has developed considerable expertise in this area, as well as extensive case law.

The Convention also has the advantage of not being limited in scope to the area of the EU but of operating in relation to almost the whole of the European continent.

At the same time, it is the European Court of Justice' s practice to take account of the national fundamental rights applicable in the Member States.

This practice could be affected if the EU were to obtain its own set of fundamental and human rights.

My Group voted in favour of the Jackson resolution on Structural Funds in the environment because we believe in the principle of ensuring effective implementation of environmental law - in this case, the wild birds and habitats directive.

However, we are surprised that Members of this House voted for the original proposal in paragraph 7 to cut off funds to some of our poorest regions in the EU.

Indeed, the Commissioner, in a response to the debate, said she would not be stopping approval of key funding programmes.

Members of the Environment Committee clearly cannot be aware of the undue delays that any non-approval of Structural Funds programmes would create, nor indeed of the new budgetary procedure that could involve not only delays but the loss of millions in funds in the case of the UK to Merseyside, South Yorkshire, the Highlands and Islands, Northern Ireland, Cornwall and the Isle of Wight.

These are vital life-line funds for jobs and growth.

I therefore welcome the fact that this House voted by a majority against cutting off resources.

The Commissioner would, in any case, have had no legal competence to stop approval and therefore I am glad that, at the end of the day, common sense has prevailed in our vote.

- (DE) It would appear that Community environmental protection does not have its own lobby at the Community institutions.

There is no other explanation as to why the Commission gave way yesterday and suddenly decided to reinterpret the Structural Funds regulation.

Having given itself real teeth last year and called in notifications of FFH areas for the joint "Natura 2000" project which had been overdue for years, the Commission has now tripped itself up by accepting that notifications can be submitted ex-post.

That was unnecessary in that the regulation fully covered the Commission' s demand for FFH lists to be submitted together with the plans at the latest and per se leaves the Commission no room for manoeuvre here.

The Structural Funds Regulation - decided unanimously last year by all the Member States - clearly states that the ex-ante evaluation is a prerequisite to the programme and the planning documents which the Member States submit to the Commission for approval.

The Structural Funds regulation also states that this ex-ante evaluation should include an assessment of the environmental situation, especially in areas which might be influenced by Structural Fund intervention.

The Commission is therefore duty bound to ensure that the documents notify it of potential areas subject to European nature conservation before it approves the plans.

Submitting FFH lists once plans have been approved makes no sense from the point of view of content, because the protected areas will be reduced and adjusted to planned investments (rather than representing the framework, as required under the regulation), nor does it make any legal sense from a legal point of view because then, of course, exactly what the Commission wished to avoid will happen, i.e. planning conflicts will result in long-winded disputes.

The Commission is deluding itself if it thinks that it can use Article 39 to recoup what it has failed to obtain during ex-ante evaluation.

How can the Commission be credible vis-à-vis the European citizens if it is unable to implement its own requirements?

By giving in, the Commission has lost the confidence of many who see sustainable development as a chance for the next generation.

- (FR) The French members of the Union for a Europe of Nations Group are very concerned with preserving the natural heritage in general and the environmentally sensitive areas in particular.

We share the desire to protect an environment which it is our duty to pass on intact to our children.

That is a laudable and necessary ambition.

Yet the Commission, ever faithful to its nature and its habits, cannot stop taking every opportunity to overwhelm the states and their citizens with new directives and pernickety little rules, which often bear little relation to real local conditions.

The only result of this kind of overload is to paralyse the economic players a little more each day and to hold back freedom of enterprise.

This happened, for instance, with the CTEs which are designed to turn our farmers into environmental officers, rewarded not by the fruit of their labours but by subsidies paid in return for their submission to the Gosplan of Brussels.

We therefore categorically reject Mrs Jackson' s proposal to link payments from the Structural Funds to the transposing by Member States of EU environmental legislation.

That would be a very dangerous mixture of unrelated things and would pave the way to the generalised practice of financial blackmail, a blackmail that is all the more inadmissible in that, as we must remember, the money from the Structural Funds remains above all the product of the contributions the Member States pay into the EU budget.

Mr President, I would like, as a matter of priority, to thank Parliament for lending its support to aid for Mongolia.

I hope this will lead to a much more proactive approach on the part of the Commission, as I have not seen a sign of this yet.

It is unacceptable for the Commission only to take a lukewarm interest in a country which probably has no mineral resources, which, in terms of human rights, is doing a relatively good job in the region, which is small and very much agriculture-based.

It may not occupy centre stage but is very needy despite this.

This Parliament has noticed this and offered its support, and I urge the Commission to take this message extremely seriously and to grant this aid.

While agreeing with some of the concrete concerns expressed in the report about, in particular, women' s rights, and while approving some amendments which point the way to progress, we do not intend to support the European Union' s claim that 'respect for, and promotion of, human rights and fundamental freedoms... constitute fundamental objectives of EU foreign policy' .

Within the European Union, one of the fundamental rights of man, the right to make an adequate living from his labour, is being trampled underfoot for nearly 20 million men and women.

A fairly substantial proportion of immigrant workers, those regarded as not having the proper papers, is being deprived of any legal existence.

All the while, outside the European Union, several of its Member States, among the most powerful of them, are supporting, arming and financing vile dictatorships, especially in their former colonial empire.

And what about that manifestation of respect for human rights that took the form, for several weeks, of bombing Kosovo and Serbia?

Under these circumstances, we are abstaining from the vote on this report.

- (FR) In this joint debate on human rights, the report under consideration here analyses the instruments available to the Union to promote these rights in the world and their concrete application between 1 June 1998 and 30 June 1999.

As you know, the EU' s international action to promote and protect human rights is based on several instruments, including the CFSP and development cooperation.

With the entry into force of the Treaty of Amsterdam, the European Union has become more visible on the international stage thanks to the appointment of a CFSP High Representative, in the person of Javier Solana.

The Treaty of Amsterdam has made respect for human rights one of the main objectives of the EU' s common foreign and security policy.

The European Union has many instruments available in this field. There are the common strategies (a new instrument created since the Treaty of Amsterdam and designed to enhance the overall coherence of EU action at international level), the common positions (which define the EU' s approach to a particular matter) and the common actions (which relate to certain specific situations and involve immediate reactions, on the model of humanitarian aid).

There are also specific and horizontal actions relating to a given policy.

They include, in particular, the fight to abolish the death penalty.

Finally, what is known as the 'human rights' clause, which has been incorporated into most cooperation and development agreements with third countries since the 1990s, enables the EU to keep up the pressure, in respect of human rights, on the countries with which it is linked.

This clause does not change the fundamental nature of these agreements but does enable both parties to reaffirm respect for certain common values and principles as the precondition for any form of cooperation, economic or other.

Yet the rapporteur feels that the current European human rights policy is fragmented and needs to be replaced by a coherent common strategy marked by closer interinstitutional cooperation.

I think initiatives such as establishing an advisory group to discuss the strategic aspects of human rights activities, comprising representatives of the EU institutions and the Member States, together with human rights specialists, would lead to greater coherence and therefore effectiveness.

In the same context, the proposals that the EU should develop its own indicators to gauge respect for human rights, that a special European Parliament envoy should be nominated for prisoners of conscience and that a human rights website should be launched on the Europarl site on the Internet, are well worth considering.

The report also emphasises that the EU strategy must give priority to systematically abolishing the discrimination suffered by women.

I want to express my unconditional support for that demand!

- The European Parliamentary Labour Party voted against Amendment No 7 because we do not feel that a reference to the supposed 'Echelon' network is appropriate to this report.

Allegations that such an 'Echelon network' exists are based on hearsay and circumstantial evidence.

Furthermore, the democratic oversight of national intelligence services is, in any case, primarily a matter for national parliaments.

The United Kingdom has one of the most effective systems of democratic oversight, both political and judicial, of its intelligence services in the world.

Political oversight is exercised by a House of Commons committee, which has full access to documentation.

Moreover, the intelligence operations of third countries, including the United States, operating in cooperation with British intelligence services within the United Kingdom, are also subject to the same democratic oversight.

- British Conservatives are in the forefront of those seeking to improve human rights in many parts of the world.

While there is much in the Malmström resolution that we can support, unfortunately there are significant elements that have been included which we find unacceptable.

For example, we do not share the enthusiasm for an EU Charter of Fundamental Rights.

We are sceptical about demands for substantial increases in expenditure and bureaucratic activity and in the role of EC-funded NGOs.

We are concerned that it is minority differences that are stimulated, with little emphasis on integration.

We are concerned at the extension of the concept of human rights to include, for example, domestic violence, which is properly a matter to be handled under other legal instruments.

We are opposed to the introduction of sweeping new categories of eligibility for asylum, which would be open to abuse.

Many of us do not support the abolition of capital punishment in principle.

And we are suspicious about proposals to impose further codes of conduct on business.

While we value the role of the EU in supporting human rights, we believe that human rights regulation and legislation, as in so many areas dealing with the relationship between the citizen and the state, is a matter for national governments, and we do not welcome an extension of EU intervention in this area.

It is for these reasons that British Conservatives have voted against the Malmström resolution.

Mr President, I would have liked to have voted for the Haarder report, in spite of certain passages in it, and certain statements, including some to the House, to the effect that there are no rights for the family and that to grant special rights to the family would be a discriminatory, not to say racist, measure.

The supporters of that theory should get their act together.

If there are no specific family rights as such - as the Committee on Women' s Rights decided, very much against my wishes - then such rights do not exist for the other heterosexual or same-sex communities either and the section on "Lifestyles and types of relationship" has no place in this report.

I myself was lucky enough to grow up in an entirely normal family, consisting of a mother and a father who were not divorced, and I still regard this model of a happy and united family as one of the foundations of our society.

It always deserves to be recognised and to enjoy a special status, despite what some people might feel; but, given the result of the votes on the amendments, in the end I really could not vote for this report, in particular because paragraph 18 was adopted.

Mr President, I should like to follow on from what Mrs Lulling has just said.

I should like to say that Mr Haarder has made an exemplary effort to bring about a consensus.

As a result, his report was far better than all the previous reports.

However, I and a majority in my Group voted against the report because points 52 - 56 contain quite controversial social policy requirements which may well be supported by the left wing of this House but which have nothing to do with human rights.

The German constitution offers marriage and the family special protection and that has nothing to do with the violation of human rights.

On the contrary, it is a guarantee of human rights.

Marriage and the family form the basis for human rights, as does the right to life.

I therefore believe that these points should have been left out of the human rights report.

If they had, the House would have voted unanimously in favour of this human rights report because, apart from that, Mr Haarder has presented an exemplary piece of work.

Mr President, I note with some surprise that I am bringing up the rear, despite having been the first to request the floor in writing.

Secondly, I should also like to note that, broadly speaking, my Group supports the Haarder report and expressly highlights the fact that there was excellent cooperation with the rapporteur.

At last we have before us a report which duly deals with the subject, the stated period and enforceable rights.

We voted against it, however, because two points were accepted by the majority of the House; I refer to points 53 and 54, which tackle the issue of the family and the excessive support or special support for all alternative types of partnership.

We in the European People' s Party see the family as a value per se, as the cornerstone of society, if you like, as the heart of society, and cannot accept that alternative life styles should be specially fostered and set above the family, which we see as the nucleus of our society.

However, with these points and the majority decision by Parliament, we now have a situation in points 53 and 54 in which alternative lifestyles enjoy special favour and are placed above the family, as a result of which we find it impossible to vote for the report as a whole.

Mr President, I just wanted to add to what Mr Pirker has said by pointing out that I voted in favour of point 42 of the Haarder report despite the fact that it contains an error because Austria is named in connection with freedom of movement.

The executive committee of the Nationalrat (National Assembly) has passed a resolution unanimously adopting the motion for the executive committee to reach an agreement under paragraph 2 of the Law of 3 April 1919 on the resolution by the Federal government of 26 March 1996 and to consider the declarations of renunciation by Felix Habsburg-Lothringen and Karl Ludwig Habsburg-Lothringen as adequate, so that nothing now stands in the way of their being issued with passports which will allow them to enter Austria.

I am therefore able to tell the House that both Felix Habsburg-Lothringen and Karl Ludwig Habsburg-Lothringen have valid passports without any form of restriction.

Neither signed the declarations of renunciation required by the constitutional office, because they have distanced themselves from the house of Habsburg; instead they merely entered the following statement on their passport applications: "In order to avoid misunderstandings, let it be noted in this connection that I, the applicant, have not and do not question the republican form of government of Austria nor have I ever considered making any manner of claim to sovereignty" .

The call on Austria to take action in relation to freedom of movement is therefore devoid of any substance.

- (FR) In adopting the Haarder report on human rights in the European Union, the European Parliament has just committed one of those aberrations that are so common they must be part of its nature.

Among others, it is calling for equal rights of all kinds between same-sex couples and the traditional family, together with lowering the age of consent for same-sex relations.

May I just remind you that Article 16 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights states that "the family is the natural and fundamental group unit of society and is entitled to protection by society and the State" .

That same article defines the family in terms of the marriage between a man and a woman.

The International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights repeats the same idea by declaring, in Article 10, that "The widest possible protection and assistance should be accorded to the family, which is the natural and fundamental group unit of society" .

The reason why the traditional family is entitled to this state protection is because it provides a service without price: the renewal of the generations, the perpetuation of society, the education of children and the transmission of values.

That service is a very good reason for granting the family special advantages, reserved to it alone.

By ignoring that vital law, the Haarder report shows that in this respect, as in many others, the European instruments go against not only the nations but also against society itself.

- (DA) We support the general recommendations in the report to the Member States regarding compliance with the international conventions on human rights.

We also share the concerns referred to in the report about the situation in certain countries as regards the rights, for example, of asylum seekers, women and children and in connection with minority languages.

However, we oppose the annual report on human rights being used to promote further integration within the EU.

We are not in favour of the new institutional arrangements proposed in the report or in favour of the proposal that the EU should establish a common legal framework and a common policy on refugees and asylum seekers.

We believe that human rights problems should be combated locally and by means of the international human rights institutions and forums which already exist and which are designed for this purpose, for example, the UN and the Council of Europe.

Nor do we support the view that the EU should draw up a new, legally binding EU Charter of Fundamental Rights. Rather, we are of the opinion that such a Charter would create conflicts in relation to the European Convention on Human Rights.

An EU Charter of Fundamental Rights would not in itself help improve the human situation, either at European or international level.

We have, however, chosen to vote in favour of the report in spite of what I have just said, for we think it is extremely important to fight for improved human rights in Europe.

- (FR) I welcome the EU-related aspects of the work carried out by the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Defence and Security Policy on the annual report on human rights.

Let me remind you that this report replaces the traditional memorandum on EU activities in this field which the Council used to present to the European Parliament every year to inform it of EU action on human rights in the world over the past year.

This report aims to explain the EU' s motives and the institutional structures and instruments available to it for conducting an active policy of respect for human rights.

More specifically, the report points out that the Treaty of Amsterdam has introduced new human rights provisions in order to underpin EU action in this field, especially in the context of the CFSP.

We must grasp these new opportunities.

Thus the Treaty has established respect for fundamental rights, as guaranteed by the Council of Europe' s Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, as a principle.

That means the European Union is 'founding' its action on the principles of democracy and respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms.

With enlargement, the European Union has clearly announced to all candidate countries that respect for democracy, the law, human rights and minorities is a basic accession criterion.

Our European Parliament has a vital role to play in the formulation and practical application of EU human rights policy.

Our powers have gradually increased so that this Parliament has now become a forum for discussion of human rights, a recognised forum as our debate today proves.

The report we are discussing points out that, although the European Union claims to export its model to third countries, the situation at home is not flawless either. In fact the 1999 Amnesty International Yearbook singles out eleven of the fifteen Member States for criticism, reproaching them with more or less serious human rights offences.

Aside from any criticisms, the rapporteur puts forward practical proposals, which I support, such as extending the right of all non-EU nationals to vote and stand for local and European elections provided they have resided in the EU for more than five years.

I also find other proposals on improving the right of asylum most interesting; they need to be quickly put into in practice.

On the situation of candidate countries, much progress remains to be made, especially in relation to respect for the rights of minorities.

The European Parliament must, therefore, remain vigilant.

- Concerning the statement in Amendment No 32 by Mr Rack, Mrs Schleicher, Mrs Cederschiöld and Mr Méndez de Vigo, on behalf of the EPP-ED Group, to the Duff/Voggenhuber report on an EU Charter for Fundamental Rights, our Group questions whether, under the present circumstances, it is still necessary for the Union to become a party to the ECHR.

This is an issue which requires deeper analysis.

Overlapping and conflicts between the Court of Justice of the European Communities and the European Court of Human Rights should, in any event, be avoided.

- I believe that this is a good report and deserves support.

However, problems arise in the detail of paragraphs 52, 53, 54 and 56.

I voted for these paragraphs because I agree with the objectives of the rapporteur.

I would, however, like to ensure that my voting intentions are not misinterpreted.

In relation to paragraph 52 I support the right of individual conscience.

In stating this principle I would also like to make it absolutely clear that this in no way implies that I personally support abortion.

With regard to paragraphs 53, 54 and 56 I oppose discrimination on the grounds of sexual orientation.

I would, however, add a few caveats.

Firstly, I do not support the right of gay couples to adopt.

Secondly, I do not support the lowering of the age of consent below 18 years of age.

With these clarifications entered for the record I am happy to vote for Mr Haarder's report.

- On balance, this is an excellent report with the exception of paragraphs 52 to 56.

This section is poorly drafted and ambiguous.

It deals with issues that are firmly in the competence of each Member State, and should so remain.

- (FR) I want to congratulate our rapporteur, Mr Haarder, on the quality of his report on respect for human rights in the European Union.

I support the general philosophy underlying the document, which aims to consolidate European policy with regard to civil and political rights, but also to the economic, social and cultural rights of EU residents.

Yet I would also like to draw my colleagues' attention to two requests made in the report, which I find problematic.

Paragraph 19 of the report, concerning the protection of national minorities, and paragraph 20, calling for the ratification of the Charter for Regional and Minority Languages, pose real problems.

We certainly understand the spirit of the rapporteur' s observations on the need to protect national minorities: it sends out a strong message to some of the candidate countries, especially the Eastern European ones, whose nationals do not all enjoy fundamental rights.

Parliament firmly rejects abuses of fundamental freedoms throughout Europe, as the Haarder report emphasises.

But we regret that it alludes to the rights of 'national minorities' , an expression that is far more restrictive than the universal concept of 'human rights' .

Furthermore, we support the idea of an indivisible political community, within which ethnic origin is not eclipsed but regarded as being of secondary importance.

The Republic cannot recognise specific 'minorities' or 'communities' : in its view there are only autonomous and free citizens with equal rights.

In view of our convictions we must also express strong reservations about paragraph 20 of the report, which refers to the Charter for Regional and Minority Languages.

Everyone is free to use one or several languages of his or her choice in addition to the language of the Republic and everyone has the right to learn them at school.

But the fact remains that this is a choice and not an obligation.

The Charter is too vague in this respect, which entails the risk of encouraging the formation of regional communities; that would pose a threat to the unity of the Republic but also, in the long run, to the cohesion of the Union.

I will, nevertheless, vote for Mr Haarder' s report because of its quality and its underlying philosophy.

- Obviously, we have no objection to a report on human rights being presented to the European Parliament but as all Member States of the European Union are signatories to the European Convention on Human Rights and all citizens are therefore (even if indirectly) able to pursue cases of breach of these human rights to a Court of final arbitration, what concerns us is the way in which this report seems to go well beyond the important principles enshrined by the United Nations and the European Court of Human Rights.

It is not the primary function of this parliament to produce extensive and controversial additions to current legislation and extra channels of redress on an assumption that these should automatically be acceptable simply because they have been proposed.

All of us want human rights to be uppermost in the minds of national and European legislators.

We do not need this report either to remind us of them or to attempt to push the agenda into areas which are likely to be of great controversy and are likely to achieve counterproductive results instead of an enhancement of human rights already determined.

- (EL) Once more, the hypocrisy of the European Union is evident both in the state of, and respect for, human rights within the Union and in its international policy on these matters.

We are particularly worried by the proposals for greater consideration to be given to human rights in the Union' s foreign policy, not because we underestimate their importance or the need to promote and safeguard them but because experience shows that they are being used selectively.

The European Union turns a blind eye to situations in which human rights are being savagely violated in order to protect its imperialistic interests.

Its attitude towards the Turkish regime is a blatant example.

Elsewhere, the particularly sensitive issue of human rights is being used as an excuse for intervention, even military intervention, so as to impose specific policies and particular courses of action.

The recent and continuing invasions in Kosovo, using the rights of minorities as a pretext, and the unbelievable demands being made on Yugoslavia are a typical example of how military intervention is being advanced as a general principle of international law at the expense of the principle of national sovereignty.

The very policy which the EU and its Member States are pursuing from within is leading to human rights being subverted and becoming dead letter.

The effects of this policy are already visible in the rise of extremist, fascist powers and racist perceptions, and not just in Austria.

The report on combating racism does not demonstrate that the necessary conclusions have been reached.

We therefore condemn the EU' s attempts to use human rights as a pretext in order to reinforce its anti-grass roots and anti-democratic nature and intervene further to the detriment of the people.

We call on the people to be vigilant and to stop their self-proclaimed saviours trampling on their rights. We also urge them to fight for solutions which will guarantee that their rights are promoted and flourish.

For these reasons, the three Members of the European Parliament of the Greek Communist Party will abstain from voting.

- (FR) I want to draw a parallel between the reports by Mrs Ludford and Mr Haarder and the report by Messrs Duff and Voggenhuber.

The European Parliament is proposing to take part in drafting a European Charter of Fundamental Rights.

Nonetheless, we cannot see how this additional document can contribute to the fight for human rights, except by injecting a little more legal confusion.

And, above all, what are we to think of our House' s concept of these rights?

We can get an initial sketchy idea from reading the Ludford and Haarder reports: this is a project for a libertarian society, based on rights without obligations, on freedom without responsibilities.

Freedom is not something that can be decreed.

But those who are building Europe seem unaware of that fact: they not only want to bring happiness to the people ex nihilo, regardless of their differences and their aspirations, but, on top of that, they want to establish a society without points of reference, without distinction between what can and cannot be done, a society that believes in hedonism or the culture of death.

Man cannot be regarded as an entity independent of those around him and concerned solely with his immediate well-being.

Certainly he has rights, including, first and foremost the, right which, paradoxically, he is often refused, the right to life, which must be defended and promoted; but you appear to have forgotten that the human being needs the objective limits necessary to all life in society to be established.

The human being not only needs to be given the means to live, but also, and above all, he needs the reasons to live.

An additional charter, European or not, will certainly not provide them.

- (NL) We have consented to the Haarder report but would like to make the following observations regarding paragraphs 19 and 20 of the draft report.

Paragraph 19 urges Belgium to sign the Convention for national minorities.

Flanders does not seek to prevent Belgium from ratifying this Convention for national minorities, but it would like to add the proviso that this should be done outside the Belgian constitutional context.

In the Belgian federation, the federal states are equal pursuant to the rules in the constitution.

Not one of them constitutes an actual minority.

Because the Convention does not clearly define the term "national minority" , according to Flanders, it does not apply to the periphery. For Flanders, "national minority" in such a context can only refer to a minority which has been established within a certain area for centuries, whilst the French-speakers only moved to the periphery some three centuries ago and have since refused to integrate, which is to be expected in the normal course of events (compare this with the Flemish migration to Wallonia and their perfectly integrated descendants).

Moreover, French-speakers living in the periphery, which boasts the language facilities, can count on protection, which is mostly unavailable to real minorities.

So, whoever tries to change the situation in the Brussels periphery using this convention will implicitly put the future of the Belgian constitutional equilibrium at risk and illustrate once again that a European lack of insight into our federal system can lead one to think that we would be better off as the separate Member States of Flanders and Wallonia, rather than as a federal Member State of Belgium.

Without a doubt, French-speaking Belgian MEPs will again use this vote to play political games in Belgium.

We do not wish to participate in this and would emphatically disassociate ourselves from this kind of practice.

Moreover, we regret that in paragraph 5 of the Ludford report, the same text was adopted for racism and xenophobia.

In the same light, Flanders would like to make it clear that the Charter for Regional and Minority Languages, as referred to in paragraph 20 of the Haarder report, does not pertain to French in the periphery but, for example, to the Limburg dialect (recognised in the application of this Charter in the Netherlands) or to the Arel German dialect in the Province of Luxembourg.

- (IT) Quite apart from the approval or rejection of amendments and the removal or amendment of paragraphs, we were disgusted to find in an annual report of the European Parliament on such a sensitive and urgent matter as human rights, the recommendation "not to imprison child abusers, except as a last resort" , and a call for the Member States to "lower the age-of-consent for homosexual relations" .

We must fight against pornography, against increasingly widespread child abuse, against male and female prostitution and against sex tourism, which inevitably leads to suffering on the part of children.

We must fight against discrimination and psychological and other forms of abuse in the spheres of work, information, politics and the family, which is again at the centre of the debate at a time when children are being transformed into mere objects to satisfy the egotism of those who, having relinquished all other values, are attempting to satisfy their egos and their desire to possess with "technological" motherhood or fatherhood.

We utterly reject a resolution which cancels out its positive points with such abominations, and we are sounding the alarm bells in dismay. If you continue along this path, you will destroy the European Union and go against the wishes of the great majority of its citizens.

- (FR) I want to explain the reasons underlying my rejection of the annual report on respect for human rights in the European Union.

Two of the provisions in that text call on a number of countries, including France, to ratify the European Framework Convention for the protection of national minorities and the European Charter for Regional and Minority Languages without delay.

First of all, I really must dispel a misunderstanding that is tainting the whole debate about regional languages; the purpose is certainly not to forbid whomsoever it be from speaking, teaching or promoting a minority or regional language of whatever kind.

Insofar as learning or using these languages remains a personal choice, I, for my part, am in favour of any measure to promote their conservation and transmission, since they form part of the cultural heritage of the nations.

I have voted against the Haarder report because, in calling for the ratification of the European Framework Convention for the protection of national minorities and the European Charter for Regional and Minority Languages, it is seeking to promote a concept of European integration that is based on a vision to which I cannot subscribe.

According to that concept, the individual has particular rights based on his membership of a territorial, ethnic or religious entity, while the community constitutes the key means of mediating between the individual and the right he is claiming.

Whilst, at first sight, recognition of the community may seem a factor that protects the integration of minorities, in fact, however, it is a strong factor of social segregation and regression (you need only think of the situation of young Turkish or Maghreb girls, who are excluded from the emancipating benefits of ethnically mixed schooling, who are held back by archaic rules on the status of women).

Similarly, while recognition of a special status for these communities may seem to protect the weakest and most destitute, on the contrary, it in fact produces a social compartmentalisation which the triumphant march of liberalism can turn to its advantage.

Moreover, while it is true that enlargement of the European Union means we must take account of the special situation of certain national minorities, nonetheless the community-based solution offers no future prospects whatsoever for population groups who are under threat or oppressed.

On the contrary, recent history has shown how the exacerbation of the sense of belonging to a particular community can trigger the resurgence of ancient ethnic disputes and lead to fratricidal conflicts.

Rather than this concept, I prefer the universalist vision of a republican Europe in which each individual as such fully and actively exercises his rights and freedoms.

I prefer a Europe which offers a chance of integration to all those who subscribe to its common values, whether they proclaim their religious identity or practise no religion, whether they speak the language of their ancestors or have chosen to transcend their roots.

That Europe affirms the primacy of a principle not found in the Haarder report, the secular principle, which contains and synthesises all the other freedoms: right to respect for private life, freedom of conscience and religion, freedom of expression and association.

The Republic of Europe remains to be built: let us hope that the Charter of Fundamental Rights, which is still at the drafting stage, will constitute the first act and the cornerstone of that Europe.

For the same reasons, I abstained on the report on the fight against racism and xenophobia in the European Union.

(SV) It is incompatible with the subsidiarity principle and proximity principle that the 626 Members of the European Parliament should pronounce upon what vision of the family and what legislation affecting the family the 15 Member States and the twelve candidate states' national parliaments should arrive at.

In solemn speeches and addresses, such as that given this week in the European Parliament by the Prime Minister of the country currently holding the presidency of the Union, Portugal, the wealth of Europe' s different cultures, traditions, languages and national identities has been emphasised time after time.

To then state that the family' s - and, therefore indirectly, children' s - legal position should be standardised throughout Europe, as proposed in paragraphs 53 and 54 of the present resolution, constitutes a basic offence against the national right to legislate and against the EU' s own subsidiarity principle, as formulated in the Treaties of Maastricht and Amsterdam.

In our capacity as Swedish Christian Democrats, we shall, of course, be continuing our work in the Swedish Parliament aimed at establishing a basic legal position where the family and marriage between men and women are concerned. This is with a view to making our country' s legislation more friendly to families and children and out of an active desire to support stable and long-term parental relationships which can meet children' s needs for security, care and socialisation.

- (FR) The annual report on respect for human rights in the European Union is usually taken as an opportunity to display a rather pathetic excess of political correctness.

The champions of the libertarian ideology never miss the chance to list a whole series of demands, each more ludicrous than the next, all wrapped up in proper sentiments.

Perhaps that is what this whole exercise demands.

Alas, the 2000 vintage still goes along with this curious tradition.

Nothing has been left out, from the right of non-EU nationals to vote and stand in municipal and European elections, to guaranteeing 'same-sex couples rights equal to those enjoyed by traditional couples and families' , to the standardisation of the procedure governing the right of asylum within the European Union, all inspired by the eternal resolve to glean new powers for Brussels.

As a member of the Committee on Women' s Rights, I shall confine myself to emphasising the equality between men and women on the one hand, and the importance of the family on the other.

While the persistence of discrimination between men and women, with regard to pay for example, is unacceptable, to set men against women, as some feminist organisations do, would be sterile and put social cohesion at risk.

We therefore categorically reject any policy of quotas or positive discrimination, those pet themes of political correctness.

As we put it in Brussels on 1 March, that kind of policy would reflect a profound contempt for women: women should gain access to political or administrative posts not through the mechanical workings of some form of quota but through the recognition of their merits and abilities.

Women have a specific role to play in society: they have a vital family role to play in the procreation of the new generations that are essential to the survival of society, a role to play in educating the young; they have an economic role, as mother of the family, but also a role within family enterprises (family holdings, businesses, SMEs).

This role has been downgraded for far too long, although it is a key role.

On the one hand, that implies giving the wives of self-employed workers who play a part in the family business a stable status and, on the other hand, recognising the economic and social role of the mother.

It also implies enabling women to reconcile family life with working life, giving all women the chance to make a genuine choice: how many women have been forced by economic constraints only to have two children when they would have liked three?

How many of them have been forced to devote more time to their professional life than they would have wished?

That kind of policy would mean giving the family its due place.

But this report is an extremely dangerous all-out attack on the family.

It calls for equal rights for same-sex couples and traditional couples and families, forgetting the vital role the family plays in social cohesion.

Let us make no mistake: everyone leads the private life they want; there can be no question of secret policing.

However, same-sex couples as such are of no use to society, they are sterile and can only lead to a sterile society; so society does not have to recognise them and grant them rights: it should ignore them.

The family, on the contrary, is the community on which society is based and that ensures its stability.

Its utility resides in the fact that it provides the most stable framework possible for creating new generations, for their education, and therefore for the continuity of mankind.

Even now, with the strong backing of certain European resolutions and under pressure from action groups, there are some who are preparing to recognise the right of same-sex couples to adopt children.

Just imagine the psychological future of children with two fathers and no mother, or two mothers and no father!

If it is to fulfil its potential, a child needs a father and a mother, a stable family.

In face of the culture of death, it is our duty to stand up for the culture of life.

We believe in an exalted idea of the dignity of man, whoever he may be, without discrimination, from the moment of conception to his natural death.

That means breaking with the materialistic and individualistic view of man and believing that there is something sacred in each individual, which is the foundation of human dignity.

Only then can we effectively and consistently ban human cloning or discrimination on the basis of genetic inheritance, a discrimination suffered far too often by, for instance, Down' s syndrome babies, in the name of what seem to be the best of intentions.

It is only at that price that we can reject the unacceptable hypocrisy of chatting peacefully about human rights while closing our eyes to an economic and commercial system which, in the name of the dogma of free trade, encourages child exploitation in many third world countries.

And then we will be able to move away from a policy of minorities, the legacy of an individualist thinking that is a threat to a peaceful society, away from an ideology of minorities that is a new expression of the class war, that disregards the profound unity of the human family and seeks to establish superficial divisions based on race, sexual mores, age or ethnicity and demand specific rights for each of them.

Man is neither a social security number nor a pawn on a social and economic chessboard to be manipulated at will and discarded when no longer of use.

He is worth much more than that: every man is a sacred history.

- (NL) The SP MEPs Anne Van Lancker and Kathleen Van Brempt have abstained from the vote on paragraphs 19 and 20 of the resolution on respect for human rights in the European Union, in which Belgium is urged to ratify the 1995 European Framework Convention for the protection of national minorities and the 1998 European Charter for Regional and Minority Languages.

"We fully subscribe to the international agreements to protect minorities and minority languages.

However, we cannot tolerate international agreements of this kind being used by certain groups in Belgium to their advantage in order to undermine the language legislation which guarantees the tolerant co-existence of the three language communities" .

That concludes the explanations of vote.

(The sitting was adjourned at 2.11 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m.)

The next item is the debate on topical and urgent subjects of major importance.

The next item is the debate on the following motions for resolutions:

B5-0246/2000 by Mrs González Álvarez and others on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left/Nordic Green Left;

B5-0253/2000 by Mr Sánchez García and others on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party;

B5-0262/2000 by Mr Carnero González and others on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists;

B5-0272/2000 by Mrs Schröder and others on behalf of the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance;

B5-0278/2000 by Mr Salafranca Sánchez Neyra and others on behalf of the Group of the European People' s Party (Christian Democrats) and European Democrats

Mr President, this Parliament has long been calling for compliance with the United Nations resolutions and for the European Union, that is the Commission and the Council, to become more deeply involved in solving the Sahrawi problem. Although we are going to vote in favour of this resolution - which I regard as a good consensus resolution, calling for the obvious once again - I would perhaps have worded certain points differently.

I refer to the statement that both parties, Morocco and Western Sahara, must make equal efforts to resolve the conflict.

We believe there should be more emphasis on asking Morocco to concentrate its political will on resolving the conflict, because the Sahrawis have demonstrated time and again that they want it finally resolved.

They have released prisoners and accepted the United Nations rulings on eligible voters. It is the Moroccan Government that has been putting obstacles in the way of resolving the conflict.

The latest obstacle to delay this referendum indefinitely has been the introduction of 76 000 appeals to the United Nations from possible voters in the referendum on Western Sahara.

If obstacles continue to be put in the way, we may be responsible for a more serious conflict.

Some people are shocked that the Sahrawi people are now saying they are left with no alternative but to take up arms again.

I can understand it. It is a solution nobody wants, of course, but it is one we are forcing them into.

Mr President, the European Union - and Parliament within it, of course - must strive to avoid a new conflict in an area which is already troubled enough.

We do not want Western Sahara to become another East Timor, Mr President,

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, there are circumstances which make Western Sahara a highly topical issue and they are relevant this evening.

The first is the United Nations Security Council' s urgent resolution of 29 February, which agreed to extend the MINURSO mandate to the end of May.

Secondly, there is the food crisis facing the Sahrawi refugees in the desert camps.

Mention must be made of serious incidents which have recently occurred in the occupied territories of Western Sahara, where pro-referendum demonstrations have been suppressed by the Moroccan authorities.

Mention must also be made of the visit the Maghreb Delegation will be making to Morocco next week and the King of Morocco' s favourable attitude to the European Parliament visiting the territory of Western Sahara for the first time.

The instability that could become endemic in this part of Africa could affect some of the outermost Community regions, like my region, the Canary Islands. Our citizens want a peaceful solution to the conflict in Western Sahara and they want the Sahrawi people to hold the referendum under conditions of freedom, transparency and equality.

And finally, one of the objectives of the European Union' s common foreign and security policy is the maintenance of peace and the strengthening of international security.

And here the High Representative for the CFSP, Mr Solana, ought to play a more active role in achieving adequate guarantees for the Sahrawi people through an active presence and direct participation in the stages of the peace process and the referendum.

That is why we support the motion for a resolution.

Mr President, first we must express our concern for the Sahrawi people, many of whom have experienced long years of exile and suffering.

Solving their problem means respecting the deadlines for holding the referendum that has been postponed again and again.

If there were to be another postponement it would seriously aggravate the problem.

Stability, security and peace in the Maghreb region depend on this referendum taking place.

For the referendum to lead to the fulfilment of those objectives, however, the preparatory work must be done with great care, especially the correct compilation of the full electoral roll, which has still not been achieved, and strict fulfilment of the criteria governing its compilation must be insisted on.

The European Union must fully assume its role of mediator in this process, which is important not just for the region itself, but also for the whole of Europe, and especially for certain countries.

It must carry out that role by, amongst other things, supporting the decisions of the United Nations and ensuring that the process reaches a conclusion in total transparency and with maximum guarantees, complete probity and respect for democracy.

Mr President, after the vote in East Timor, the process of self-determination in Western Sahara is the last one outstanding in the world.

But it is a process of self-determination which grows more complicated by the day, as highlighted last week by news of the repression taking place in the occupied territories of Western Sahara.

On the proper conclusion of this process of self-determination depend the stability, peace and indeed the economic integration and development of the whole Maghreb.

I would even say that the transition to full democracy apparently under way in the Kingdom of Morocco also depends on it.

From our point of view, the culmination of the process of self-determination in Western Sahara lies in the application of the peace plan from the United Nations and the Organisation for African Unity.

And the core of that peace plan is precisely the holding of a free and fair referendum on self-determination, in which voters can make their choice without any kind of pressure.

In spite of the efforts of the United Nations, in spite of MINURSO, in spite of the progress that has been made in compiling the electoral roll, the referendum keeps being postponed virtually sine die.

Of course, the delay of the referendum is essentially the responsibility of one of the parties, which is failing to finalise acceptance of the terms under which the said referendum is to take place.

For that to happen, for self-determination to become a reality in Western Sahara in the short term, the available instruments must be used: the Houston Agreements and the efforts of James Baker.

Direct dialogue between the parties is essential.

The Kingdom of Morocco and the Polisario Front must restore the direct dialogue which existed at the end of the 1980' s and which led to the Houston Agreements.

The European Union should make it a priority to help keep that process going, to help it succeed.

Regrettably, the Union has not acted in the most appropriate way up to now.

Much has been said, but little has actually been done.

The most important point in the resolution we are going to adopt here today is the European Parliament' s call to the Council to take common action, as provided for in the Treaty on European Union, on Western Sahara.

And that means statements and instruments, making all the instruments we have at our disposal available to help bring this process of self-determination to a satisfactory conclusion, assist Mr Baker, support the United Nations, call on the parties to respect the terms of the international resolutions and set in motion essential humanitarian cooperation.

That is how we can contribute to achieving a priority objective: peace in the Maghreb.

Self-determination in Western Sahara is essential for that.

Mr President, I should like on behalf of my Group to voice our serious concern at the current situation in the Western Sahara to the European Parliament and, more importantly, the Commission and the Council.

The constant postponement of the referendum on the future of the Western Sahara is unacceptable.

A state of emergency reins in the occupied areas.

At least 56 people have been arrested, including 27 women, for fighting for the right to self-determination.

We call on the government of Morocco to stop repression, lift the state of emergency and permit freedom of expression.

We call on the Council of the EU to vote on joint action which will enable the peace plan to be duly implemented without delay.

The previous involvement of the personal envoy of the UN Secretary General, Mr James Baker, should be used for further mediation work in a bid to implement UN Security Council Resolution No 1292/2000.

We urge the Commission of the EU to ensure immediately that the people in the refugee camps have a secure supply of food.

The supply situation has deteriorated dramatically.

All the stocks of basic foodstuffs have been used up.

According to information from various NGOs, food has been rationed since December and various countries have withdrawn bilateral aid.

The World Food Programme relies on the EU; as a result, ECHO must now provide 80% of the food aid originally intended as supplementary aid.

The Council and the Commission must therefore immediately exert pressure on the UN to improve the food situation.

The Commission must set up a financial safety fund for the next three months.

Is it right that, due to staff problems at ECHO and the lack of a new global plan, no food aid is being supplied at present?

Anything approved today will not be implemented until next August at the earliest, but people cannot be left without aid for such a long period unless they are supposed to starve to death.

We had a similarly dramatic situation a year ago in East Timor.

A referendum was held. A state of emergency followed.

Only then did international aid react; no preventative action was taken in order to avoid conflict.

That is why we call on the Commission and the Council to act before it is too late.

Mr President, to begin with, I want to agree with most of what has been said in this regard, especially by my colleague, Mrs González Álvarez.

I also want to take the opportunity to appeal to the Council.

As I understand it, Portugal does not intend, during its presidency, to take any initiatives on this issue.

I would therefore appeal to France do so in the course of its own forthcoming presidency and, last but not least (and if nothing has happened by then), to my own country, Sweden, to take measures during its own presidency with a view to achieving a peaceful resolution of this conflict after all these years.

I am also particularly glad that Commissioner Nielson is present here today.

I hope that we shall be able relatively soon to have a meeting in connection with what was stated here in the European Parliament by German aid organisations the other day, namely that refugees in the camps are in danger of starving and that infant mortality and deaths in childbirth have already increased by an alarming amount in recent months.

ECHO has assumed the major responsibility of constantly providing for the refugees and, whenever this organisation wavers, the voluntary organisations are left powerless.

They have ceased to provide aid and there is no effective coordination.

I really would appeal to Commissioner Nielson to act quickly.

I would also appeal to the chairman and members of the Committee on Budgets to deal with this issue quickly.

I cannot think of anything worse than languishing for 25 years among the sand dunes and being taken in by referenda year upon year, only then to starve to death.

Mr President, the Western Sahara issue is, unfortunately, familiar.

It is one of the few legacies of colonialism still surviving in the year 2000. Morocco is not complying with the United Nations resolutions.

A referendum should have been held years ago, as it was in other countries such as East Timor, Latvia and other places where the right to self-determination has been exercised.

The position of the European Parliament has always been to support, not the independence of the Sahrawi, but the right of the Sahrawi people to freely express their views.

Even today, this right is still being suppressed, under various different pretexts.

Meanwhile, the situation of the Sahrawi people has become serious: even their physical survival is under threat.

In spite of this, they have kept up good relations with Morocco, continuing to conclude trade agreements in various different fields - from fisheries to citrus fruit - while the violation of human rights and of the right to self-determination is being completely disregarded.

I therefore call for all possible steps to be taken to ensure that the right to self-determination of the Sahrawi people is recognised, if necessary through the cooling of relations with Morocco, which, moreover, has already spent too much money fighting this principle.

Mr President, the peace process in the Western Sahara initiated and led by the Secretary-General of the United Nations looked promising.

The eligible voters were identified thanks to the effective UN mission, MINURSO.

But the Moroccan Government has artificially stepped up the number of appeals concerning voters, a clear sign that it wants to prevent the holding of the referendum on self-determination.

Nor has it confined itself to these delaying tactics.

In recent weeks it has embarked on violent repression of the Sahrawi people, in the form of arrests, disappearances and the introduction of a real state of siege in the occupied territories.

In its motion for a resolution, my Group reaffirms the right of the Sahrawi people to self-determination and calls on Morocco to call an end to all forms of repression and to apply in full the Houston Agreements to which it has subscribed.

The United Nations must do its utmost to ensure that the referendum is held before the end of 2000.

I call on the Council and the governments of the Member States, in particular France and Spain, to stop being so accommodating vis-à-vis the Moroccan authorities and to involve themselves more actively in the success of the peace plan and the holding of the referendum, for that is the most appropriate democratic means of achieving a peaceful and lasting settlement of the conflict in Western Sahara.

The Commission is closely following developments in the implementation of the UN Security Council' s plan to settle the Western Sahara conflict.

Like the Member States of the European Union, it wholeheartedly supports the efforts of the UN Secretary-General and his personal envoy, Mr James Baker, to find a just, equitable and lasting solution for the Western Sahara.

The Commission is aware that the organisation of the referendum is currently affected by problems with the finalisation of the list of voters and it hopes that Mr Baker' s visit to the region will bring the desired breakthrough.

As for humanitarian aid, the Commission channelled more than EUR 61 million through NGO partners to provide Sahrawi refugees in the Tindouf region with food, medical and sanitary aid between 1993 and 1999, and even though the circumstances for delivering humanitarian aid in this case are quite difficult, this will not stop us from continuing our support.

Thank you very much, Commissioner Nielson.

The vote will take place today at 5.30 p.m.

The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions:

B5-0244/2000 by Mr Miranda and others on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left/Nordic Green Left;

B5-0251/2000 by Mr Queiró and Mr Ribeiro i Castro on behalf of the Union for a Europe of Nations Group;

B5-0254/2000 by Mr van den Bos on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party;

B5-0263/2000 by Mrs Carrilho and others on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists;

B5-0276/2000 by Mr Rod and others on behalf of the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance;

B5-0279/2000 by Mrs Maij-Weggen and others on behalf of the Group of the European People' s Party (Christian Democrats) and European Democrats

Mr President, we are all aware of the tragic situation in Mozambique, and it is a matter of the utmost urgency to provide the necessary aid so that the government can respond to the most urgent needs of its people and succeed in reconstructing the vast regions where destruction has been almost total.

It is essential that the Commission and the Member States commit themselves decisively to all the support actions, including financial aid for materials and equipment, technical assistance for mine-clearance in the areas of the country where this problem still applies, support for holding an International Conference to mobilise as much emergency aid as possible and obtain the economic resources necessary for the recovery of Mozambique' s economy, which has been so cruelly affected by the floods.

It is equally important that all the countries cancel Mozambique' s debt in full so as to facilitate its recovery.

We therefore call for total commitment in active solidarity with Mozambique from everyone, including this Parliament, because we think it is important to send a delegation so that Members can find out more about the situation and the country' s reconstruction process.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, in our mind' s eye we can still see the tragic pictures from Mozambique, the results of a rare sequence of extremely harsh natural events. We are also very much aware of how slow the response to this massive disaster has been.

We regard the resolution we will be voting on today as the continuation of an emergency debate which took place at the mini-session in Brussels immediately following these events.

We concur with all the points mentioned here: the need to keep on mobilising resources for the rescue and relief of the people who have been displaced, to carry out an inventory of the effects of the crisis as a whole and to coordinate and unite efforts to prevent the foreseeable health consequences, replant farm crops and reconstruct the country.

But we alone should not bear the blame for the delay.

We should also be wondering what other countries in other continents are doing.

What about India and Pakistan, which have substantial resources and large communities resident in Mozambique?

And what are the nearby African countries doing?

Angola, for example, has powerful armed forces which could have given valuable assistance, or Zimbabwe, just next door, or Nigeria, which has an operational air force.

These questions must also be asked given the imminence of the approaching European Union/Africa Summit, so that we can communicate better on this issue out of common concern for solidarity.

I must also say that we are sensitive to the issue of external debt forgiveness, but we identify more with the text set out in the joint resolution.

As a Christian Democrat, I am sensitive to the appeals of the Catholic Church in this jubilee year for positive handling of the external debt of the third world as a whole.

But we need to make a distinction between the different situations of many African countries.

There are cases where the fortunes accumulated by the leaders of these countries would be enough to pay off their external debt, so these are sensitive issues which need to be carefully considered.

We know this is not the situation in Mozambique, as poor as the country may be.

However, we think the wording of the joint motion for a resolution is correct, and I must say right away that we agree with the position taken by the Portuguese government, which is to immediately write off half of Mozambique' s external debt.

Mr President, the media have portrayed a distorted image of the disaster which struck Mozambique.

Whilst the world witnessed scenes of desperate people on rooftops and in trees, aid had already got under way off camera.

At least gripping images have a mobilising effect on public opinion and provide a strong base for aid.

But the other side of the coin is that disasters which do not reach the news, to all intents and purposes, do not exist.

This is why it is essential that international aid is not led by the media but only by the people in need.

According to the organisations involved, despite everything, aid has got under way relatively quickly.

This may be true, but this does not apply to the primary rescue operations.

It was not the Commission which was responsible for this, but the governments.

Aircraft, helicopters, food and medicine must be available on demand and at a moment' s notice.

And I mean literally at a moment' s notice.

The waiting period should only be determined by the distance involved, not the red tape.

There is a need for much better cooperation between the aid organisations and the armed forces to this end.

It is commendable that Commissioner Nielson travelled to Mozambique so quickly.

I would be interested to hear about his trip and what he thinks of the criticism of the government?

And what about the criticism concerning coordination?

The 25 million aid package is sufficient for now, but will need to be increased at a later date.

Mozambique has now entered an extremely difficult phase.

Diseases must be kept at bay, the landmines littering the area must be cleared and re-housing schemes must be established.

For many Mozambicans, the misery is only just starting, now that the media have packed up and moved on.

It is therefore up to us, Parliament, the Council and the Commission, to closely monitor the victims ourselves.

Mr President, we all know that the consequences of the tragic flood disaster in Mozambique would have been less serious if the more developed countries, and especially the countries of the European Union, which has a special responsibility for the former Portuguese colony, had reacted immediately by sending the necessary resources, especially helicopters, to help the population.

For days there were only seven helicopters trying to bring those people the aid they need, while governments remained silent and the whole world looked on, anguished and appalled.

The European Union must never behave like this again.

To make what amends it can, it must now provide Mozambique with all the aid necessary to combat disease, feed the people and reconstruct the country materially, if necessary, going beyond the restrictive and anti-European limits laid down in the selfish budget agreements of Agenda 2000.

In particular the Member States must cancel their share of Mozambique' s external debt.

Mr President, the recent floods in Mozambique, followed by the hurricane, have thrown the country into complete disarray, at a time when it was just about recovering from the political atrocities of the past.

It is sad that this should happen to one of the world' s poorest countries as well.

Unfortunately, aid got under way relatively late in the day, at least according to the reports.

Those images of people perched on rooftops and in trees, which were transmitted across the world, have naturally caused questions to be directed at the international community and the NGOs regarding the speed of action required to alleviate the worst of the emergency situation.

Moreover, the world also witnessed how quickly South African helicopters were on the scene and how they saved a few thousand people as a result. I think it would be fitting to pay tribute to them for these efforts.

Meanwhile, we have heard from Commissioner Nielson that a great deal more was done than was made known.

We appreciate the fact that he travelled to Mozambique in person to assess the situation and to see what the EU could do in the way of aid.

In my opinion, the programme which has now been drawn up in conjunction with the Mozambique government is a sound one, also because it is phased.

It will first address emergency aid, then housing and infrastructure and after that structural aid in order to get the affected areas back on their feet.

The funding which has been set aside for this project is considerable.

I have heard that the international community has put one hundred million on the table in the meantime, and that the EU has made a disproportionate contribution to this.

Moreover, I heard this morning that debts have most definitely been deferred but that it is to be examined how this will be dealt with in future.

It would be good, of course, if these debts were actually suspended, for then the Mozambique government could use the funds for this purpose.

Mr President, I am left with an uncomfortable feeling. The images which have been broadcast obviously do not reflect reality.

Mr Van den Bos has also pointed this out.

This means that the European Commission should consider whether the international intervention power which Mr Solana is busy setting up should not be supplemented with a kind of European intervention power for humanitarian aid, which acts quickly and which can also inform the media quickly on the work that is being done.

The images were inadequate, the disaster is very sad indeed, but the European Union did not stand idly by, as was suggested. We most definitely provided support.

I think it is only fair to clarify this here.

Mr President, rarely has the European Parliament devoted its attention to a natural disaster in circumstances so dramatic and so deserving of our support.

It is not just the extent of this disaster, and its expression in terms of the number of dead, communities stranded, children with nothing to eat, the destruction of homes and property, or the belated aid many have spoken of today, that arouse our sympathy. It is the irony of a people who, after securing their independence and surviving a war, had the ability and intelligence to choose peace and democracy, and began to rebuild their infrastructure and pursue development, only to be met with a natural tragedy of these proportions, forcing it to start all over again in many areas.

The strengthening of humanitarian aid, debt forgiveness for one of the poorest peoples in the world and the holding of the international conference provided for in the resolution, which I hope we will approve, is the least we can do for these people who will never give up their African journey towards peace, democracy and development.

As you are aware, I visited Mozambique on 2 and 3 March, together with the Portuguese State Secretary, Mr Amado.

We were able to visit some of the flood-affected areas, including the Chaquelan settlement where more than 28 000 people were already at that moment being assisted, thus witnessing at first hand the consequences of the flood disaster, and also witnessing the immediate effect of some of our assistance.

From the onset of the crisis the Commission has addressed the consequences of the floods in Mozambique in a comprehensive manner.

We have directed our attention to the following areas of concern: immediate relief, resettlement, rehabilitation, macro-economic stability and long-term development.

On the rescue, search and recovery phase: the situation is that the Commission does not have instruments that are geared to this type of intervention.

Member States have the logistical capacity which is needed for these kinds of activities.

For the relief emergency aid and resettlement phase, the Commission has approved two ECHO decisions for a total of EUR 2.7 m for Mozambique, and we are preparing a third decision for EUR 5.5 m.

These cover food aid, water and sanitation, essential relief items as well as the small-scale rehabilitation of essential health infrastructure and preparation for cholera epidemics.

In addition, EUR 1.4 m from the food security budget line have been made available locally to the delegation and the government of Mozambique.

The Commission is planning to fund the delivery of seeds and tools to the peasants to promote replanting as soon as the flood-waters recede.

In addition to the action already funded in Botswana, the Commission is currently carrying out a humanitarian need assessment in Zimbabwe, Zambia and Madagascar.

Turning to the rehabilitation phase, during my visit I announced an initial amount of EUR 21 m in additional funds from the development budget, of which 5 to 10 m will come from the NGO co-financing budget line and the balance from redistribution of earlier EDF funds.

The Commission is insisting on the need for reinforced coordination with the government around the shared comprehensive reconstruction framework.

A donor core group is meeting every week in Maputo with the government at ministerial level.

The EU presidency and the Commission delegation are members of that group.

The Commission intends to contribute to the preparation of the international donor conference that will be convened probably by the end of April.

The Commission will provide its funding for the rehabilitation requirements in strict coordination with EU Member States and the other donors.

As to macro-economic stability and long-term development: proposals intended to help Mozambique maintain macro-economic stability are currently being appraised by the Commission with the government and the World Bank.

Additional resources, up to EUR 15 m, could be made available.

To maintain the rapid growth achieved by Mozambique in recent years, pre-disaster levels of cooperation will be maintained and stepped up.

This will result in disbursements for this purpose estimated at EUR 150 m this year as compared to EUR 100 m last year.

Within the framework of the Community we will contribute EUR 1 bn for debt relief to ACP countries.

Within this, Mozambique figures among the retroactive cases and will be eligible for debt relief under the enhanced HIPC initiative this year.

Concerning coordination with other donors and aid agencies: the Mozambique government, in conjunction with the UN Office for Coordination of Humanitarian Assistance (OCHA), provides the principal platform for coordination of rescue and relief as expressed in the consolidated appeals they have made.

This local ownership of the coordination process should not be challenged by outside donors, at least not as long as it works reasonably well, and this - the UN organisations in Maputo informed us - is in fact the case.

Constraints have been identified in this terrible disaster case.

The magnitude and sudden onset of the flood disaster in Mozambique has left the Commission, as well as Member States and other donors, with the question of whether relief response could not have been speedier, as has also been pointed out in this debate.

I am at present seeing how we can overcome these constraints to humanitarian assistance in order to provide assistance from the Community even more quickly and efficiently than at present.

But it should not be forgotten that this was actually a catastrophe that had many surprising elements, nor was it particularly easy for Member States to mobilise and deploy very sensitive and difficult hardware such as helicopters with extreme rapidity.

Finally, I would like to emphasise the figures concerning the international response.

The overall figure of funding for this disaster now stands at about EUR 109 m globally, of which more than EUR 91 m come from the Commission and the EU Member States.

It has already been said in this debate that the European response has, relatively speaking, shown that Europe actually cares.

In money terms we have contributed quite well.

This is not the whole answer to the problem, and we will continue to find better and quicker ways of responding.

Thank you very much, Commissioner Nielson.

We all hope that our aid really will help the people get over the worst of it.

The vote will take place today at 5.30 p.m.

The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions:

B5-0252/2000 by Mr Marset Campos and Mr Jové Peres on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left/Nordic Green Left;

B5-0255/2000 by Mr Di Pietro on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party;

B5-0264/2000 by Mr Medina Ortega and Mr Fava on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists;

B5-0270/2000 by Mr Lipietz and Mr Knörr Borrás on behalf of the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance;

B5-0280/2000 by Mr Salafranca Sánchez-Neyra on behalf of the Group of the European People' s Party (Christian Democrats) and European Democrats

on the electoral process in Peru.

B5-0245/2000 by Mr Markov and others on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left/Nordic Green Left;

B5-0256/2000 by Mr Haarder and Mr Väyrynen on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party;

B5-0261/2000 by Mr Oostlander and others on behalf of the Group of the European People' s Party (Christian Democrats) and European Democrats;

B5-0265/2000 by Mr Sakellariou and Mrs Krehl on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists;

B5-0271/2000 by Mrs Schroedter and others on behalf of the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance

on violations of human rights and humanitarian law in Chechnya.

Freedom of the press in Serbia

B5-0247/2000 by Mrs Morgantini and others on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left/Nordic Green Left;

B5-0257/2000 by Mr Haarder on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party;

B5-0266/2000 by Mr Swoboda and Mr Sakellariou on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists;

B5-0273/2000 by Mr Lagendijk and others on behalf of the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance;

B5-0281/2000 by Mr Oostlander and others on behalf of the Group of the European People' s Party (Christian Democrats) and European Democrats

on freedom of the press in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.

B5-0268/2000 by Mr Naïr and Mr Sakellariou on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists;

B5-0282/2000 by Mr Buttiglione on behalf of the Group of the European People' s Party (Christian Democrats) and European Democrats

B5-0250/2000 by Mr Swoboda on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists;

B5-0258/2000 by Mrs Lynne on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party;

B5-0283/2000 by Mr Elles and others on behalf of the Group of the European People' s Party (Christian Democrats) and European Democrats;

B5-0285/2000 by Mr Messner and Mrs Maes on behalf of the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance

on the situation in Jammu and Kashmir.

Mr President, the violation of human rights in Peru is another case in the long list of cases occurring in Latin American countries with the connivance of a complacent United States.

The coming elections offer no democratic guarantees, so it is up to the European Union to act as a reference point in ensuring that the citizens of Peru and the democratic parties of that country receive those guarantees.

In view of what is going on in that country, and in Colombia, Mexico, Ecuador and elsewhere, it seems appropriate for the European Union to establish a permanent human rights observatory for Latin America.

It is not just the euro which must compete with the dollar; our ethical and political human rights principles must replace the old backyard and gunboat policy the United States is pursuing in the area.

Mr President, Peru has had quite a troubled constitutional life with frequent incursions by the military into civilian life.

After democracy was restored, as a result - certainly - of the activities of the Shining Path terrorist organisation, the democratically-elected President of Peru, Mr Fujimori, carried out a government coup by dissolving Parliament and drawing up a constitution made-to-measure for himself as President.

The European Parliament has already had occasion to condemn this type of action by President Fujimori.

President Fujimori has obviously re-established a degree of calm, if one can call it that, in Peru. But he has continued to keep himself in power by authoritarian means.

In fact I would say that, for many, President Fujimori is no more than the civilian representative of military power exercised indirectly.

Yes, there are still elections in Peru, there are political parties, there are means of communication and there are certain guarantees.

But the guarantees are not complete.

The proof is that three judges from the Constitutional Court were removed for opposing his re-election plans.

That means the guarantees are not complete.

There is no independence of the judiciary or of the legislature.

Secondly, Peru recently withdrew from the jurisdiction of the Inter-American Court for Human Rights, and I think that is a very bad sign for a country.

I think we should ask the Government of Peru to review that decision.

And thirdly, there is still military action going on inside Peru at this moment, frequently creating difficulties for democracy.

Remember that, as a member of the Andean Pact, Peru is bound to the European Union by a democracy clause and the European Community, or more specifically the Community institutions, has a certain responsibility by virtue of that democracy clause to call for the electoral process in Peru to be adapted, as far as possible, to certain essential democratic requirements.

Mr President, as a member of the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance and also as a Member of the European Parliament from the Basque Country, a land which has supplied a fair number of emigrants to Latin American countries, I want to express my solidarity with all those who fight for human rights to be upheld - not only in Peru, but throughout the world.

And I want to denounce the situation that exists in Peru, a situation which is due not just to the complacency and connivance of the United States, as has been mentioned here, but also to that of plenty of other countries, including European ones, and the hypocrisy which reigns over international politics.

It is well-known - and there is the Carter Foundation report - that access to the media must be provided as soon as possible, media bias must be ended, harassment of candidates and observers in local elections must be ended, improper use of public funds for electoral advantage must be exposed, there must be transparency in electoral administration and access for all parties to the elections and the rights of independent electoral observers must be guaranteed.

In this respect, the reference just now to a permanent human rights observatory for Latin America seems to me entirely appropriate.

Mr President, our primary duty in the struggle to protect the civilian population, refugees and prisoners of war in Chechnya is to do everything to finally bring the war in Chechnya to an end.

This should also be uppermost in the mind of the parliamentary delegation due to travel to the war zone over the coming weeks.

Only a political solution to all the issues connected with the conflict and reconstruction of the region will guarantee a change in the awful situation faced by the people in the towns and villages which have been destroyed, in the refugee camps and in the prisoner of war camps.

I should also like to warn against judging just one side and apportioning blame solely to the Russian side.

It is clear, including from the report by the Council of Europe delegation, that human rights have been violated and war crimes committed by all the warring factions.

They must be investigated and the guilty must be called consistently to account.

But we should also give the competent Russian authorities the chance to do this themselves.

Mr President, we had a welcome visit yesterday to this Parliament from a delegation from the CIS Parliamentary Assembly. This gave us a unique opportunity to discuss Russia' s war with Chechnya face-to-face with other Parliamentarians.

These visitors appealed to us to understand that, in their words, Russia was fighting against terrorism and was not waging a real war, and that this fight against terrorism had been exacerbated by outside arms flows and training camps sponsored by predatory nations jealous of Russia' s power.

We responded. Russia is a member of the Council of Europe, and even her need in terms of security to protect her citizens internally from outside assault could not absolve her from her responsibilities under international conventions.

I put the point that the containment by Russia of arms flows from Russia would be a very welcome step forward in terms of shared efforts to combat terrorism.

There are, however, two sides to this political tale of war and suffering, and I think we must seek more strongly to understand the causes of conflict between Russia and Chechnya, so that we can help to stem the flow of human blood more quickly another time.

I suggest no sanctions, no economic sanctions against Russia should be considered at this time.

We have a duty, now that the war is almost over, to have access to victims and to give aid for rehabilitation.

Mr President, I must contradict Mr Markov quite categorically.

It is not apportioning blame to one side to talk of the genocide committed by Russia against the Chechen people, as Lord Judd does in the report by the Parliamentary Assembly delegation of the Council of Europe.

Of course, both sides are guilty of infringements, but Lord Judd' s diagnosis is pretty unequivocal: genocide.

That is reason enough not to ask Russia to investigate infringements and war crimes.

It would be highly unusual to ask the murderer to investigate himself and we need international bodies to do this.

What we need is the international criminal court and we must bring those responsible to justice.

Of course, we must call on the Russian authorities here but we too must become more involved than previously, because this is not a simple internal matter of state; it is a question of human rights violations on a massive scale in an area subject to the Human Rights Convention of the Council of Europe, in an area subject to the system of rights and values of the OSCE.

We seem to keep forgetting that the Chechen government was elected under the supervision of the OSCE and that we also need to intercede for this legitimate Chechen government, except that we cannot find this government today, because its representatives are holed up in the mountains fighting for their very survival.

That is why I warn against a pseudo balanced approach.

Naturally, we must condemn infringements on both sides, but we should not confuse the perpetrator of genocide with his victims and that means that we must take good care not only to provide humanitarian aid - that must be done and it is high time that something was done by the EU here - but also to ensure that a political solution is found to the conflict.

A political solution to the conflict cannot be enforced using the arms of the Russian army, because then the war will just keep breaking out in new forms as guerrilla war or as terrorism or as some other form of underground war.

So we need to ensure that a negotiated solution is reached with the elected representatives of the Chechen people.

Today we discussed the right to self-determination in the Western Sahara; I should like to point out that the Chechen people also has a right to life and we must safeguard the Chechen people' s right to life, either jointly with Russia or on our own.

We have not yet reached that point, but we did hear how Russian society is currently becoming more radical from an expert this morning.

We interceded for the release of the Russian journalist Mr Babitsky.

He was due to visit the European Parliament today and give us an eye witness account of the situation in Chechnya, but he was not allowed to leave Russia.

He was not allowed to come to Strasbourg because the Russian authorities are frightened of the free and open report of an independent journalist who looks at both sides critically and wished to throw some light on the truth here and reveal the genocide being committed against the Chechen people.

It is a scandal and we cannot accept it.

Freedom of the press for Russia is also a service to the Russian people.

Mr President, it would seem that a war that was started to end terrorism is turning into a situation where a new terrorism is just starting.

It seems to be becoming a permanent phenomenon in the region.

We have condemned the Russian action over the recent months in five separate resolutions.

There has been a certain amount of one-sided thinking in them here and there, which has not made them any more effective.

For example, the idea to use the TACIS programme as a sanction will only lead to ordinary people suffering and has not deterred the Russian government in their policy.

The extension of the war and terrorism is a major threat to us all.

For that reason, we need a Caucasus peace conference, because these problems are not confined to Chechnya.

Secondly, the human rights situation is intolerable, and we therefore need a proper investigation into violations of human rights by all parties.

In addition, speedy and unhindered access to the area on the part of relief organisations must be guaranteed once and for all.

Thirdly, the war must be stopped and talks begun.

And fourthly, Russia' s active participation in the work against international terrorism and the illegal arms trade is essential.

Finally, the principal rule with respect to refugees is that they should be helped near to where they live and helped to return to their homes.

We should be reminded, however - so as not to be too sanctimonious in all of this - that when Chechen refugees turned to us for help we did not receive them in our own countries as we did on such a large scale with Kosovo.

In this we recognise the short-sightedness of our own policies.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, we know that Russia' s international standing has been seriously damaged by the Chechen war.

A full investigation of human rights violations involving international observers is also in Russia' s political interests.

Except that the Russian government does not appear to be totally convinced of the fact.

How else are we to interpret the fact that the UN envoy Mary Robinson was not granted access to Grozny and the filtration camps.

The agreement which has now been brokered with Mr Kalamanov by the human rights envoy of the Council of Europe, Gil Robles, is a step in the right direction. But it will only continue to be credible if the two Council of Europe envoys really can work independently and move freely and independently around the country.

We reject and shall not accept any unilateral interpretation of the agreement by the Russian government.

If it should come to the point that the Russian government fails to keep to this agreement, the Member States of the European Union must bring intergovernmental proceedings against Russia before the European Court of Human Rights and ensure that there is an international investigation of the human rights violations, and I cannot but support Mr Paasilinna.

We too are required to put a halt to the expulsion of refugees in our countries, as the German government has done.

We too are required to grant Chechens political asylum in our countries.

It would make a great deal of sense if the proposals by the German government were adopted by all the Member States.

Mr President, although this does not mean that I approve of the policy of the Chechen nationalist leaders, I wish to say on behalf of my colleagues and myself, that we are disgusted at the vile deeds the Russian army has committed in Chechnya.

This is a despicable war, whose prime victims are the people of Chechnya, but also the young Russian soldiers.

We are also appalled, however, at the attitude of the western powers, in particular the European ones.

The British Prime Minister' s recent visit to Moscow, the way he toadied to the butcher-in-chief Putin, reflect the general attitude of the western powers.

What public opinion sees is a few declarations condemning certain aspects of the war in Chechnya; what we are actually seeing is political and financial support for the Kremlin.

Any western loans that have not been hijacked by the Yeltsin clan can thus be spent on pursuing the war against Chechnya.

Many of the parties represented here in Parliament form part of governments that are pursuing this policy of conciliation and support.

Under those circumstances, the vote in Parliament can only serve as a fig-leaf for the hypocrisy of the European big powers and their profound complicity with the crimes the Russian leaders have committed in Chechnya.

Freedom of the press in Serbia:

Mr President, having access to independent media in the context of an open and free debate is one of the most important cornerstones of a free and democratic society.

This is something which the world' s dictators have always known.

All societies and all States which stifle their own press are after one thing only: to silence debate and to extinguish the vital spark of democracy, which is to say the open and free society.

This is now happening every day in Serbia.

The few independent TV and radio stations in Serbia are being harassed and persecuted in order finally to be closed down entirely.

A desperate, dictatorial leader is oppressing his own people. Mr Milosevic is threatening Montenegro, attacking the weak opposition in Serbia and infiltrating Kosovo.

Mr Milosevic and his fellow criminals must be removed.

I therefore want to ask Commissioner Nielson what he and the EU are doing to ensure that Mr Milosevic is brought to justice before the International War Crimes Tribunal in The Hague.

It is to the world' s shame that Mr Milosevic has not been tried in court for his war crimes and that he is allowed to continue his attacks upon freedom, peace, democracy and the free press.

The people of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia are still living in terrible conditions, battered by their own government' s policy of homicide and suicide, NATO shelling and the embargoes of the international community.

Any democratic opposition is difficult, not only because of suppression by the Serbian authorities but also because of the deprivation suffered by the whole of the population, for which the international community is partly responsible. The result is yet more conflict and violence.

Today, we want to express our solidarity with the journalists and democrats whose rights have been violated and declare our commitment to fighting the Milosevic Government' s suppression of the freedom of the press and the freedom of speech.

The Serbian authorities are suppressing newspapers, independent radio stations and any radio stations which acknowledge opposition groups or parties.

I would just like to mention the example of the Studio B operators who, in addition to being pressurised by heavy fines from the authorities, saw their equipment destroyed by hired masked vandals.

In this regard, an appeal has been made to the Serbian authorities, calling upon them to bring their criminal inquiries to a close in order to punish those guilty of crimes, to put an end to the increasing suppression and to amend the recent law limiting the freedom of the media.

We call for economic support from the European Union for the independent press, but also an economic aid programme for Serbia, to assist the entire afflicted population and to help make it possible for the people of Serbia to at last live in peace and to elect a democratic government.

Mr President, we have started a new round - the umpteenth - in Milosevic' s war against the free media. So much is clear.

It seems to be heralding the elections in a perverse kind of way.

The campaign has started and anyone who disagrees with him needs to keep their mouths shut.

It is really unacceptable that elections will soon take place - allegedly formal, democratic elections - in a country where the opposition has first been left without any tool to express itself.

It is a trademark of a totalitarian regime which knows all too well that free, independent media are a nuisance and pose a threat, even to a regime such as that of Milosevic.

The EU' s support - on which we are probably all agreed - can roughly take two forms. It would be beneficial to support the media in the neighbouring countries: Croatia and a number of other countries have been mentioned.

I am in favour of this.

But it can never replace support provided to the media in Yugoslavia, in Serbia, media which deserve this support. The EU makes a difference.

The EU has made a difference in the past with its support.

It has an obligation to do this in future and should also be given the means to do this.

This is fine within the framework of the new CARA programme, but it is also particularly important that this should happen in two weeks' time, in conjunction with the Stability Pact.

At the finance conference on the Stability Pact, the European Union can and must commit itself to a number of programmes.

The programmes are ready, the necessity is there; let us take swift and unambiguous action.

Mr President, whichever way we view the Balkans, in the light of recent atrocities or future events in terms of the Stability Pact, we always seem to come up against this horrifying character of Milosevic and his cronies, people who have a string of crimes against humanity to answer for and who should urgently be taken to the Court of Justice in The Hague.

This crook, this old communist crook, is able to remain in power on account of his virtual monopoly of radio and TV and his oppression of any critical independent alternative, among other factors.

Various actions have been undertaken on the part of the European Union, such as providing independent stations with equipment.

But now that one station after the other is being closed down, the EU will need to act again in consultation with the affected parties.

We just heard that Mr Wiersma was denied a visa to visit the opposition in Belgrade.

It is most peculiar that the European Union is not really aware that we too have this tool at our disposal and that, for example, we should, in fact, deny entry to the EU to the Serbian football hooligans in return, because they are people who take advantage of the Milosevic regime in the most shocking manner.

Now that the Stability Pact will be coming into its own, the help of the neighbouring states will provide a new and sound alternative, especially now that Croatia has experienced a political U-turn.

Alternative reports can be directly provided via stations in Croatia and also in Montenegro.

The Stability Pact can only succeed if Serbia is a democratic constitutional state, not before, and once the criminals have been brought to justice.

As long as Milosevic and his friends can introduce laws which undermine the traditional human rights and human freedoms, as long as this is the case, the outlook for Serbia remains bleak.

It is unfortunate that the internal opposition is so weak and so divided nationally.

The European Union will need to look for powers in Serbia which are not driven by this blinkered nationalism but by values whose observance has also proved to benefit humanity in the European Union.

Mr President, we will gladly support our compromise resolution, especially once the GUE/NGL has pulled out.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, this is not the first time that we have debated the media in Serbia; we have been discussing this matter for years.

We should remember that, in October 1998, once NATO considered that the first planned attack on Serbia in order to help the Kosovars was over, because Milosevic had allegedly given way and allowed unarmed OSCE observers into the country, that it was precisely at this point that this Information Act was issued and began causing so many problems for the independent media: and now we are looking at the result.

It has become clear over the last two years that the media are being increasingly sidelined.

But we have already said that.

How weak must the Milosevic regime really feel, given how it treats the media?

Apparently he is terrified that the awful truth of his inhumane treatment of all Serbian citizens over the years, even against the Serbs in Serbia, might finally be revealed to the majority of these citizens, terrified that the people might soon deal with Milosevic and his henchmen the way the Romanians dealt with Ceaucescu.

I think he is terrified of this and we should help the media so that they can spread the truth about Milosevic and his regime.

Mr President, apparently, the Milosevic regime is not tired of fighting battles, not by a long shot.

Recently, it has taken systematic action against local stations, in particular.

It does not flinch from using violence in these activities.

Neither do the government-run media shrink from launching a full-blown witch hunt against the country' s independent media.

They are then termed rather scornfully 'NATO agents' and 'traitors of the mother country' .

It is not by chance that the powerful Serbian police apparatus operates mainly at local level, especially in those towns and cities where the opposition emerged victorious in the 1996 local elections.

With the same elections round the corner and parliamentary elections not too far off either, many in Serbia suspect that the Milosevic regime has already launched its own campaign.

The target, regional radio and television stations, is an obvious one from a Milosevic viewpoint.

Anyone in Serbia' s small and medium-sized towns who wants to see and hear anything other than what is spouted parrot-fashion by the state media based in Belgrade is heavily reliant on these stations.

By the way: the few independent papers that do exist are hard to come by in the provinces.

This once again underlines the significance of a political counter weight on the Serbian air waves.

As can be expected, Serbia' s dictator is fighting his battle against the as yet independent media in an underhand manner.

Legalistic arguments over missing licences or outstanding financial state payments mask the true political intentions: to silence his own people as much as possible.

What did receive the official seal of approval for the Serbian population, however, were the politically correct pop music stations of Slobo' s son Marko and daughter Marija.

Given this sad situation, all those in Serbia who stand up for the freedom of the press deserve our support.

This is not just verbal support, but also tangible support in the form of new transmission equipment being provided to the affected stations, following consultation, as stipulated in paragraph 3 of the present joint resolution.

Milosevic' s willing servants are then welcome to hold on to the confiscated technical equipment.

Mr President, the majority of the Security Council - France, China, Russia - is now in favour, subject to certain conditions, of lifting the embargo imposed on Iraq nearly ten years ago.

Imposed on the Iraqi people I should say.

The UN inspectors responsible for monitoring disarmament in Iraq have destroyed or ordered the destruction of the stocks of arms, material and products that could lead to the manufacture of weapons of mass destruction.

They have made sure that Iraq has no long-range missiles that could threaten its neighbours.

The International Atomic Energy Agency has concluded, after a number of investigations on the ground, that Iraq has no capacity to produce nuclear weapons, as has been confirmed by the reports of three groups of experts on Iraq, and as the UN Security Council' s Resolution 1284 confirms today.

That is why our resolution calls for this embargo to be lifted.

Nonetheless, the US Government refuses to definitively lift the embargo, on the pretext that Iraq has not respected its obligations.

Without offering the slightest proof, Washington continues to accuse Iraq of secretly manufacturing biological and chemical weapons.

In response to this concern - which, according to the experts, is unfounded - France has proposed to the Security Council that the lifting of the embargo be accompanied by further inspections relating to disarmament and by controls on Iraqi imports.

Washington has refused this proposal too, thus creating a situation which primarily hits the Iraqi people and not their leaders.

According to the UN humanitarian agencies, several hundreds of thousands of Iraqis, including some 500 000 children, have died prematurely because of the embargo, for lack of food, medicines or adequate care.

For the first time in ten years, an American delegation of advisors and congressmen published a report yesterday, on 14 March, on their return from a visit to Iraq. In it they call for the embargo to be lifted for humanitarian reasons.

According to that delegation, the 'oil for food' programme is a totally inadequate response to the urgent physical needs of the Iraqis.

Mr Eric Rouleau, the former French Ambassador, speaks of a slow-motion genocide.

Our resolution therefore calls for an end to this situation.

However, we also think we need a broader debate on this subject.

That is why we are not putting this resolution to the vote today.

On an issue as serious as this one, we prefer, first of all, to call for a Commission and Council declaration.

We are therefore proposing that this debate be deferred to the month of April.

At that time, we will endeavour to obtain the support of all those who want to bring this inhumane embargo to an end and to do so, needless to say, without giving Saddam Hussein' s regime a blank cheque.

Mr President, the situation before us arises from the Iraqi Government' s refusal to accept United Nations Resolution 1284.

As things stand at the moment, the Iraqi government is not prepared to accept this resolution, and there is a real danger that when the United Nations Commission responsible for monitoring the destruction of weapons of mass destruction applies for an entrance visa it will be refused.

The British and American Governments have already given it to be understood that, in this case, hostilities would be resumed.

It is therefore possible that, in a few months' time, we will have a major military clash on our hands, not just the ticking over of long drawn out hostilities as, sadly, is the case even now - the bombs continue to fall periodically - but large-scale bombings within the space of a few weeks.

I feel that we should focus our attention on the possibility of preventing this from happening.

I am sure that the Iraqi Government is prepared to accept Resolution 1284 - a fact confirmed by contact with the Iraqi leaders - but it needs clarification on certain points which are referred to in the Resolution.

It must be made clear that, at the end of the United Nations mission, the embargo will be lifted - not just suspended, but lifted once and for all.

No one will consider rebuilding Iraq if it is obvious that there will only be four months of stability, and that, after that, the embargo could be reimposed without fresh, credible reasons.

We have attempted to besiege Iraq and to force the Iraqi people to change their government through the embargo and we have not succeeded, even though we have been trying for seven and a half years.

Instead of driving the Iraqis to rebel against the regime in power, the embargo has induced them to hostility towards the West, and in any case, has made them incapable of any kind of action.

I feel that it would be more destabilising for the regime to return to a more comfortable situation in terms of trade, to a situation in which the people have at least some hope of happiness, rather than to continue with the embargoes which, at this stage, are not succeeding in overthrowing the regime, but are simply inflicting enormous suffering on the people and, in particular, on Iraqi children.

Iraqis are not going to die of starvation.

There is no famine, but there is an extremely serious health problem: the water and drainage systems have disintegrated and sewage water and drinking water mix, creating dysentery rates which send the infant mortality rate sky high.

The people need more than medicine: they need us to go out there and rebuild their water supply network, their drainage system and their power stations, restoring an adequate quality of life.

I feel that our resolution should also serve to reassure the State of Israel.

We must not forget that Iraq does not possess any nuclear weapons and is not likely to be able to produce any, but it is also true that if it did, its government, or part of it, would use them.

We must therefore make it clear to Israel that a major concern of our policy is the defence of the State of Israel and the right of the State of Israel to exist.

We must draw up a balanced resolution which is acceptable to all the parties involved if we want to avoid the military clash which is lurking over the horizon: not a demagogic declaration, but a political proposal in which Europe takes control in order to protect world peace, exercising its key role in this area with due responsibility.

Mr President, I must confess that I am extremely unhappy that we are not going to vote on this motion today.

With every passing moment, we are rushing towards the danger of a military clash which must be avoided.

I called for the issue to be debated during the last part-session, and I wonder at the fact that a month passed before our socialist friends managed to reach a consensus with us regarding a motion, even though there should not have been any difficulties as we agree on the basic points.

Nevertheless, I realise that it is also important for us to achieve as great a consensus as possible in order to give our governments a firm basis.

However, I call for no more time to be wasted, for I would not like us, as has happened in the past, to once again have to discuss what we should have done to preserve peace once war has already started.

Mr Buttiglione, if I may summarise, you are confirming the note the Chair has received in the meantime, on behalf of your Group, and in agreement with Mr Naïr, to the effect that this resolution will be withdrawn.

But the debate will continue, regardless of what is going to happen in the next part-session in April and which I hope will accord with the political wishes the two of you have expressed here.

So the debate continues and the resolutions are withdrawn.

Mr President, I too am sorry that the vote will not now be taking place.

I am concerned, as are the other speakers, at the plight of the people in Iraq.

One should never forget that the plight of the people in Iraq is being inflicted upon them by their own government.

We should not forget that in January this year Parliament passed a resolution asking that the Kuwaiti prisoners of war still imprisoned in Iraq should be released or at least that details should be given to their families and that there should be compliance with the United Nations resolutions.

That has not happened and we must be quite unequivocal in sending the message to Iraq, and indeed to the people of Kuwait, that we in Europe are not going to forget and are not going to ignore the plight of those people still being improperly imprisoned in Iraq.

We want to make that message as loud and clear and unequivocal as we possibly can.

Mr President, the UN sanctions have become a weapon of mass destruction, claiming at least 200 children's lives every day.

Dennis Halliday, who resigned from his position as director of the UN humanitarian mission in Iraq in protest at the sanctions, confirms the UNICEF statistics - five to six thousand children die every month as a direct result of the sanctions.

Mary Robinson, the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights, has been speaking out against the sanctions imposed in violation of international law, which prohibits the starving of civilians as a method of warfare.

She says: 'How can you expect me to condemn human rights abuses in Algeria, China and elsewhere when the United Nations themselves are responsible for the situation in Iraq?'

The UN economic sanctions have denied Iraqis spare parts to restore infrastructure, making water and airborne infectious disease rampant.

Furthermore, the shortage of medical and food aid has made deaths from these treatable diseases epidemic.

The UN estimates that five to six thousand children die unnecessarily each month due to sanctions, even after the UN food for oil programme.

The sanctions constitute relentless lethal force, and innocent Iraqi people caught between opposing forces are paying the price.

John Pilger's documentary two weeks ago on British television showed quite clearly what the situation is, and nobody with an ounce of humanitarian concern in them can ignore this plight and can persecute the innocent people who have no say over Saddam Hussein.

This is ridiculous: a war is being waged against voiceless children basically because the United States, and indeed the British, are supporting this kind of inhumanity to their fellow man.

Mr President, we are spending a few minutes discussing an issue which, although seemingly a long way from Europe, is really close by because, in today' s world, trouble spots can reverberate throughout the entire world.

It is in the interests of all of us to prevent a new crisis and a new war in Kashmir, because, in the final analysis, it would come down to a military conflict between two countries which are equipped with atomic weapons, which are striving for atomic weapons and which are prepared to acquire atomic weapons.

Whatever the details, whichever way you look at it, it is a damned dangerous situation which we have to avoid.

Without making a value judgement, I think that both countries, India and Pakistan, must exercise extreme restraint.

The one with regard to increasingly frequent violations of its borders and the other with regard to increasingly frequent proven discrimination against sections of the population, especially Muslim sections of the population in India.

I do not want to make an assessment, I do not want to put it on the scales, but both sides are guilty of fanaticism, in this case religious fanaticism and extremism, which is making this trouble spot more and more dangerous.

The European Union - and we have debated human rights, xenophobia and discrimination at length over the past few days - must fight against this extremism with all the means at its disposal wherever it occurs, at home, in the candidate countries or throughout the entire world.

We have to support all available initiatives.

We are not the ones in the hot seat when it comes to taking initiatives.

The United Nations and, without doubt, the United States of America find themselves in this position.

But it is incumbent upon us to state clearly that this conflict needs to be resolved, not exacerbated.

In this sense, Mr President, I consider it important for Europe to raise its voice and call on both countries, both India and Pakistan, to do whatever they can and to offer them both international aid if they consider that it is needed or makes sense in order to resolve this conflict.

What we must not do is keep quiet.

Mr President, I am pleased that we are debating this resolution today even though I would have preferred the ELDR resolution to have been the one we are debating.

India and Pakistan have carried on this conflict for over fifty years now.

There were UN resolutions that called for a plebiscite for the people of Kashmir all that time ago, and still nothing has happened.

It is even more important now that we find a solution, especially as both India and Pakistan are nuclear powers.

If there is another war across that border, I believe it could turn into a nuclear war, and that will be a problem not only for India and Pakistan and the people of Kashmir but for all of us.

That is why I hope India and Pakistan will come to the negotiating table, together with the people of Kashmir.

I would like to see either the European Union or the USA acting as an honest broker, as a mediator, to try to find an end to this dispute.

But whatever happens, the human rights abuses must stop.

We have daily reports of rapes, murder, torture, and a lot of people say, "Oh, this is an exaggeration" .

But when I was in Azad Kashmir and I went to one of the refugee camps a few years ago I was very moved by the first-hand accounts I heard.

I was even more moved when I went into a tent where the women and children were.

I went up to one woman and although we could not speak each other' s languages we stood there and hugged each other.

That woman was sobbing her heart out.

I could almost touch the pain, really feel the pain of that woman.

She was not acting it, she was not pretending it - nobody goes to a refugee camp for fun.

They were there because they had been tortured, they had been mistreated and they were escaping.

That was not an isolated incident, and it is still happening today.

They must come to the negotiating table.

Mr President, I am as delighted as others are that we are having this debate today for the first time in our elected parliament in this session.

It is long overdue, for the reasons which our previous speakers have already underlined.

Relations between India and Pakistan are indeed deteriorating, with Kashmir being a particular bone of contention.

Tensions are also being aggravated by the fact that these two countries are nuclear powers.

Indeed, in the Herald Tribune of Tuesday, March 14, 2000, the headline reads: "Nuclear war between India and Pakistan is a real possibility" .

For this reason alone, supported also by the well-known UN resolutions and the reference which has already been made to the constant violation of human rights, Kashmir is no longer a problem that can be swept under the carpet and not debated in this Parliament, as has happened for many years.

It is increasingly an international problem and one where mediation will, in my view, become essential.

So what can we do to bring long-term stability to this volatile region?

We discussed this issue when we met with members of the US Congress in our normal framework of delegations earlier this year.

The US is in favour of arbitration, but it strikes me that, when President Clinton visits these two countries next week, India should be asked to come to the negotiating table so that, together with Pakistan, it can find a long-term settlement to this Kashmir question.

Equally, the European Union should, when formulating policy towards South-East Asia, raise the profile of this issue in order that we in the Foreign Affairs Committee can have a more substantive reason to have a debate in our Chamber in a few months' time.

As these two approaches are made, this two-pronged approach by the European Union and the United States is, in my view, the best way to start the process for long-term peace and stability in this region.

Mr President, I am delighted that we can discuss this almost forgotten conflict. It has not been completely forgotten in the sense that political refugees who live in our own towns and neighbourhoods come and talk to us about this problem.

I am then often ashamed at how little influence we can exert as a huge economic power in the political field.

This is why I welcome the debate on this conflict today.

However, we should not just treat it as a conflict between Pakistan and India regarding the respective spheres of influence that the two countries want to see established.

Very often, the people who actually live there are not taken into account.

Although the UN resolutions of 1948 and 1949 stipulated that the fate of Kashmir and Jammu should be decided by a referendum under international supervision, this never actually happened.

India and Pakistan were supposed to attempt this on their own, but this only led to a whole raft of small conflicts which - and the previous speakers were right to underline this - have taken on more threatening proportions since both countries have become nuclear powers.

This appears to have awakened world opinion again.

I am convinced that international mediation is desirable and necessary.

I am therefore happy to concur with what Kofi Annan said concerning this matter, but I do hope that this will not prejudice the right to self-determination on the part of the peoples involved.

Mr President. Over a year ago, in February 1999, there was hope for new relations between India and Pakistan.

In the Lahore declaration, both presidents confirmed their determination to comply with the 1972 Simla agreement.

Unfortunately, the Lahore process came to a standstill during the clash over Kargil between May and July 1999.

The latest development in Kashmir is worrying.

We condemn the continuing human rights violations, the religious fanaticism, the sabotage and the terrorism.

The cause lies in activities by rebels who are operating across the border, across the line of control from the Pakistani side and systematically attacking unarmed civilians.

India has repeatedly accused the government and Islamabad of backing the guerrillas with technical and military know-how.

Border crossings have to be prevented along a 700 km stretch of country which is hard to monitor.

The political and military situation needs to be further stabilised in order to create a climate for bilateral talks.

The Indian government has already declared that it is prepared to resume negotiations, provided that the demarcation line is strictly adhered to and fundamentalist tendencies are checked.

When US President Clinton visits South-East Asia at the end of March - James Elles referred to this - and if we are to visit India in April as the SAARC delegation of the European Parliament, then the subject of Kashmir will need to go to the top of the agenda.

We must work on achieving a rapprochement between the two neighbouring states, the Islamic state of Pakistan and the multinational state of India.

It is up to Commissioner Patten and the high representative of the Council, Mr Solana, to ensure that the European Union has a chance to distinguish itself as a successful international mediator in conflict situations.

First, on the presidential elections in Peru, the Peruvian authorities invited both the EU presidency and the Commission to send observers to the elections.

A consultation took place between the Commission and the Member States, concluding that the situation does not justify the organisation and deployment of a full EU observation mission.

Some Member States announced, however, that they would be sending observers on a bilateral basis including, in some cases, representatives of their national parliaments.

They are also supporting the mission of observers of the Organisation of American States, led by the former Minister for Foreign Affairs of Guatemala, Mr Eduardo Stein.

On the human rights situation in Chechnya I have the following comments. The Commission is also deeply concerned about increasing evidence of human rights abuses in Chechnya.

We want Russia to comply with its OSCE/Council of Europe commitments and seek a political settlement, allow independent investigations on reported human rights abuses, improve the climate for an independent press to operate, and address the legitimate requests of humanitarian operators.

These issues are also mentioned in your resolution.

It was exactly these issues I discussed very directly with the Russian Government during my visit to the region at the beginning of February.

The Commission also reiterated this message through Foreign Minister Ivanov during the ministerial troika on 2 March, where we submitted to him a number of concrete proposals including ECHO assessment missions to Chechnya, NGO access and basic requests, visits of EU diplomats to the region before presidential elections to report on civil conditions, the humanitarian situation, alleged human rights abuses and investigations.

We are still waiting for an answer from the Russian authorities on these concrete proposals.

On the media situation in Serbia, the mounting series of actions taken against Studio B by the authorities last week are wholly unacceptable and we deplore them.

The increasing pressure put on the independent media shows just how important those media are.

The European Commission has made great efforts to support the independent media in Serbia.

In December 1999 we approved a EUR 3.3 million programme of support.

We have put aside an emergency envelope of funding which will be able to provide equipment and survival funds for these media, including such television stations as Studio B. The Commission is allocating new personnel for the implementation of media projects, and our contracts with beneficiaries have been streamlined to try and speed up the process of the delivery of grants.

Satellite equipment is being distributed across the region to Croatia, Bosnia-Herzegovina and Macedonia.

The European Commission's Europe-by-satellite service is continuing its support by making available time on its service for independent TV stations in Serbia to broadcast information which will reach the rest of the region and encourage exchange of programmes.

On Iraq, I have the following comments: the Commission is concerned about the unilateral Iraqi decision to oppose the acceptance of UN Security Council resolution 1284 and its subsequent delaying of the operation of the new monitoring instrument UNMOVIC and the easing of the sanction regime.

This will only prolong the crisis in Iraq.

Oil for food remains the best short-term option to alleviate the suffering of the Iraqi population.

In the longer term, the economic and social situation in Iraq can only be improved by increased economic activities stimulated by lifting sanctions.

Ways should be pursued to engage the Iraqi government in a dialogue on the implementation of UN Security Council resolutions which might lead to a gradual easing of sanctions.

But let us be clear - the key to the lifting of sanctions lies with the Iraqis.

The Commission has, since the Gulf War in 1991, been the major donor of humanitarian aid to Iraq, to the tune of over EUR 242 million.

Another EUR 8.6 million is allocated from the 2000 ECHO budget.

The Commission is, however, concerned about the restrictions imposed by the Iraqi Government on NGO operations, which may jeopardise the implementation of ECHO financed humanitarian aid programmes in Iraq.

Finally, Mr President, on the situation in Jammu and Kashmir, the Commission welcomes the European Parliament's deep concern regarding the Kashmir conflict reflected in the different draft resolutions.

The international community's concern for the region is a legitimate one, particularly as both sides possess nuclear weapons and as dialogue between them has, at this stage, effectively broken down.

Precisely because of this impasse and the high risks involved, third parties must adopt a balanced approach.

Third parties may urge both sides to de-escalate military confrontation in a structured way and resume comprehensive dialogue with a view to relaunching the Lahore peace process.

Pakistan should be asked to put a stop to infiltration of paramilitary personnel crossing over from their side of the line of control.

India should be encouraged to look for and explore the full potential towards internal political solutions to meet the expectations of the Jammu and Kashmir populations in line with the possibility for enhanced autonomy as enshrined in its constitution.

The Commission believes that a stand on the issue should take the present extreme sensitivity of the situation into account, especially with a view to the upcoming EU summit with India, where Kashmir will certainly be discussed.

Thank you very much, Commissioner Nielson.

The vote will take place today at 5.30 p.m., except on the situation in Iraq, as agreed.

The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions:

B5-0248/2000 by Mr Di Lello Finuoli, Mr Manisco and Mr Papayannakis, on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left/Nordic Green Left, on crime linked to illegal trafficking in Apulia (Italy);

B5-0259/2000 by Mr Procacci, on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party, on the fight against organised crime in South-East Europe;

B5-0267/2000 by Mr Lavarra and others, on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists, on the fight against organised crime;

B5-0274/2000 by Mrs Frassoni and others, on behalf of the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance, on the urgent situation created by crime linked to illegal trafficking in Apulia (Italy);

B5-0277/2000 by Mr Le Pen and others, on behalf of the Technical Group of Independent Members, on organised crime;

B5-0284/2000 by Mr Fitto and others, on behalf of the Group of the European People' s Party (Christian Democrats) and European Democrats, on organised crime.

Mr President, I support the motion for a joint resolution tabled by a large number of my fellow Members and supported by the most representative groups of this Parliament, for we must call urgently upon the governments of the Member States to intensify the fight against organised crime and make it more effective where, in addition to cigarette smuggling, this involves drug and arms trafficking and, even more importantly, the trafficking of human beings.

Italians are familiar with the difficulties of dealing with organised crime.

We are familiar with the way in which organised crime uses activities such as cigarette smuggling, which do not always seem, and I stress that this is only an illusion, to be very serious, in order to sabotage any possible opposition.

Europe has a major duty to promote the development of these new areas, many of which look set to join the Community, but there is every likelihood that all our investments will be in vain should we not succeed in defeating these organisations of gangsters which will otherwise reap all the benefit of our investments.

The means and resources donated by the European Community would not be used for healthy growth, but would serve to further strengthen the canker of underground organisations.

For this reason, I would draw attention to an extremely positive point of the resolution which calls upon the Community to monitor the economic and social development of the populations of the areas in question, because that is where we will achieve most.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, this is not the first time that we have dealt with the problem of organised crime in the European Union and there is a specific reason why we are doing so today in an urgent debate: the murder in Brindisi on 24 February of two officials of the Guardia di Finanza has again suddenly brought to light the danger faced by our colleagues in the security bodies of the Member States whose job is to protect the external borders of the European Union or work in regions which, because they are adjacent to the external borders of the European Union, are breeding grounds for organised crime.

Our colleagues in the public police departments do not only deserve our full solidarity and respect; above all, we owe it to them to acknowledge once and for all that, wherever we live in the European Union, officials of the Guardia di Finanza in Apulia, for example, and I say this as a German member of parliament, are protecting the territory and the citizens of my country.

I think that we in this European Parliament owe it to the relatives of the victims to acknowledge that respect for the dead is not an Italian but a European matter.

That is the first point which I wished to make here.

The second is a political challenge which, in my view, we are not taking seriously enough.

We talk of the need to combat organised crime efficiently and yet we too frequently overlook the fact that the European internal market which we ourselves have created, with freedom of movement of services, capital, goods and persons, has created a huge free zone of economic activity in which, wherever legal transactions can be freely conducted, illegal transactions can also be freely conducted.

In creating this huge legal economic area, we have also created a huge illegal economic area and it is now possible to operate on a large scale throughout the whole of Europe for the purposes of smuggling, trafficking in human beings, credit card fraud, drug trafficking, prostitution and every other possible form of serious crime.

However, the police counter-strategies needed still mainly come within the jurisdiction of the nation states.

The instruments to fight organised crime are organised at intergovernmental level.

Where I live, in the district of Aachen, there is a town called Herzogenrath.

The Netherlands are on one side of the street and Germany is on the other and if you rob a bank on the German side and escape to the Dutch side in time, then you are lucky because no German police is allowed to follow you.

This is a practical example of the difficulties inherent in the fight against organised crime and clearly illustrates the need for a cross-border, or rather a pan-European approach.

The point I wish to make is that, when it comes to serious crime which can only be combated at a pan-European level, the European Union needs independent operational powers for the European police agencies under the control of the European Parliament.

I think that, as politicians in the Council, the Commission and Parliament, we owe it to those who fall victim to increasing organised crime to create the instruments needed to fight organised crime efficiently.

Mr President, for a long time, cigarette smuggling has had a rather romantic appeal in Italy, which it acquired particularly after the war thanks to the influence of neorealist films.

However, the events taking place in Puglia and the South of Italy are not at all romantic.

Quite the opposite. The tragic death of two customs and excise officers is a European issue as well as a question of Italian public safety, and it is not just a question of European safety, but also, and above all, an issue which has a bearing on our relations with our neighbours across the Adriatic.

The European Union is making a substantial contribution to the reconstruction of the former Yugoslavia.

The actions of the local authorities and our initiatives to assist them are absolutely vital elements in the fight against organised crime, and are therefore also crucial for the safety of Europeans.

We regret that the joint resolution did not take up our suggestion to make the new reconstruction programmes conditional upon an undertaking by the governments of the former Yugoslavia to cooperate actively in the fight against organised crime.

However, we hope that the Council and the Commission will be able to mobilise these governments through their endeavours and that an effective action of this kind will be instigated at the Conference scheduled for 19 and 20 May, in which both institutions are to take part.

Mr President, the Tampere Summit last year took note of the extremely difficult situation of some of the regions of Europe, and set the date for the forthcoming Conference of 19 and 20 May next which is on the very subject of the security and development of this area.

Europe is attempting to enlarge its borders and create an area of freedom, security and justice.

The Adriatic is a border and so is the Ionian Sea.

If we want to give weight to the processes of European enlargement, we must reassure our citizens, our fellow citizens who live in those areas, that our words are not just hot air but authentic projects which will genuinely affect their situation, and that, when we talk of law and security, we will provide them with the necessary means, conditions and systems.

We have already paid too high a price in deaths - too many civilians gave their lives in the raids in Puglia - and we have lost too many men from the forces of law and order.

In consideration also of the existence of the Stability Pact, we need to take practical steps to show that the enlargement of Europe will also mean greater security for our people.

Mr President, when it comes to this issue, I am in two minds.

On the one hand, it is only natural - and I was the rapporteur for enlargement to the east and internal security - that we need to worry about higher security standards, not only in the candidate countries, as we do in the EU itself, but of course in all other European countries.

We need a pan-European system of internal security, and here the Balkans are naturally a special cause for concern because we have assumed responsibility in Kosovo and the neighbouring regions.

On the other hand, however, we must take care not to classify certain peoples in a particular manner.

We are therefore against point 4 of the joint resolution which names Montenegro.

Of course, Montenegro also has internal security problems, as we do in the EU for that matter.

But Montenegro presently faces a huge threat; as you will have heard, and as officially confirmed by NATO yesterday, Milosevic has again started military operations against Montenegro.

We must be careful not to give him an excuse.

Therefore, solidarity in the fight against organised crime, yes, but please, no specific passage on Montenegro; just support for Montenegro in its struggle for greater freedom.

Mr President, I consider the consensus reached in this Chamber on the need for a new initiative to fight organised crime very important, in particular because of the realisation which spread from the Group on behalf of which I am speaking, that the dramatic events in Brindisi are not just an issue which is confined to the Region of Puglia, but that they draw on values, principles and objectives which are an integral part of the new European policy and on the question of justice and security for the citizens of the Union.

Parliament and the institutions of the Union must take due account of this perspective and provide a rational response to the fear and insecurity experienced by the citizens in the face of crime, and it must fight all aspects of crime, including those who resort to brutal violence with no qualms about killing the forces of law and order and defenceless citizens, and the supranational financial and economic criminal organisations.

The links between criminal groups in different countries and the increasingly wide geographical spread of crime call for a supranational response.

After all, security is one of Europe' s objectives in the Treaty of Amsterdam and was on the agenda of the European Council held in Tampere in the autumn of 1999.

We hope that substantial decisions similar to those proposed in Tampere will be taken regarding the creation of common investigation groups, a European police academy and a genuine European judiciary such as EUROJUS.

This is the path we must take, taking due account of the fight against crime taking place in the Balkan States in our relations with these countries.

Finally, may I also express my sympathy for the families of the victims and recognise before this Chamber the extreme sense of duty shown by those two officers in that tragic event which took place on 24 February.

The Commission has examined with great interest the resolution concerning the threat posed by the development of illicit activities of criminal groups operating in several countries of south-eastern Europe.

We share the preoccupation expressed in the resolution as to the risk of seeing the reconstruction and development efforts in the context of the Stability Pact being jeopardised by international criminal networks that engage mainly in trafficking in human beings, trafficking in drugs and arms as well as in smuggling of goods.

Clearly a lot of these criminal activities have serious negative consequences for the Community and its Member States.

As you are aware, the European Council has shown its strong determination to fight against organised crime and has demonstrated the need for a coherent and coordinated approach by adopting in June 1997 an Action Plan to Combat Organised Crime.

Although many actions envisaged aim to encourage cooperation between the fifteen Member States, the plan does not neglect the need also to develop wider forms of international cooperation.

The tangible result has been the conclusion by the Council in 1998 of the Pre-accession Pact on cooperation against crime with the candidate countries.

As regards the specific question raised by the resolution and related to the situation in the Balkans, the Commission agrees that there is a real danger of massive development of organised crime activities if no coherent and coordinated action is set up in this region associating the various donors as well as the international and regional actors.

The Commission considers that the Member States have a crucial role to play in providing their expertise and human resources in supporting specialised projects in the fight against various criminal activities in the Balkan region, including the fight against corruption.

The Commission considers that it can prove and provide a useful input to the Stability Pact by combining the Member States' expertise and the Community funds in order to set up well-targeted anti-crime projects and activities.

In this respect, the Commission is also ready to act as a coordinator and in close consultation with the special coordinator of the Stability Pact.

Furthermore, I have to underline that the Commission is preparing a proposal for a new specific financial instrument which will provide a global legal basis for the Community assistance to the whole region.

An official proposal will be presented to the Council by the end of this month and we hope that a new regulation will come into force as soon as possible, hopefully just after the summer break.

The Commission remains convinced of the crucial importance of making all the necessary efforts to support effective measures for the fight organised crime and is determined to develop, within this new framework, regional projects covering the field of justice and home affairs.

In addition, the Commission is already in a position to announce that, under its programming of the assistance envelope of regional programmes for 2000, around EUR 2 m have been earmarked for projects within the field of justice and home affairs.

Furthermore, as regards trafficking in certain goods such as the smuggling of cigarettes, and insofar as this traffic also affects the Community's territory and its financial interests, OLAF has set up multi-disciplinary and multinational task groups.

These groups work to combat organised crime whose transnational dimension has been demonstrated on several occasions.

They have been established to provide support and operational assistance that focuses its investigations on the sectors and products which are most vulnerable to fraud, which is the case for cigarettes.

The results of the activities of these task groups recorded over the last few years are particularly significant.

In 1996, for instance, cigarette smuggling, mainly in the transit regime, totalled ECU 800 m.

The overall financial impact of fraud detected in this area in 1997 was an estimated ECU 1.6 bn covering Community own resources and national revenue.

The number of inquiries against cigarette smuggling even increased in 1998, although the financial impact was lower than in the previous years.

This can be explained by the continuation of large international inquiries and the success in the fight against cigarette smuggling from Andorra and against the black market in Spain.

All in all we take these threats to the Community very seriously and will continue working hard to fight them.

Thank you very much, Commissioner Nielson.

The vote will take place today at 5.30 p.m.

The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions:

B5-0243/2000 by Mrs Maij-Weggen and Mr Bowis, on behalf of the Group of the European People' s Party (Christian Democrats) and European Democrats, on the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES);

B5-0249/2000 by Mr Sjöstedt and others, on behalf of the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance, on the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES);

B5-0260/2000 by Mr Davies and others, on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party, on the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES);

B5-0269/2000 by Mrs Roth-Behrendt, on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists, on the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES);

B5-0275/2000 by Mr de Roo and Mrs Isler Béguin, on behalf of the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance, on the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES).

Mr President, first of all, I would like to apologise on behalf of Mrs Maij-Weggen, who submitted this resolution.

She has had to leave earlier on account of a death and funeral in the family.

It is not the first time in this House that the CITES Convention is being mentioned.

Over the years, this Convention, with its 148 signatories, has saved many plants and animals threatened with extinction.

This often followed robust campaigning on the part of the environmental and animal-protection lobby, campaigns which were adopted many times over by the European Parliament, the national parliaments and also, for example, by the American Congress.

Once again, it seems unlikely that the correct decisions will be taken at the CITES meeting in Nairobi and once again, we will be stepping in to prevent the wrong decisions from being taken.

In this intervention, I would like to focus on three risks.

The first risk concerns the fact that a number of southern African countries have proposed moving the African elephant from appendix I to appendix II, which means that the controlled hunt will be allowed.

Together, these countries would like to harvest more than 50 tonnes of ivory. We urge the Commission and Member States not to go along with this.

The list of illegally traced ivory is already so extensive that a legal hunt would only exacerbate the problem.

In the light of the fact that over a twenty-year period, the entire population of the African elephant has plummeted from 1.3 million to 625 000, we have now reached a critical level, as is widely known.

A second risk which I would like to point out is Norway' s and Japan' s proposal to re-legalise the hunt for the minke whale in the North Atlantic and the Southern Pacific.

Again we are opposed to this, if only because these lovely animals are already being hunted down by both countries.

Re-legalisation would only further reward bad behaviour.

In addition, this minke whale is an endangered species and it would be preferable to keep to the arrangement to protect all whales.

Finally, I would like to give a third example. Cuba has requested to move the hawksbill turtle back to appendix II.

This is the result of a typically isolated view of an animal generally threatened with extinction.

As this species mainly lays its eggs in Cuba, people think that there are plenty of them and would like to kill 500 of these tortoises per annum, only to serve them up at exclusive restaurants, with the shells being sold off to Japan.

This would be a tremendous incentive to continuing the illegal hunt.

Cuba should be ashamed of itself, making this proposal, and what is more, their own proposal does not even meet the ideology adopted by Cuba itself, to which, incidentally, I do not subscribe either.

In a nutshell, these are three examples from a series of proposals in Nairobi which cause us great concern.

We urge the Commission and Member States not to support this type of proposal but to keep CITES as it is.

Let us not start this century on a bad note but on a good note and work together to ensure that no more plants and animals are threatened with extinction.

Mr President, as the previous speaker said, this resolution is addressed to the parties to the CITES Convention meeting in Nairobi in April.

We are addressing them to try to preserve species under renewed threat, species like the Asian pangolin, the gorillas of the Congo, the elephants - through the sale of ivory - and the other species mentioned in the resolution.

I want to refer briefly to three essential measures which ought to be taken in Nairobi in the days ahead.

The first is providing information and raising awareness amongst the public, the buyers and sellers.

The second is sanction mechanisms against those who have not yet adopted legal measures to stop poachers, in particular, benefiting from impunity.

And the third is cooperation with developing countries, because sometimes trafficking and trading in threatened species is the only way to survive in their rural areas.

Mr President, protecting animal and plant species which are threatened with extinction is about more than just preserving the natural riches.

It is about a battle between civilisation and barbarism.

Maintaining bio-diversity is also about more than preventing the extinction of certain animal species, however important these may be, such as elephants and whales.

Since the individual species are unable to stand up for themselves, we need to do this for them, at home or elsewhere.

This means, for example, that the international transport of tropical animals must be regulated.

Even today, there are scandalous cases of abuse, both in legal and illegal transportation.

Over-exploitation and misuse cannot be explained by poverty alone.

They often involve ruthless traders who only have their own self-interests at heart.

Although we may not be aware of it, huge numbers of animals are also the victims of natural disasters and especially wars in Africa.

Animals are, by definition, not just there for our amusement.

It is only right that a civilised society should give their beastly fate more attention.

Mr President, at the previous CITES conference, the European Parliament almost unanimously adopted a resolution to accord the African elephant the highest status of protection.

The African elephant is still a threatened animal species, according to the IUCN.

Fourteen EU Ministers faint-heartedly abstained from the vote and, as a result, legalised the shooting of elephants in Africa.

The Dutch Minister was the only one to vote for the conservation of the elephant.

Between 10 and 20 April next, the fate of this elephant will once again feature on the agenda of the world community.

Kenya, the hosting nation, and India have tabled the proposal to grant the African elephant full protection once again.

Shooting elephants in order to sell their tusks to Japan and then giving the proceeds away - at least on paper - to protect wild animals is a perverse kind of logic.

Besides which, it does not work.

South Africa, Botswana, Namibia and Zambia want to shoot even more elephants now.

This blood money also ends up in the wrong hands.

I would call on the 15 Environment Ministers, including the 6 Green Ministers, to show courage and to grant the African elephant full protection once again on 30 March during the Environmental Council.

Full protection is also needed for the hawksbill turtle which is only to be found in Cuba.

In the space of three generations, more than 80% of the population has disappeared.

Regarding the African elephant and the hawksbill turtle, the European Commission gives priority to the blood trade with Japan.

Mr President, the European Community is not a party to CITES.

The present text of the Convention permits only individual countries to join.

The Gaborone amendment to the CITES text from 1983 would allow us to become a party to the Convention.

However, this amendment has not yet entered into force due to the insufficient number of CITES parties who have ratified it.

The Commission continues its diplomatic efforts to ensure that a sufficient number of ratifications are made in order to allow the Community to play a more proactive role in this important Convention.

Notwithstanding the fact that we are not yet a party, the Community possesses legislation to implement CITES.

This legislation is amongst the most thorough and comprehensive of its kind in the world.

The Commission's policy is based on both conservation and sustainable use, principles recognising that peoples and states are the best protectors of their own wild fauna and flora.

Concerning the specific matters in Parliament's resolutions, we agree on the need to step up enforcement measures in the field of wildlife trade in India.

We will approach the Indian authorities along the lines suggested, and continue to do all we can to support and further the objectives of CITES.

Concerning the proposals for the forthcoming Conference of the CITES parties, the Commission has yet to adopt a formal proposal.

However, our general orientation on the major issues is as follows:

On whales, the Community's position should be unambiguous.

No return to commercial whaling until the International Whaling Commission deems that the appropriate management controls are in place.

We should therefore oppose the Japanese and Norwegian proposals to restart the trade.

On African elephants, we favour the maintenance of the status quo until a clear picture emerges of the impact of the international trade that was permitted in 1997.

We should not support any of the proposals that have been made.

Concerning the Cuban sea-turtle proposals, the Community should oppose the resumption of the regular annual trade in shells.

We need, however, to hold a more open position on the disposal of the Cuban shell stockpiles until we know the position of the neighbouring countries to Cuba.

Finally, on sharks, there is cause for concern, and the proposal on basking sharks should, in particular, be supported.

Here, however, CITES will need to work closely with regional fisheries bodies and the UN Food and Agriculture Organisation.

Thank you very much, Commissioner Nielson.

The vote will take place today at 5.30 p.m.

Mr President, I see from my order paper that the vote on the situation in Iraq has been withdrawn.

Can I be told at whose request, and what reasons were given for withdrawing that?

It was not the vote which was withdrawn; on the contrary, the movers of the motions themselves withdrew both their motions.

If there is no motion to vote on, then obviously no vote can then be held.

I am not aware of the reasons which prompted the movers of the motions to do this - you must ask them yourself - but clearly, if they have been withdrawn, then we cannot vote on them.

Perhaps Mr Swoboda can briefly explain what is behind this.

Mr President, you are quite right, we have withdrawn the motions for resolutions.

If I may briefly explain, we withdrew them because we shall be holding a longer, more detailed debate on this subject during the next Strasbourg session.

I think that it makes more sense, given the worsening situation in Iraq, to hold a debate once the Council and Commission have made statements detailing their position rather than under the urgency procedure.

That was our reason for withdrawing them.

Mr President, may I confirm that what Mr Swoboda just said applies equally to the EPP-ED Group.

We have withdrawn our motion for a resolution for the same reasons, i.e. the debate scheduled for April.

Thank you, Mrs Grossetête, I think the reasons are now clear.

Mr Buttiglione wishes to raise a point of order.

Mr President, I withdrew my motion in spite of my conviction that we are mistaken not to take the opportunity to intervene, now that it is time to do so and we have the possibility of achieving a general consensus on the matter.

I would stress that this is the second time that the adoption of this motion has been deferred and I hope that events do not reach crisis level before we are able to attempt to influence the situation to bring about peace.

We shall now proceed to the vote.

Mr President, although it would have been better if we had voted at lunchtime, I am happy to go ahead now.

Mr President, I support the proposal by my friend, the very honourable member, Baroness Ludford, with pleasure.

Let us proceed with the vote.

Mr President, I should just like to ask why the sudden change of mind by the members.

Mr Posselt, I suggest that you ask them yourselves later.

I do not want a public debate in plenary on the matter.

Before the vote on Amendment 53

Mr President, on behalf of the GUE/NGL Group, I wish to withdraw Amendments 53 and 55 relating to paragraph 17 of the report.

It does indeed seem that the wording of these two amendments could give rise to conflicting interpretations, especially in certain language versions.

I am against ethnic classifications, because that would stigmatise immigrants.

Amendments 53 and 55 called for the term "ethnic" to be deleted.

The use of the word "data" could be taken as referring to statistics on the incidence of racism and discrimination, which could be useful; but it could also be taken as referring to the introduction of files, with all the problems that implies and which we also discussed in relation to Eurodac.

Those are the reasons why I decided to withdraw these two amendments.

Mr President, I am grateful to Mr Sylla for withdrawing these two amendments.

But I wanted to ask him whether he does not think the same problem could arise with the part of the first sentence of Amendment 54 that has not been changed and which, in the English version I have before me, reads: "stresses that the EU must collect reliable ethnic data as a basis for review" . I am concerned specifically with the terms "reliable ethnic data" and wonder whether Mr Sylla could perhaps table an oral amendment relating to this notion of "ethnic data" ?

The mover of the motion had the foresight to withdraw the motion before the vote.

We are not therefore voting on it.

(Parliament approved the motion for a resolution)

Mr President, I do not want to delay the proceedings, I just want to ask the Bureau to consider refusing to accept any more motions for deletion in the future which delete entire paragraphs so that we can avoid the problem which has arisen today.

I would ask for this to be considered.

Mr Swoboda, this is to do with the fact that, in our wisdom, we changed the agenda and, if I remember correctly, because I sit behind you, you too voted in favour at the time.

If you have now changed your mind, you must submit a motion to amend the agenda again and then I shall gladly proceed otherwise.

Mr President, I freely admit that I have room for improvement.

Mr Swoboda, that applies to both of us!

Mr President, on a point of order, I am very pleased that this report has gone through.

We spent a very long time voting on this.

Most of these amendments were put down either by members of the technical group of racists or by the EPP on positions that they lost in committee.

We should not be spending so long voting on amendments put down when they lost their position earlier on.

We could have done it much more quickly because the position has been quite clear.

You have touched on a fundamental problem which has to do with the way in which this has been entered on the agenda.

If, according to the agenda, these proposed amendments have been submitted in time, then the President will call them and deal with them as usual.

Mr Speroni wishes to raise a point of order.

Mr President, I do not know whether there has been an interpreting error, but Mr Evans called us the "technical group of racists" , whereas we are the Technical Group of Independent Members.

I am certain it was a problem of translation.

Report (A5-0055/2000) by Mr Belder, on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy, on the Commission communication [COM(1999)256 - C5-0094/1999 - 1999/2099(COS)] on countering racism, xenophobia and antisemitism in the candidate countries

(Parliament approved the motion for a resolution)

Report (A5-0067/2000) by Mrs Read, on behalf of the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy, on Europe - An Information Society For All: Commission initiative [COM(1999)687 - C5-0063/2000 - 2000/2034(COS)] for the Special European Council in Lisbon on 23/24 March 2000

(Parliament approved the motion for a resolution)

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, this is the first explanation of vote which I have given in many years and my first explanation of vote as chairman of the EPP-ED Group.

Unfortunately, our Group was unable, for a number of fundamental reasons, to vote in favour of the Ludford report on countering racism and xenophobia in the European Union.

We take the view that a good cause, namely the fight against racism and xenophobia, is being abused for extraneous objectives and that the report deals with topics which have nothing to do with racism and the fight against racism and xenophobia.

Most of our group therefore abstained or voted against.

Firstly: the Ludford report flouts and violates the underlying principle of subsidiarity by calling in points 4, 6, 27 second indent, 11 and 20 for measures such as the recruitment of third country nationals to public office or formal requirements to change curricula and teacher training programmes.

Secondly: the report deals with matters which have absolutely nothing to do with the subject of the report by calling in points 19, 22 and 30 for measures such as rights for third country nationals to vote in local and European elections.

Thirdly: the Ludford report addresses matters which lie outside the time framework of the report and have nothing whatsoever to do with the report.

And I want - and I would prefer if more people listened, especially those who are about to leave - I want to highlight the absurdity of this report and I regret having to say this about this report in particular.

Its absurdity lies in the fact that not only fewer than one-third of the members voted, but a statement was made about a Member State of the European Union, namely Austria, a statement to the effect that Parliament subscribes to the sanctions of the fourteen Member States.

Parliament decided by a large majority, following a passionate debate in February in Brussels, not to subscribe to these sanctions and today, with such a small minority, with so few present, we are subscribing to these sanctions.

There are two reasons for this: first, because it is an issue which is extraneous to the subject of the report and, secondly, because we are dealing with an issue which was decided a long time ago by a large majority.

My Group has therefore been compelled either to abstain or to vote against the report.

Mr President, I voted against this report because I judge a good bottle of wine by its contents, not its label.

This report may well have an anti-racism label, but it contains an indigestible brew of ideologically confused nonsense and does not merit the title of an anti-racism report.

This report is beyond improvement and I warn the House not to continue making a fool of itself with such absurd reports, because the issue of anti-racism is too important to be used as the basis for some sort of ideological show battle.

Although we do not agree with many of the recitals in the report on countering racism and xenophobia, we voted for that report because it takes a stance against discrimination and in favour of the rights of minorities.

Yet we certainly do not go along with the way Parliament is congratulating itself.

First of all, because most of the proposals to promote the rights of minorities and immigrants remain vague and are not binding.

Secondly, because of the hypocrisy involved in pretending to stand up for immigrants and minorities while conducting an anti-immigrant domestic policy, if only in the form of hunting down immigrants who do not have proper papers.

Finally, the report says nothing whatsoever about the deep-rooted economic and social reasons, in particular the rate of unemployment and the worsening poverty among a growing section of the population, that encourage demagogues of the racist and xenophobic extreme right to stir up unrest.

Mr President, I am speaking on behalf of the Spanish delegation to the Group of the European People' s Party to explain why we abstained in the vote. Abstention does not normally mean taking a clear position but in this case it does.

We abstained because, on the one hand, we support the symbolism and principles of the fight against racism and xenophobia, and some of the points in this report contain important statements, for example, paragraph 8, on the functions of the European Racism and Xenophobia Information Network and paragraph 24, which invites the Member States to prioritise some very specific issues in this fight, to mention only two.

But, on the other hand, by contrast with the Haarder report which we voted for this morning, this report is long on radical demagoguery and short on legal rigour.

Now this Parliament, as co-legislator, should know that any statement it makes has either legal value or, as in this case, quasi-legal value, and that is why greater care must be taken.

Let me give you just one example of this: paragraph 22, which seeks to give substance to European citizenship, by granting rights to vote in European and local elections to third country nationals resident in the Community.

That obviously violates the Treaty right away.

And I could give further examples of this kind of thing to justify our abstention.

Mr President, I should like to give a very brief explanation on behalf of the Austrian delegation of Socialists.

We voted in favour of this report because we believe that, a few statements notwithstanding, it is a good report, and I find the way in which parts of this report have been described during the explanations of vote totally unjustified.

We would have preferred a statement in keeping with the European Parliament' s resolution on Austria.

But as this point was accepted nonetheless, we voted in favour of the report on account of its fundamentally positive thrust.

Mr President, I am a firm supporter of the fight against any form of racism and xenophobia, but I abstained from the vote on Mrs Ludford' s resolution because I see it as one of those hotchpotch resolutions that tries to cover all manner of things and sometimes contradicts itself.

I do not think this kind of resolution does any credit to our Parliament.

- My Group and I are pleased to have voted for and supported the Ludford report which is concerning the important subject of the fight against racism and xenophobia.

Those who have voted to oppose family unity; to oppose encouragement for ethnic minorities to participate in elections; against a policy force that reflects Europe's diversity and against multi-ethnic parliaments are to be deplored and condemned.

The British Labour members and the PSE Group voted in favour of Amendment 2 to delete paragraph 17, not because we opposed the sentiments and intentions, but as it was open to possible misinterpretation or charges of ambiguity.

The fight against the racists and xenophobes in our society, those who seek to divide Europe, is one that must and will be won.

(SV) We conservatives support most of the measures against racism and xenophobia in the Ludford report.

We are, nonetheless, abstaining from voting in the final vote because we believe that labour market legislation is an area to which the subsidiarity principle ought to be applied, as mentioned in paragraph 17.

- (FR) The Ludford report on countering racism and xenophobia, like the Haarder report on human rights in the European Union that is also before us, seem inspired by some malevolent spirit that is prompting them to go beyond the legitimate protection of the rights linked to human dignity and to methodically destroy, one by one, all the bastions of citizenship, regardless indeed of whether it is national or even European.

Both reports give the impression of aiming to defend the rights of an indiscriminate individual, who could be living anywhere at all on this planet, rather than the rights of individuals situated in time and space, who have inherited certain traditions, who uphold their own values, i.e. precisely the citizens of our respective countries, who have sent us here to protect them, and for no other purpose.

I think the approach taken in these reports is a kind of violation of our terms of reference.

For instance, the Ludford report proclaims equality between European citizens and third country nationals and goes so far as to propose that non-nationals can be employed as European officials in the same way as Member State nationals, or that they enjoy the same rights of unchecked freedom of movement and family reunification as EU nationals.

The differences are being ironed out at every level, for the Haarder report also supports equal rights for same-sex couples and the traditional family.

The two reports also join forces in calling for the right of immigrants to vote and stand for election in local and European elections.

I think that second category is highly significant.

For even if supposedly practical reasons could sometimes be trumped up for calling for their participation in local elections, the significance of their participation in European elections is purely ideological. Its aim is to show that the future Europe must not be a super-nation (even if there is a super-state) but, on the contrary, an open field, a crossing point where the rights taken away from the nations would be redistributed all over the world.

Another revealing point common to both reports is that they call for the proposed new 'rights' to be enshrined in the Charter of Fundamental Rights of EU citizens, now being drafted, on which I gave my views the day before yesterday during the debate on the Duff­Voggenhuber report.

And, of course, they insist that, in future, this document must be legally binding on the Member States.

That is another aspect that shows that this Charter, if it really was adopted in the form called for by the European Parliament - but which we will oppose absolutely - would have the effect of a mechanism for reducing the powers of the nations.

Here as ever we see that the European level is the point of least resistance in face of pressure groups, of extraneous minorities, even of foreign interests.

And once again we draw the same lesson: the citizens must keep a close guard on their powers and only delegate them where necessary to transparent institutions, devoted to their defence and over which they have full control.

- (DA) We are in favour of the humanitarian angle from which the report has been drawn up.

We are in favour of the report focusing upon the breeding grounds for racism and xenophobia in Europe.

We think it is important to combat racism and xenophobia by guaranteeing citizens the rights to education, access to the labour market etc. It is also positive that the report should recommend that citizens of third countries should have better opportunities for integration.

For the aforesaid reasons, we have chosen to vote in favour of the report, since we basically think it is extremely important to combat racism and xenophobia.

We would emphasise, however, that we cannot support the means of combating racism and xenophobia that the report recommends.

We believe that measures such as drawing up a common asylum policy and establishing EURODAC - which would cause asylum seekers to be viewed with suspicion - would not further the fight against racism and xenophobia.

- (FR) I congratulate the rapporteur on the quality of her work on the European Commission' s report on the implementation of the European Year Against Racism (1997).

Recent events in Austria demonstrate that it is, alas, still necessary today to combat racism, antisemitism and xenophobia.

As the report points out, we really must express "horror at the entry into Government in Austria of Jörg Haider' s Freedom Party" .

Let me take this opportunity to repeat that we must keep up the pressure on the Austrian Government and continue to encourage public debate.

For there is indeed a strong risk that people will simply become used to the situation.

I repeat: the great risk is that it will become part of everyday life.

This open breach of the founding principle of our European Union, namely unconditional respect for fundamental rights, must not create a precedent.

Throughout Europe, extreme right-wing parties are hoping to exploit the entry into power of this coalition with its fascist connotations.

So it is our duty as European democrats to remain vigilant, to tempt this government into a foolish mistake that will lead to its fall.

I personally am prepared to take this fight to the bitter end.

Like the rapporteur, I believe that the ethnic, religious, cultural and linguistic diversity of Europe is a source of vitality and that it is essential for Europe' s future economic prosperity and social success.

That is why the public authorities of the Member States and the EU institutions must actively promote racial equality and take concrete action to achieve greater ethnic diversity among their staff.

I also agree that leading the fight against racism and xenophobia and the promotion of equal opportunities should be an explicit responsibility allocated to one European Commissioner.

One other proposal deserves our full attention.

The report urges the Member State authorities to include, as formal requirements of school curricula and teacher training programmes, the teaching of Europe and its role in the world, including slavery and colonialism, and the history and culture of minority communities, the dangers of racism, xenophobia and intolerance, including the Holocaust and antisemitism, and the imperative of racial tolerance and the value of diversity.

Coming back to Austria, one reason why it has come to this extreme situation is perhaps that this country does not have a sufficiently objective memory of the past.

Let me conclude by asking for consideration to be given, in the framework of the IGC, to possibly amending the Treaty of Amsterdam, specifically its Article 7 which concerns action against any Member State guilty of a "serious and persistent breach" of fundamental freedoms and rights.

(PT) We cannot fight racism and xenophobia only by legislating against them. What we really need are measures aimed at effecting a sea change in the underlying causes of the conditions which allow these phenomena to spread.

The report we are debating deals with a series of points we fully agree with, aiming principally at guaranteeing the fundamental rights of the citizens of third countries who choose one of the Member States of the European Union as a place of work and residence.

It is especially worth highlighting the need to give the citizens of third countries resident in the European Union political rights, by granting them the right to vote in local and European elections.

For those reasons, our vote is in favour of the report.

- As a former Minister in the UK for race relations I am very much aware of the need to look constantly for ways of improving relations between all groups and interests in the population.

This requires a careful mixture, firstly of education, and only when absolutely necessary, of legislation.

This report totally fails to provide a balanced approach.

It is gesture politics at their worst with the clear ideology of the author taking precedence over good sense.

It is damaging through its stridency.

It gives no credit for the great achievements in race relations in EU states.

It offers only a defeatist agenda, not one of a positive nature.

It insults those who are trying to improve a situation and therefore it is offensive to many.

In short, it is an abuse of the opportunities offered by our Parliament to debate and determine issues like this which are vital and important and deserve better than this approach.

Those of us who really care know the great difficulties of this subject.

We simply cannot support such an appalling set of proposals, particularly as Baroness Ludford's approach could have the unfortunate result of turning the majority against the minority rather than harmonising relations.

This report would undermine rather than improve race relations.

That cannot be a desirable outcome.

- (FR) Sarah Ludford' s report is a masterpiece of morbid and destructive rage against the identities of the peoples and nations of Europe, their rights to be different, their rights to make their own choices, to be their own masters, to refuse social, cultural and institutional disintegration.

This pathological, fanatical and obsessive 'anti-racist' mania is being used merely as a psychological lever in the process of colonising Europe and forcing its people into submission.

The sole purpose of this frenzied attempt to heap guilt on the Europeans, who are in fact generous, welcoming, open to other cultures, anything but racist or intolerant, is to make them accept the unacceptable, to persuade them to submit in silence to a mass, general colonisation, to a new society in which they will become no more than a subjugated minority.

The moral inquisition, propaganda and constant psychological conditioning to which we are being subjected are worthy of the most despicable methods applied in the communist regimes' 're-education' camps.

But this report will at least have the merit, thanks to the Baroness and her cronies, of letting us find out who the new collaborators are.

- (FR) Europe is facing real difficulties today.

Like it or not, it is not the path of glory it aspired to be for the citizens of the Member States.

It reflects what it is, namely a remote and restrictive machine whose sole purpose seems to be to enact finicky legislative rules obviously aimed at centralisation and standardisation.

It is against that background that this year, as ever, we are once again debating human rights in the world and in the Union, accompanied this time by a debate on countering racism in the European Union and the candidate states.

That could have allowed us to inject a little 'soul' into a system sadly in need of it.

But that was not to be.

The rapporteur, the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs and the plenary have served us up documents that smell of death.

These pseudo-defenders of the rights of man have quite simply forgotten that man is not a concept, a point in a political programme.

The human being has a dignity, a mission that are far superior, if not contrary, to what is being put before us today.

Respect for the human being means recognising that his legitimate rights correspond to legitimate obligations, that he must exercise his freedom responsibly, that his natural dignity presupposes moral points of reference.

It is not a question of restricting that freedom but, on the contrary, of becoming aware that man lives within a family and national community, that his humanity imposes rules on him, failing which civilisation becomes synonymous with barbarism.

I would not so much say that the European Parliament has missed an opportunity as that it has once again been true to itself, libertarian and, in the final analysis, liberticidal.

- (FR) I could not vote for the report by Baroness Ludford and I want my abstention to be perceived as an expression of strong contempt, because of the incongruities and exaggerations contained in certain passages of this report.

Various exaggerated statements and demands, especially those concerning third country nationals residing in the Member States of the European Union, are of a provocative nature and lead to reactions that the report terms racist. Yet the majority of the citizens of our Member States often cannot understand why it should be absolutely essential for third country nationals residing in the EU to enjoy the same rights as them, including the right to vote, when there are no reciprocal rights at all for EU nationals residing in those third countries.

I know that in making these points I risk being demonised by the media and falling into the trap some sections of the report are setting for those among us who still dare express their opinion in the face of the exaggerations on which Baroness Ludford' s report bases what it sees as a rise in racism and xenophobia.

- (FR) Today, the European Parliament is presenting us with the new man in a new world.

The Ludford report is not an account of the good or bad situation as regards racism in the European Union; it is the political programme of an extreme left-wing libertarianism that, in the end, shows little concern for the natural rights of man.

In fact, reading this document would suggest that the countries of Europe, especially the Member States, are hellish places where the most elementary rights are trampled under foot daily, where the governments and their authorities, including, and I quote, "the police, justice and immigration services" , pursue totalitarian and inhumane policies.

Oh how wonderful it must be to live in China, in Cuba or in North Korea!

Faced with these tyrants, the European Union is keeping vigil: since it is close to the people, and so concerned with their happiness, that it manages their daily lives, it will know how to promote new and hitherto unknown rights; since its foundations and the way it works are so democratic, it will know how to create this new Europe freed of all sin; it will know how to be the undisputed guide that can lead all its followers towards 'a brighter future' .

Communities, whether national or European, need points of reference that are not exclusive but that guarantee enduring relations.

Our nations are often pluri-secular, they have always attracted populations and ethnic groups different from their own, who have added their value to that of their hosts.

This happened without problem, because our nations presented these newcomers with identified systems within which they could easily find their bearings and their place.

Mrs Ludford is proposing a society with no model, where the law of the strongest would be bound to prevail. Freedom means a just and identical law for all; for each individual or each group to have its own law spells anarchy and barbarism.

The European edifice will not be built simply by the addition of those who make it up; it will be the result of a concordance of views about its destiny and the ways to achieve it, or it will not be built at all.

Today, the Ludford report puts us at a remove from that Europe.

Mr President, the only reason we voted for this report is to reaffirm that we are opposed on principle to any form of racism, xenophobia and oppression of minorities, within or outside the European Union.

However, that vote does not mean we agree with all the recitals and all the proposals in it.

At the same time, we do not think the states that already belong to the European Union are in a position to teach lessons to countries that are only at the stage of applying for accession, given the extent to which the ignominy of racism and xenophobia is being propagated in most of the Member States of the European Union itself, by demagogues from the extreme right, even and including some within this Parliament.

The next item is the report (A5-0042/2000) by Mr Goebbels, on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, on the European Central Bank recommendation for a Council Regulation (EC) concerning further calls of foreign reserve assets by the European Central Bank (BCE 0001/1999 - C5-0202/1999 - 1999/0817 (CNS)

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the European Union has equipped itself with a politically independent Central Bank, responsible for safeguarding price stability.

The ECB must, at the very least, be financially independent.

Pursuant to the Treaty, the Bank' s initial capital is fixed at EUR 5 billion while foreign exchange reserves are fixed at EUR 50 billion.

As the European System of Central Banks is currently composed of only 11 national central banks, the capital released is only EUR 3.9 billion, while currently transferred reserves come to only EUR 39.46 billion.

Of that, 15% are in gold, while the remaining 85% consist of US dollars and yen.

It should be noted that interest on its own capital is the European Central Bank' s only reliable source of income.

In the short term, this income varies with interest rates.

The ECB' s other source of income is the interest on its official reserves.

However, from that income the ECB has to deduct the interest it pays on its liabilities in euros vis-à-vis the national central banks.

The foreign exchange reserves that appear on the ECB' s balance sheet are given in national currencies, while the liabilities vis-à-vis the national central banks are given in euros.

At present, given the interest rate differentials between the euro on the one hand, and the US dollar and the yen on the other, the net income from interest is positive.

However, in the event that interest rates vary, and to the extent that the source of income is highly sensitive to interest rate differentials, the share of income accruing from interest could fall very quickly and even produce a loss.

Since the ECB holds currencies to offset liabilities in euros, it would also run a foreign exchange risk if the euro appreciated substantially against the reserve currencies it is holding.

An internal ECB calculation indicates that the foreign exchange value at risk could exceed the ECB' s current capital.

A 10% depreciation of the US dollar and the yen against the euro, accompanied by a 10% fall in the price of gold, would wipe out all the ECB' s existing capital.

The Treaty provides for a mechanism whereby the ECB can forearm itself against any erosion of its capital.

The European Central Bank can partially or totally retain the monetary income from the Eurosystem.

Nevertheless, a central bank that depended on being bailed out repeatedly would not be very credible.

In fact, the European Central Bank will probably close its 1999 financial year with a deficit of more than EUR 200 million.

So it is imperative to resolve this structural problem as quickly as possible.

On 14 April 1999, the European Parliament endorsed an ECB recommendation on doubling its capital in the long term.

The recommendation under consideration today seeks to authorise the Governing Council to effect further calls of foreign reserves, raising the ceiling to EUR 100 billion.

So it is simply a question of authorisation in principle to increase reserves as needed, without being pressurised by exceptional events.

The ECB might, for example, make use of this procedure to augment them on a case-by-case basis, particularly during a period of large-scale intervention, but also, possibly, because of potential portfolio losses, the portfolio being revalued every quarter according to market rates.

In this context it must be noted that the total reserves of the Eurosystem come to more than EUR 350 billion.

As President Duisenberg maintained at his last hearing before the European Parliament, the ECB does not intend to intervene on the foreign exchange markets to try to influence the external value of the euro.

In the event of another international financial crisis, which remains possible given the irrational exuberance of the markets, there could be a need for concerted intervention by the main central banks.

To enable the ECB to be a party to agreements such as those known as the Plaza or Louvre agreements, the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs felt it was clearly necessary to advise Parliament to vote for the recommendation.

I have not proposed what might be called a political resolution to my colleagues.

Personally, as I said a while ago, I feel that Parliament votes on too many resolutions and that this inflated number of resolutions reduces the value of other, politically essential resolutions.

In this case it is a question of saying yes or no.

A massive yes vote also sends out a political message.

We want the ECB to be able to pursue its main objective of safeguarding price stability in total independence - including material independence.

At the same time, and here Mr Duisenberg is being too evasive for my liking, we also want the European System of Central Banks to give its unequivocal support to the European Union' s general economic policies.

We want the Central Bank to play its full part on the international scene and to make an active contribution to defining new rules that will enable the international financial system to operate without crises.

We are confident that the Governing Council will make optimum use of the foreign exchange reserves in the Eurosystem in the event of tension on the markets.

No one claims that the deterrent effect of the foreign exchange intervention instrument is proportional to the amount of reserves. However, credibility is enhanced by the option of being able to mobilise additional assets at any time without delay.

It would be warranted, however, for such internal ECB transfers, which will not be included in detail in the Eurosystem' s weekly consolidated financial statements, to be disclosed a posteriori.

The European Parliament also assumes that the ECB President will explain the decisions taken by his Council when he appears before the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and, indeed, during plenary debates.

The Central Bank has everything to gain from this improved transparency with regard to consolidating its credibility.

Mr President, I will close my statement by emphasising, speaking for myself and addressing myself to the ECB, that the ECB is there to serve the women and men of Europe, to serve the economy as a whole.

So its role is not just to satisfy the expectations of the financial markets.

Mr President, I should like to carry on from the point at which the rapporteur stopped in his report, for which I thank him, and point out once again that, compared with the plethora of resolutions which do not equate with the priorities of this House, increasing foreign reserve assets is an important resolution.

What is the legal basis for today' s debate?

According to Article 3 of the Statute of the European System of Central Banks, owning and managing official foreign reserve assets is one of the tasks of the ECB.

This task is carried out in parallel by the ECB and the national central banks, whereby the national central banks transfer part of their reserves up to the equivalent of 50 billion euros to the European Central Bank, in accordance with Article 30.1 of the Statute.

It was decided at the time, in Article 30.4 - which is why today' s discussion comes as no surprise - that the ECB could call up further foreign reserve assets beyond the limit set in Article 30.1.

This call must be issued in the form of a regulation by the EU Council.

The ECB is currently calling for a further increase of 50 billion euros.

We, the Group of the European People' s Party (Christian Democrats) and European Democrats and the entire Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, as the rapporteur has already said, welcome this proposal.

The reasons are set out in detail and time is already marching on, but allow me to say that we consider that this increase is needed.

First, because it will help to increase the financial independence of the ECB, and the independence of the European Central Bank is instrumental to the stability and unassailability of the currency.

The return on the capital paid up so far and the official reserves currently represents the ECB' s only source of income for financing its operations.

We know that it sustained a loss in 1999.

We must therefore admit that a lack of funds robs the ECB of the ability to formulate an independent and transparent policy.

Its financing requirements must be covered so that its independence cannot be called into question.

Secondly, we are in favour of this increase because it will help to foster the credibility of the ECB on the markets.

If the ECB is financially independent and self-sufficient, this will increase its credibility on the international markets and, by extension, strengthen the euro en route to the third stage on 1.1.2002.

Thirdly: this increase will enhance the ability of the ECB to react and adapt.

In the event of a serious imbalance on the markets, possibly doubling its reserves gives the European Central Bank the potential to carry out its task in the form of a stability policy more effectively.

It gives it the possibility to react more flexibly because it has the necessary funds at its disposal.

Our report also introduces an additional model for strengthening the transparency of this procedure and I would therefore ask that you vote in favour of increasing the reserves.

Mr President, we have good reason to be puzzled by the European Central Bank' s request to double the ceiling of its calls of foreign reserve assets from the national central banks.

At first sight it may seem acceptable to raise the current ceiling from EUR 50 billion - in fact it is 39.5 billion because certain countries have not joined the single currency - to EU 100 billion, when we remember that the national central banks will still have EUR 300 billion of own official reserves available.

However, the fact that this operation is to take place so soon after the date when the single currency was launched clearly shows that the value of the reserves was seriously underestimated at the time.

Aside from a few technical explanations relating to details, such as the exact number of ECB staff, there is only one valid reason that can be cited: the euro-optimism surrounding the launch of the euro, as it was called at the time, led people to believe that the single currency would naturally be strong and that the question of reserves was, therefore, secondary.

They all seem to be becoming rather more realistic again now.

But the whole business is not yet closed, for the explanatory memorandum in the draft regulation, like the explanatory statement in the European Parliament' s report, are rather disturbing, pointing out as they do, in passing, that the aim of raising the ceiling is, and I quote, to enhance the Bank' s "ability to adapt to different possible scenarios" .

Since this does not refer to a scenario where the value of the euro is rising - if that were so, there would obviously be no need for additional reserves - it must mean a scenario where its value is falling.

The European Parliament' s report seems even more alarmist when it refers in so many words to the potential instability of the euro which, according to the rapporteur, does not need to be demonstrated.

This slip of the pen will no doubt displease Mr Duisenberg who, for his part, keeps reiterating day after day that the euro is fundamentally stable.

Yet it is a revealing slip of the pen.

For it is, in effect, not realistic to believe that an artificial currency can inspire the same confidence as a currency solidly established among the people.

Mr President, on behalf of my colleague, Mr Solbes, I would like to make the following comments.

The Commission has been consulted by the Council - as it has been by Parliament - about the recommendation of the European Central Bank concerning further calls of foreign reserve assets to the ECB.

The Commission has adopted its opinion on this recommendation on 8 March, which reads as follows: "Noting the rights of initiative of both the Commission and the ECB, the Commission has agreed with the initiative taken by the European Central Bank.

The Commission supports the doubling of the limit for calls of foreign reserve assets by the ECB to the extent that these further calls serve to replenish holdings of reserve assets up to the initial limit of EUR 50 billion fixed in the ESCB Statute" .

The Commission has therefore adopted a favourable opinion on the ECB' s recommendation.

Should Parliament adopt the report of Mr Goebbels in its present form, this would mean that Parliament' s and the Commission' s views converge, which I would welcome.

The vote will take place tomorrow at 9 a.m.

(The sitting was closed at 7.35 p.m.)

Adoption of the Minutes of the previous sitting

The Minutes of yesterday' s sitting have been distributed.

Mr President, last night, we were faced with the unwelcome news on EDF (German TV channel) that Mr Hombach, the EU Balkans Envoy, has been placed under investigation again by the Public Prosecutor.

We have already had serious problems of this kind to contend with, as has the previous Commission, but in this particular case the accusation has been levelled that DM 300 000 were allegedly paid to an agency with nothing being received in return.

I call upon you to inform the Council of this and to urge it to relieve Mr Hombach of all his duties until such time as this investigation has been resolved in a conclusive and legally valid manner.

We cannot afford for the European Union to make a bad impression again.

We take note of your comments, Mr Zimmerling.

Yesterday evening after the votes in the Chamber, a comment was made which I would like to distance myself from and not to be associated with.

There was no mistake in the interpretation and Members of this House did refer to the Technical Group as the Technical Group of Racists.

No one could, by the wildest stretch of the imagination, consider someone like Emma Bonino a racist.

People need to be extremely careful how they treat other people in this Chamber.

Some people may not like the fact that the Technical Group has been set up, but it has been.

These Members were elected just like me and every other Member in this House and we have to accept that fact.

People have rights and I do not think that the comment that was made yesterday was acceptable.

We take note of your comments, Mrs McKenna.

Mr President, when, in the sitting on Monday, I thanked the French State, the city of Strasbourg and the European Parliament for the fact that we could only get sound on the Finnish television channel and that the taps runs cold water but not hot, I did not mean that this is how it should be, but that these things should be put right.

I hope that the French State, the city of Strasbourg and the European Parliament will be able to take steps to put such small matters right in so expensive a building.

Very well, Mr Seppänen, we also take note of your comments.

Mr President, on seeing the Minutes, I am horrified to note that I have once again failed to sign the register of attendance, although I participated in a quite considerable number of roll-call votes.

I would ask that my attendance be recorded in yesterday' s Minutes.

That will not be a problem.

Mr President, I do not have any comment to make on the Minutes, but I do want to say something about the European Parliament' s information services.

I do not know whether I have picked the right moment to say this.

It does not concern the Minutes, but relates to something else.

Right then, a fellow MEP has just given me the session news about the debate we had yesterday on the Ludford report, and I am disappointed to note that it makes no mention of the statement I made on behalf of our Group.

I would ask the parliamentary services to look into why it was left out.

I can assure you that the services will look into this very closely, Mr Poettering.

Mr President, further to yesterday' s minutes, I would like to express my great disappointment at the fact that even fewer than 200 Members attended the votes yesterday.

I conclude this from the minutes.

Very well, Mr Manders, we take note of all of that.

Whether national or European, any central bank exclusively serves the interests of big investors.

We refuse to make a choice between the different ways in which capitalist groups and wealthy investors manage their banking, since whatever they do is against the interests of the working classes and the majority of the population.

Our abstention expresses our opposition to both the national and the European organisation of the banking system.

The next item is the report (A5-0046/2000) by Mrs Izquierdo Rojo, on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development, on the proposal for a Council regulation on information measures relating to the common agricultural policy (COM(1999) 536 - C5-0249/1999 - 1999/0209(CNS)).

Mr President, I am presenting a report by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development on the proposal for a Council regulation with regard to information measures relating to the common agricultural policy.

This report sets a precedent, as it is the first time that the Council has consulted Parliament on these measures.

The Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development has studied this legislative motion for a resolution extremely promptly and with great interest, and has approved it unanimously.

I would like to highlight the following aspects of the amendments proposed by Parliament: First, in Amendment No 2, rural information and activity centres are included as possible agents for these measures.

Secondly, the amendment refers specifically to the important role to be played by young farmers in the aforementioned measures.

Thirdly, we indicate to the Commission the value of simplification and cutting through red tape, both in the examination of the programmes submitted and in subsequent monitoring.

Fourthly, we single out countrymen and women, farmers and other parties active in rural areas as the ideal beneficiaries of these measures.

On examination of our amendments, it is clear that they have a human aspect and allow a far more dynamic, open discussion.

They avoid dealing with the CAP in a passive, purely bureaucratic and technological fashion.

That is why we believe that Parliament's amendments improve the text.

Fifthly, with regard to the cofinancing percentage, Parliament would like the Commission to be able to increase this percentage, increasing financing for organisations or associations with few financial means.

Sixthly, we already know that, according to the proposal, commitment appropriations provide EUR 4.5 million annually through the EAGGF, which implies EUR 27 million for the current period, 2000-2006. However, the proposal made by Parliament indicates that the European Commission should adapt the budgetary allocation to the large number of organisations entitled to participate under this regulation.

Finally, Mr President, I would like to highlight the contribution of Amendment No 10, which proposes a new Article 5a, defining the following criteria to be met by programmes or measures eligible for funding: that these programmes should foster sustainable, multifunctional farming; they should serve to maintain or create jobs; they should promote social and regional cohesion; they should give a more prominent role to women and young people; they should protect the environment and safeguard the water supply, air quality and soil quality; they should treat agricultural waste and control energy expenditure, in the countryside and in transport.

In our opinion, these are proposals that should promote rural development and improve food safety and product quality.

The European Parliament would like the Commission to make these priorities, which are priority objectives for agriculture in 2000, easier to visualise in these next information measures.

Mr President, that is all I have to say.

I would like to thank all the members of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development for the support and collaboration they have given me at all the meetings we have held.

I would also like the European Commission, in one way or another, to take account of Parliament's criteria.

Mr President, as high a priority as possible ought to be given to transparency and to keeping EU citizens informed of the work being done in the EU.

Providing factual and objective information about cooperation in Europe has become very important in recent years as we face considerable challenges with the extension of the EU into Central and Eastern Europe.

It is especially important to explain what the common agricultural policy is about and to provide information about objectives, resources and potential for development.

There are many target groups - farmers, first and foremost, but also people generally, as well as everyone directly or indirectly affected.

If this work is to succeed, it is important that cooperation should be established with the farming organisations and also with consumers.

The common agricultural policy was the first, and is also the most extensive, of the Community' s integrated policies and it accounts for a very large proportion of the EU' s budget.

It is, therefore, also important to make it clear that the subsidy arrangements ensure that consumers obtain food at prices which, as a result of the subsidy, are lower than they would be without the subsidy.

This means that the EU' s agricultural arrangements are of benefit to all EU citizens.

The common agricultural policy is always undergoing change and development.

It demands a great deal in terms of the supply of information and, especially, in terms of the coordination which is needed if cooperation is to succeed, both within the Member States and independently of the Member States.

Circumstances are very different from one country to another, and it ought, therefore, to be farming organisations which are among the main players, because these organisations focus primarily upon farmers.

Mr President, the purpose of information on the common agricultural policy should be to establish a strategy for communication, directed mainly at those working in farming and rural areas.

In our opinion, the main criticism of this proposal for a Commission regulation relates to the opening up of a budget line to non-agricultural organisations and also the reduction in budget appropriations to EUR 4 500 000.

This situation has been made even worse by the reserve of appropriations that the Commission is building up for itself, which, when taken in conjunction with specific actions, in fact leaves the organisations with only EUR 3 million, which is obviously a very limited amount.

I therefore welcome the rapporteur' s proposal that the Commission should match the budgetary appropriations to the numerous organisations that have a right to funding under this regulation.

However, another negative aspect of the Commission' s proposal relates to limiting cofinancing to a rate of 75%, when actions implemented directly by the Commission are financed at a rate of 100%.

Furthermore, we know that the draft guide to the rules makes access to the budgetary line I have just mentioned even more difficult for organisations, especially those in a weaker financial position, in other words, exactly the ones that need the most support.

Hence the importance of our amendment designed to supplement the concept set out in the report.

With our amendment, we hope to see Community cofinancing rise above 75% for organisations representing small farmers and family-run farms in financial difficulty.

We hope that this amendment will be adopted.

With regard to the amendment designed to reduce funds intended for the Commission by EUR 1 million and instead increase specific actions, we feel that this is potentially a way of improving the Commission' s proposal for a regulation.

Lastly, it is important to emphasise the need for the Commission to simplify its administrative procedures both in order to study the programmes presented by the organisations and for their future monitoring.

Mr President, I welcome this measure.

From an administrative point of view the formalisation is a good thing.

But when we come to think about it the amount of money is quite small - EUR 27 million over a period of six years.

Considering the size of the agricultural budget and the fact that it extends to every corner of the Union, it is a relatively small amount of money.

That is why I welcome that fact that most of it will be spent at the rate of 50% rather than 75%.

The more of it that is spent at the rate of up to 50%, the further the money goes and the greater the impact.

The common agricultural policy gets a lot of criticism.

One of the things that was not widely understood was the importance of this policy from a social point of view: the fact is, that in all the depressed regions of the Union, the common agricultural policy has maintained the population and supported communities, in a social sense, that would not otherwise have survived.

This is particularly true of the peripheral countries such as Ireland, Greece, Spain and Portugal, where communities that would have disappeared have been supported and maintained, if not for ever, certainly until a change in economic environment, until the new technologies arrived.

The long-term effect of the common agricultural policy in that sense will be greater than people have often imagined.

I have no fault to find with the way the Commission interacted with the agriculture industry over the years.

From my experience the European Commission was more open to representations and information exchange with the agriculture industry than most departments of agriculture in most Member States.

The Commission taught Member States over the years how to be open with very limited resources.

But there are new pressures, arising out of consumer concerns about new processes and systems of producing food.

These have to be explained, not only to farmers, but to consumers as well.

There is a lot of mythology about what is safe and what is not safe.

We have an important job to do to explain the workings of the whole productive system to the consumers of Europe and those outside the Union who will buy our food.

It is important that we apply as many resources as possible to this.

The last point I want to make is that, arising from these pressures, we will have a reaction from agriculture.

As we inevitably wind down some of the supports in the process of enlargement and, at the same time, maintain the pressures to protect the environment and the consumers, then there will be friction between the producers and the European administration.

To devote as many resources as possible to good relations is a wise policy.

Mr President, firstly I would like to thank the rapporteur, Maria Izquierdo Rojo, and the members of the Committee, for their report.

The proposed regulation intends to provide the Commission with a tool to help it to present an operational model for European agriculture, and give wider publicity to the common agricultural policy.

In this way, the implementation of agricultural policy is facilitated.

Now I would like to speak about Parliament' s proposed amendments. They are not generally aimed at changing the subject matter but rather at amending the proposals.

Amendments Nos 2 and 6 concern organisations falling within the scope of aid.

It is the opinion of the Commission that it is not necessary to mention the groups and organisations by name.

All agricultural organisations and rural players fall within the scope of aid according to Article 2.

This being the case, the proposed addenda are unnecessary.

Amendments Nos 5, 8 and 10 concern measures that are eligible for aid.

Amendment No 5 contains amendments regarding information services and fora for discussions for men and women in rural areas.

They are unnecessary, as they are already contained in the Commission' s proposal.

One of them, which reads "supporting them in their choices" is not in harmony with the Commission' s proposal.

The purpose of this regulation is not to offer farmers any special services.

Local bodies are better qualified to do that.

The resources available would not be sufficient for that either.

I would, moreover, like to make the comment, with regard to the amendments tabled for Article 3, that information visits are not being ruled out.

The list of activities that are eligible for aid is not exhaustive, which is indicated in the word "particularly" .

The Commission is prepared, however, to adopt this amendment.

The funding of long-term exchange programmes cannot, however, be accepted, as such action is not a part of the information policy.

Amendment No 10 concerns Article 5.

The Commission supports the objectives mentioned here, proof of which is to be seen in the fact that they are implicitly contained in Article 1, which concerns the operational model for European agriculture.

That is why it makes no sense to repeat the contents of the model in further detail.

Amendments Nos 7 and 13 concern contributions.

The Commission thinks that it is not desirable to pay more than 75% of eligible aid costs.

The lower the contribution stays the more measures there will be that can be financed and the greater the multiple effect.

Amendments Nos 9 and 12 concern the allocation and approval of appropriations.

As we know, Parliament is a budgetary authority together with the Council.

For this reason, the Commission thinks Amendment No 9 is not necessary.

Regarding Amendment No 12, which proposes including the allocation of appropriations in the regulation, I would say that if the allocation is settled on beforehand, the administration of the budgetary heading will lose its vital degree of flexibility, which might be damaging from the point of view of proposed applications for financing.

The Commission agrees with Parliament on the usefulness of regular evaluation.

It can best be taken account of in the implementing regulation.

This extra recital is unnecessary in the regulation, in the opinion of the Commission.

Provision for administrative details, evaluation and later assessment will be laid down by the Commission in the Implementing Regulation.

In this connection, it has to be said that the effective monitoring of public funds has to be assured in the process regardless of how open and simple the process is.

Amendments Nos 1 and 3 concern linguistic nuances.

These the Commission does not consider significant, as Recitals 4 and 7 in the Commission' s proposal are not as restrictive.

We shall now proceed to the vote.

The next item is the report (A5­0045/2000) by Mrs Izquierdo Rojo, on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development, on the proposal for a Council regulation amending Regulation (EC) No 1577/96 introducing a specific measure in respect of certain grain legumes [COM(1999)428 - C5­0187/1999 - 1999/0182(CNS)]

Mr President, I am presenting a report by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development on the proposal for a Council regulation amending Regulation (EC) No 1577/96 introducing a specific measure in respect of certain grain legumes.

The European Parliament has been analysing this proposal since October 1999 and approved this draft legislative resolution unanimously on 23 February 2000.

I would like to highlight the following aspects of the amendments proposed by the European Parliament.

First, Amendment No 1 on the inclusion of a Recital 2a.

This amendment supplements the Council approach, which is purely commercial, and opts for a proposal with wider economic, human and food quality aims.

Whereas the Council only talks about the market, the European Parliament highlights the economic interest for the Community of the production of these grain legumes.

Given the deficit of protein crops in the European Union, Parliament considers that this system should be improved without cutting the level of aid.

Secondly, Parliament' s Amendment No 2 proposes that seed vetches should also be included in the aid system.

Aid for seeds already exists for rice, chickpeas and lentils.

We propose this aid because, as we all know, the production of seeds is subject to supplementary technical and quality control requirements, so that if the cultivation of seeds were not supported by some form of aid, this could have extremely negative consequences for the quality of production of seed vetches.

Thirdly, Amendment No 3 indicates that, in our opinion, the Commission should, without further delay, make proposals for the 2000-2003 period.

Before I finish, Mr President, I would like to point out that in 1993 - which is some time ago now - the Council indicated that it intended to gradually strengthen the current aid system for grain legumes.

However, this has still not been done.

Secondly, successive periods show that we are faced with a chronic imbalance in this system.

The maximum guaranteed area is being systematically reduced, thus penalising time and again the farmers who are suffering reductions in aid of up to 20%.

Therefore, Mr President, what the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development of the European Parliament would really like to see is an improvement in the system.

However, we appreciate what the Commission is telling us, that this is a time of serious budgetary restrictions that we could not implement without reducing aid.

That is why we are presenting this proposal, which is really a maintenance proposal, and what we are saying to the Commission is that, without further delay, proposals must be drawn up at the latest for the 2000-2003 period to achieve an improvement in this system without decreasing aid.

I thank all the members of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development for their collaboration and support, as well as the opinion of the Committee on Budgets. Thanks also to the Commission for its willingness to hold a dialogue and I hope it will be open to our proposals.

Mr President, Commissioner, the report that is being proposed for approval today in plenary refers to a minimal reform of Regulation 1577/96 on aid for the grain legume sector.

So slight is the reform that it does not amend the total maximum guaranteed quantity, although it does split it into two, nor the amount of aid per hectare.

The only new element is the substitution of the management committee by the cereal management committee.

As the Spanish saying goes, which is very much in agreement with this regulation, 'Esto son lentejas; si quieres las tomas y si no las dejas' [ 'here are some lentils, take them or leave them' ].

Consequently, my Group will support the rapporteur's report and, above all, will particularly support Amendment No 2, which proposes the inclusion of areas dedicated to the production of seed vetches in the aid system, as this will lead to high-quality crops.

Nevertheless, I would like to make it clear that we have missed the opportunity to support a substantial, very arid area of southern Europe, which has no other crop alternative for its soil.

Furthermore, the demand for vetches for feeding livestock is increasing all the time, as shown, at least in Spain, by the fact that the area sown in the last three years has exceeded the proposed maximum guaranteed area by 100 000 hectares per year on average.

On the other hand, the food problems we have had in the European Union have been caused by feeding herbivores with animal-based feedingstuffs, and if we do not encourage the feeding of livestock with plant proteins, such as legumes, and lower their price, farmers will continue to resort to animal meal due to the enormous pressure of competition.

Finally, it just remains for me to lament, once again, the fact that the Commission's agricultural policy is more concerned with reducing spending - or, at best, not increasing it, as on this occasion - than with maintaining a genuine European agricultural sector that is so essential for the equilibrium of the region.

Mr President, I am participating in this discussion in order to support the report by my colleague, María Izquierdo, whose proposals, like those of the Commission, seem to me to be beneficial and of interest.

Grain legumes are a traditional crop in certain areas of southern Europe, including Spain and, more specifically, Castilla-La Mancha, the region I come from, which contains one third of the total area dedicated to these crops in Spain.

Our concern is therefore to avoid damaging the aid system for this sector of agriculture and, more specifically, for the production of chickpeas, lentils and vetches.

Chickpeas and lentils are two essential products in Spanish gastronomic culture and in our diet, the Mediterranean diet, which is now so highly thought of by scientists, which includes dried pulses in our traditional recipes.

The purchase of dried pulses in Spain has been increasing by up to 5% annually.

In my country, the consumption of these is 6.5 kg per head annually and anyone who knows how these products are cooked can vouch for the fact that this is a very substantial amount.

Religious customs, for example, mean that we do not eat meat during Lent and due to the wiliness and common sense of our compatriots, meat has been replaced by other dishes - delicious dishes, of course - such as our lentil and spinach stew.

We are talking about uses that have been consolidated throughout history and are now consumed throughout the year, including by non-believers and those who do not practise a religion, and that have left an almost infinitely varied series of main courses based on dried pulses, which undoubtedly increase the consumption figures.

Another sector which requires this type of product is livestock farming.

At times like this, when we are seeing fraudulently-fattened livestock and the use of unauthorised products, it becomes essential for the market to provide reasonably-priced, good quality natural feedingstuffs, such as some of those that this regulation concerns, and specifically vetches.

Finally, we are talking about Community protection for a crop which last year, in my region, provided an honest living for around 17 000 families.

Moreover, this is a sector in which, fortunately, there has not been a proliferation of bounty-hunters who move into agriculture in order to receive grants from the Union.

Here we are dealing with traditional crops farmed by people who devote themselves to these crops from generation to generation, and who have contributed to the formation of a large part of the countryside and cuisine of substantial regions of Europe, which still interest us and which we should maintain.

I am therefore asking for the support of Parliament for the Commission's proposals and the improvements which, by way of amendment, are contained in María Izquierdo's report.

Mr President, we are able to support an extension to the proposal but, at the same time, I would draw attention to the fact that Agenda 2000, which was decided upon last year in Berlin, is based, of course, upon our looking towards free trade and endeavouring to reduce the present level of aid and to reach a number of agreements under the aegis of the WTO whereby, by virtue of market mechanisms, we can obtain greater access to the many markets out in the world.

I would also draw your attention to the fact that, in recent years, conventional farming has been put under pressure. Prices have fallen for just about every product.

This is what some people call stability. Farmers experience it somewhat differently because costs are, of course, rising and price freezes will therefore automatically be experienced as a setback.

I would also recall the fact that the Commission has recently tightened up on the conditions for intervening in the area of grain.

Wheat growers, in particular, will be affected very badly, which they already are because of a 15% fall in prices, but then there is also a tightening up on quality and with regard to the issue of protein crops. This means, moreover, that, especially in the northern part of the EU, there will be further price falls in the offing.

On behalf of my Group, I shall, as I said, support an extension to the arrangements, but I would strongly urge the Commission, before 2002-2003, to make a concerted effort to investigate possible changes to the way in which we employ resources so that we can, in the future too, safeguard that group of farmers which, until now, has been supported by means of the aid arrangements in question.

- (PT) Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, as you know, we must support the production of grain legume crops by improving the system without reducing the level of aid, given the current shortfall in grain legumes both for human consumption and animal consumption.

The fact is that the system of aid established in 1989 has been modified several times, but no report has been presented on the application of the present system.

Now, by advocating a maximum guaranteed area of 400 000 hectares, the Commission wants to reduce the average production area over the last three years by around 100 000 hectares, which will mean considerable reductions in aid.

On the other hand, although we do not disagree with splitting the maximum guaranteed area into two, we feel it is necessary to adjust the historical reference period in order to calculate each of the maximum guaranteed areas excluding the last three years, in order to reduce the damaging impact for Portugal on products designed for human consumption.

Finally, it is important to point out that it is vital for Portugal that dry bean should be considered in this system, even without the change to the maximum guaranteed surface.

We therefore firmly believe that the Commission should bear in mind these amendments to the new system which it hopes to establish for grain legumes.

Mr President, I would again like to thank the rapporteur, Maria Izquierdo Rojo, for an excellent and constructive report.

There are two Commission documents that serve as a basis for the issue of grain legumes.

The first is a report on the aid scheme in place for grain legumes, and the second a proposal for improved administration of the system.

What vegetables are we actually talking about?

I know that the Spanish members know the subject well, but I should mention that by grain legumes are meant three annual vegetables with a high protein content and which are gathered in the form of dry seeds.

Lentils and chickpeas serve as food for humans, while the seeds of vetches, which to us are more unusual vegetables, are used as animal feed.

Grain legumes are grown as field crops, particularly in the southern part of the Union, as they thrive well in dry climates.

In fact Spain accounts for 90% of all EU grain legume production.

Grain legumes are not covered by the aid scheme that was remodelled with the Agenda 2000 programme, although they can be used in crop rotation schemes involving other crops such as corn.

Grain legumes are covered by their own scheme where the amount of fixed aid per hectare is EUR 181 and the maximum guaranteed area is 400 000 hectares.

The scheme was established in 1989 when the growing area of grain legumes was reduced at the expense of corn, which was already suffering from overproduction.

The special scheme aimed to preserve traditional legume grain growing areas by means of the aid per hectare arrangement.

What are the conclusions of the Commission' s report?

An examination of how the scheme has been applied reveals that the MGA of 400 000 hectares has been systematically exceeded.

There are two conclusions to be drawn from this.

First, the aim of the scheme has been successfully achieved and, second, the growing areas have to be brought under better control.

The MGA overruns in the last few years have shown themselves to be mainly with regard to vetches.

Although the scheme is being applied satisfactorily as a whole, MGA management is problematic, as those responsible for the overruns are not being treated any differently from other producers.

So how could the system be improved?

We should aim to find solutions regarding improvements within the framework of the present scheme and the appropriations set aside for it.

We are in a situation in which the Agenda 2000 reform has been adopted and international trade negotiations are drawing closer.

I would like to point out that the rapporteur' s proposed amendment whereby the current aid scheme for vetch farmers could be combined with another market arrangement, i.e., that for seed vetches, would not achieve the improvement desired.

This is a reference to Amendment No 2.

It cannot be adopted for two reasons: firstly, the schemes are mutually exclusive, as in one scheme the seeds, in principle, have to be harvested as animal feed, while, in the other, they are designated for sowing. The other reason is that it might involve extra expense.

The Commission' s report recommends that the MGA should be divided into two parts based on the earlier land area division in the proportion 40/60.

It would divide up thus: 1 600 000 hectares would be used for the production of lentils and chickpeas, and 240 000 hectares would be used for the production of vetches.

In addition, it is proposed that the Management Committee for Dried Fodder be replaced by the Management Committee for Cereals.

The purpose of this change is only to legally endorse what has become common practice on the committees.

Finally, I would like to say that the Commission will adopt the rapporteur' s amendments that reinforce its position, proposing that the Commission submit a new report, as in Amendment No 3, and seek ways of improving the system, as in Amendment No 1.

Members of the European Parliament, in the light of my comments, the proposal will probably not be difficult to adopt so that it can be applied from the marketing year 2000 - 2001 onwards.

We shall now proceed to the vote.

The next item is the debate on the following oral questions to the Commission:

B5-0207/2000, by Mrs Evans and others, on behalf of the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance, on additionality

B5-0209/2000, by Mr Davies and Mrs Attwooll, on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party, on the additionality principle in Structural Fund appropriations.

Mr President, Commissioner, the purpose of the Structural Funds is to target the poorest and most run-down areas of the European Union, those in greatest need of development, with extra money to help them begin to rebuild the economy, create jobs and regenerate poorer communities.

Additionality is meant to ensure that happens and to prevent governments from using EU funding to replace their own aid as this would defeat the object.

But in many regions and nations that is what happens at the moment and I can illustrate the problem using the example of Wales.

The granting of EU Objective 1 status to West Wales and the Valleys last year was an acknowledgement of the poverty in two-thirds of the country.

EUR 1.2 billion of European funding used effectively could provide exactly the additional help that is intended.

But if we look at the government budget to Wales, in practice there will be no more government spending next year with Objective 1 than there is this year before Objective 1.

The National Assembly budget which comes from the Treasury remains the same so that in the first fifteen months, at least, of the new programme period there are no additional resources at all.

The money will be taken from other budgets in the National Assembly, such as health and education.

Therefore central government expenditure is reduced.

Under the Structural Funds, areas of greatest need are identified and selected on regional criteria.

Yet when the Commission looks at additionality it is dealt with on a Member State level. This is a clear contradiction.

The rules as they stand allow this to happen.

Member States are not legally required to demonstrate additionality at the regional or programme level.

I agree with the statement made by Commissioner Barnier in a written reply to me when he said that the spirit of additionality rather than the letter of the law on the matter is an important consideration.

We need the revision of the system and a central part of that is looking at additionality internally in the Member States at the programme level as well as at the Member State level.

Mechanisms need to be in place to ensure that Member States respect the principle and the spirit of additionality so that funds are targeted and spent effectively.

So we are asking in this question, Commissioner, for confirmation that this will be done and I look forward to the vote on this debate in April.

Mr President, the principle of additionality exists in order to ensure that transfers to the Member States under the Structural Funds add to, rather than replace, national expenditures on structural development measures.

In this way, European Union structural policies will have a greater impact on reducing regional and social disparities.

The ex-ante verification of additionality is at present being undertaken in application of Article 11 of Regulation 1260/99.

This is an integral part of the negotiation of the Structural Funds programmes with the Member States.

This exercise is a demonstration of the Member States' intention to implement the principle of additionality over the programming period that lies ahead.

Where necessary, the Commission may request clarification from the Member States on the details of their forecasts for eligible expenditure for the period 2000-2006.

As a further measure, the Commission has prepared detailed implementing provisions for inclusion in the programming documents covering both the situation ex ante and also the mid-term and final verification of additionality.

The second issue covered by the questions is the possibility of the verification of additionality at regional level.

I would like to develop a number of elements of previous answers.

Firstly, although additionality is implemented at the level of the overall eligible spending by the Member States rather than at regional level, it must be borne in mind that the overall additionality required to be demonstrated is, by definition, the sum of the eligible expenditures at the lower level.

In practice, reduced national eligible expenditure in some regions would have to be balanced with an increase in other regions in order for additionality to be respected overall.

On this point the Commission can give a clear assurance that, where evidence exists of reduced national expenditure in a given region or regions, it will be particularly attentive with regard to the credibility of the overall figures.

A second point of clarification concerns the scope of additionality and the suggestion that, when implemented at national level, it may be incompatible with the regional vocation of the Structural Funds.

It must be borne in mind that the development-related expenditure of a Member State which is taken into account for the assessment of additionality is generally a mixture of resources allocated and managed at national level and those managed at regional level.

While there might be some categories of expenditure for which stability could be expected at regional level between the programming periods, it could hardly be suggested that the level of spending on, for example, major infrastructure should be maintained at the same level in each region regardless of current needs.

This is why the Commission takes the view that the strict application of additionality at regional level would lead to excessive rigidity in the management by the Member States of their own development expenditure.

Finally, regarding budgetary provisions within the Member States between the central government and the regions, the Commission can only repeat that these are matters exclusively for national consideration and are not related to additionality as defined in the regulations.

Mr President, can I begin by thanking my colleague from Wales - though from another party, Jillian Evans, for raising this issue.

I do not think that there is a more important issue in Wales at the moment than the application of Objective 1 funds and it is important to look at the background to the issues that we are currently considering.

There are two major news stories breaking in the United Kingdom today.

One is the shock news of BMW's decision to break up the Rover-Land Rover Group with the threat of massive redundancies right the way across the UK and the other breaking news this morning is the Conservative Party's stunning victory in the Ayr by-election driving the defending Labour Party into a miserable third place with a swing of almost 10%.

Now these stories are not just topical background to this debate.

In my view, they underpin the very issues which we are considering in the context of Structural Fund spending under Objectives 1 and 2 in those parts of the European Union which are facing major economic problems.

As we have already heard from Jillian Evans, a major part of Wales, in constituencies which I also represent, has been granted Objective 1 status, but sadly ever since that announcement was made by the Commission, our problems in Wales have actually got even worse.

As a direct result of what I would describe as UK government policy, our agricultural economy has all but collapsed.

Farm incomes are at their lowest level for a generation and this decline is also hitting the manufacturing sector.

I do not apologise for saying that the massive overvaluation of sterling which gives the UK Labour Chancellor an electoral war-chest of unprecedented proportions has handicapped every Welsh and UK manufacturer trying to export into the European market.

It is little wonder that BMW blames the Rover decision directly on UK government economic policy, but that I fear is little comfort to the thousands of workers in Rover who have strained to improve the efficiency of the company only to find that their efforts have been undermined in Downing Street.

I turn then to the central hand of Labour government at work in terms of the European Structural Funds package.

The unacceptable behaviour of the UK Government over this has already brought about the timely end of the political career of the first Secretary of the Welsh Assembly.

Sadly, the Structural Funds spending issues have been marked by delay by disputes in relation to matched funding and also in relation to the issue of additionality.

Lest it be raised later in this debate let me make it clear: this is not a new issue and I share the view that it is an issue that needs to be examined very carefully by the Commission itself.

I have the honour to be appointed as the rapporteur on the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee for the Structural Funds guidelines 2000-2006 and the committee agreed on that occasion, based on our recommendations to the Regional Policy Committee, that the Commission should pay attention to this issue of additionality.

We reiterated the importance of ensuring that Structural Funds do not just merely, as it were, replace public spending otherwise earmarked for those areas that are lagging behind.

I am rather sorry that the Regional Policy Committee did not incorporate that in the report themselves, but there it is.

There are a number of questions that I would ask Commissioner Liikanen to take back to Commissioner Barnier.

I appreciate that he is the Commissioner in office today but he may not be in a position to respond to these points himself.

However, these are points that I seek to put in the context of certainly the area that I represent and I daresay they are points that would be supported by Jillian Evans on behalf of her party.

What progress is being made in relation to the approval of the programming documents within the Commission?

Will the Commissioner take the step in terms of transparency of publishing at an appropriate time the correspondence that has taken place between the Commission and the National Assembly?

We were assured, I am bound to say by a rather complacent Economic Secretary, who has now become the First Secretary, that all matters were proceeding in an orderly fashion.

Yet we hear from remarks that are made from time to time by the Commission that there are real problems and we find it difficult to do our job within this Parliament without that degree of transparency.

So, will the Commission undertake to make that information available to all Members of the European Parliament?

Will they undertake to keep us informed in relation to these matters?

Will they undertake to challenge Member State Governments in relation to the maps that have been drawn up in relation to Objective 2 where also there has been quite clear evidence of jerrymandering also.

The additionality issue is an important one, but I must say it is not the only one which gives much concern to many Members of this European Parliament.

Mr President, I should just like to touch on a couple of points that Mr Evans raised.

First of all, I acknowledge that there is difficulty in the Midlands with the Rover Group.

I would not like to make political capital out of it.

There are too many jobs at stake.

Secondly, he also mentioned their by-election.

I congratulate his party in securing a victory in this by-election.

But, unlike him, I have been in Ayr for the last three weeks, on the doorstep.

I can tell you that additionality was never raised once.

I turn to the question at hand.

I thank the Nationalists for having raised this.

It is right that we have a proper discussion on the whole question of the Structural Funds.

But I suspect there is a deeper plot here.

What are they actually trying to achieve?

Basically, what I took from her contribution is that she wants to redefine the Structural Funds regulations.

I would remind people in this Parliament that it was not so long ago that this Parliament passed, by the assent procedure, the rules and regulations governing the Structural Funds, including Article 11, which defines additionality.

Is it therefore Parliament's role now to change that?

The role of this Parliament is to ensure that the rules are complied with.

That is what we should concentrate on.

I know that Ms Evans, along with one of her colleagues, Dafydd Wigley and a member of the Scottish Nationalist Party, Mr Wilson, went to meet Commissioner Barnier.

I should like to read out the statement made by Commissioner Barnier after that meeting:

"I know that there has been a great deal of debate in Scotland and Wales recently about European regional funding.

But I have the impression that this has sometimes confused two separate issues - additionality and cofinancing.

I am not surprised that there is a certain amount of confusion among the Nationalists on this.

Additionality, whether or not EU funds are providing additional impact, compared to what would otherwise have happened, can be used as one of the selection criteria by the local programme planners before they decide to approve aid to individual projects.

The Commission, on the other hand, is obliged by the rules to make a global assessment of additionality for the UK as a whole, with the specific aim of ensuring that the European financial aid is additional to, and not a substitute for, national finance.

We have always been satisfied in the past that the national requirements have been met" .

Mr President, it is clear from what the Commissioner has said that the Commission is conscientious in measuring the additionality of structural funding at Member State level, and it was good also to hear his assurances about the various different levels of evaluation that take place.

As the Commission will be aware, however, a number of Member States within the European Union have devolved systems of regional government.

Such regional systems of government are normally financed in whole or in part from central government funds.

It appears to me that, under the present rules, central government can build the EU contribution to structural funding into its calculations for determining regional government budgets.

There appears to be no mechanism, despite what the Commissioner said, for ensuring either of two things: first, that the additionality rule is applied to this calculation, and second, that the amount of EU funding which ultimately reaches individual regions corresponds directly to the amount earmarked for those regions at the planning stage.

At the very least, this engenders a lack of transparency.

It may also mean that the additionality principle is not being properly implemented on a region-by-region basis.

I accept, like Mrs Evans, that this does not, strictly speaking, contradict the letter of European Union law on this matter.

But, unlike her, it seems to me to be quite clearly contrary to the spirit of additionality rules and undermines the very purposes for which structural funding was established in the first place.

Although I come from Scotland, I know these issues are of concern not just to my Liberal Democrat colleagues from other parts of the United Kingdom but also to ELDR members representing regions across the whole of the European Union.

Mr President, first of all I would like to congratulate my Welsh colleague for her excellent speech and I am also glad that there is basic agreement from all sections of the political spectrum.

Some of us newcomers to this Parliament are already beginning to tire of good intentions, fantastic programmes and of hearing about the spirit of the Community regulations.

Instead of spirit, we are going to end up with ghosts and sleepless nights because, in reality, commitments are not being fulfilled.

It is therefore appropriate for the European institutions themselves to start by making good their commitments with regard to additionality.

The Court of Auditors has already drawn up an assessment of the implementation of the additionality principle in June 1999 which shows that it is a total disaster and a mistake.

Secondly, we must take into account - and this is a political declaration - the real Europe, the citizens' Europe, the Europe of nations and nations within the States, because until these are taken into account, we will keep coming back to the same old problem.

Scotland, Wales, the Basque country, Catalonia, Galicia, even a region as large as Andalusia, cannot depend on the decisions of a central State, however much of a State it is.

Mr President, Commissioner, I would like to reiterate the words of Mr Miller, who spoke earlier - and who is regrettably no longer in the Chamber - when he criticised the authors of this question by saying that our main task is to ensure that the rules are complied with.

The first rules that need to be complied with are those in the Treaty, in this case, Article 158, which takes the objective of economic and social cohesion to its highest level.

Our task is to ensure that following on from this, the Commission' s regulations and behaviour attain and serve to attain these objectives.

Our task is also to be alert enough here to criticise and to raise the issue whenever we see that this is not being done.

We support the good timing and the reasoning of the issues raised by the authors of the oral question and we agree with the comments that have already been made here.

We call on the Commission to exert more pressure to ensure that these instruments are used effectively in favour of the regions with the greatest needs, instead of, as it seems to us, letting the objective of economic and social cohesion go cold.

This subject is obviously a delicate one, and its development has been discussed at great length over the years, with many rules being regularly revised, but what we cannot accept is that the revision of these rules and the development of the bureaucracy always hit the most needy.

We cannot, for example, accept the fact that problems have been raised about allocating funds to regions which are eligible under various programmes, because if these regions are eligible for various funds it is precisely because their needs are the greatest, and anything that hinders the operation of these funds holds back their development and threatens the objective of economic and social cohesion.

Similarly, we do not accept that the Commission should in any way associate itself with the degree of inertia shown by some national governments who are not prepared to support the regions with the greatest needs.

We therefore call on the Commission to...

(The President cut the speaker off)

Mr President, I have been watching this whole business of Structural Funds and additionality for many years, and there are a number of things that we can learn from the past.

The first is that the money in absolute terms in most regions of the Community is relatively small, and its impact is political rather economic - though that is important too.

I have often said it is important that we as a European Union should not just make regulations telling people what they may or may not do, but that we should extend what appears to the European public and to the regions of the Union to be tangible benefits.

Even in rich regions they will appreciate the fact that the European Union tries to help close the gap between rich and poor.

The other thing in the macro-economic sense that we can say is that, if a certain amount of Structural Funds is allocated to Portugal or Greece or Ireland, as it has been in the past, then that money goes into these states in any case and that is the first impact that it has.

The money is actually transferred and, regardless of whether the letter of the law is observed or not, the countries become the better off.

Another point that I would like to make is that we can learn from the past.

First of all, we have now tidied up the regulations to some extent, but originally they were written in an effort to please every sector and every political interest, so that it became impossible, with the staff that the European Commission had at its disposal, to police the spending of the money, and that is still the case to a large degree.

We are now into to the third or fourth programme.

What we must do is learn from the mistakes of the past and try and apply the lessons to the future.

If you want to be absolutely effective with the way this money is spent, what you need to do is to look at what a country has been spending previously, and to ask them to submit their plans to the European Commission.

The European Commission identifies the weaknesses in this plan and says: This is the way we would like our money to be spent in addition to what you have already allocated for all this work you intend to do.

In my personal experience in Ireland, I never heard the European Commission take Ireland to task for failure in the area of additionality.

But one should remember that, between 1982 and 1992, the Structural Funds to Ireland peaked; they are getting less now, and there was a generous amount of money.

But, from 1982 to 1992, the public capital programme actually reduced, including Structural Funds.

It reduced in real terms by 30%.

So where did the Structural Funds go?

The Structural Funds actually went into public sector pay and social welfare, and it is very questionable as to whether they did a good or a bad turn to the Irish economy in those years, because they contributed to inflation and increased wage demands.

So there are lessons to be learned: set against the staff the Commission had at its disposal to deal with the Irish problem - three or four people - Ireland had 30 000 civil servants, and the Irish Civil Service won every time!

Mr President, I am going to refer to a subject that none of the previous speakers has discussed.

I am referring to the report by the Court of Auditors on the principle of additionality.

This is a report that was published in the Official Journal of the European Communities on 9 March.

This report contains a very interesting section - section 62 - that discusses privatisation.

Over the past few years, various European Union governments have enthusiastically embarked on a policy of privatisation placing the heritage which previously belonged to the community in very few hands.

In Spain, for example, over the last four years, public companies have been privatised to the tune of 4 billion, with a B for Barcelona or Brussels. These public companies have passed into the hands of private individuals.

Mr Liikanen is an expert in accounting, and knows that privatisation is a form of public disinvestment and, specifically, that it can be a form of regional disinvestment.

If, for example, an airline providing regional services was privatised, regional disinvestment could occur, and we would thus be infringing the principle of additionality.

The Court of Auditors has referred to this, saying that Member States are aware that spending decreases as a result of privatisation and it is in their interests to reduce it.

Taking into account the importance of the categories of spending affected, telecommunications, energy, etc., this simple operation can substantially modify the final result.

And we also have the response by the Commission, which must be very recent, and which Commissioner Liikanen, as a member of the College, must remember perfectly.

The Commission replies here with a system that we call the Olendorf method, a method of language-learning that consists of the teacher asking the student "Have you got my uncle's underpants?" and the student replying "No, but I have my grandmother's glasses" .

And the response given to us by the Commission in section 62 is very short.

It says: "Although the private sector sometimes invests in sectors that are traditionally considered public, it would be incredibly difficult to increase the verification of additionality in private investments, as this would imply the collection and examination of the accounts of a number of private companies which would not be obliged to provide the corresponding information to the national authorities or to the Commission" .

That is, the Commission is replying using the Olendorf method.

We have here Commissioner Liikanen who knows the subject very well, and perhaps he could give us a more specific response, as I believe that this considerably affects the core of additionality.

The second issue is that the Berlin financial forecasts anticipated a substantial reduction in the Structural Funds.

This year we have EUR 29 430 million. In the year 2006 we will have a nominal figure of EUR 26 600 million, that is to say, a reduction of 14% over seven years.

Taking into account inflation, I can calculate that there is a reduction of 20%.

That is, from now until 2006, the Structural Funds will lose over 20% compared with the current figure, which means that it will be very difficult to meet the needs we are meeting today and, as we have heard, there are still many problems in many Community regions.

There is a further problem, which should also not be hidden from the Commission or the members of this House: we are talking about the impending enlargement of the European Union with thirteen new Member States, most of which have a far lower average income than that of the poorest regions of the Community and there are no plans to fulfil cohesion policies with regard to these candidate Member States.

I know that the Commission will not be able to give me a reply on this question, but I am drawing the attention of the House and the Commissioner to the problem that this will cause with regard to Community cohesion policies.

Mr President, while I endorse everything that Mr Medina Ortega has said, I would like to say that, although we are a tiny Group with very little time to speak, I did refer to the report of the Court of Auditors that he mentioned, which is indeed from 9 March this year.

Mr President, Commissioner, as has been said here, EU funds cannot replace Member States' public expenditure and the structural aid that runs parallel with it.

This principle of additionality is important to reduce regional disparities, which is the aim of the Union' s regional and structural policies.

The Commission must oblige the Member States to work in such a way that the principle of additionality is implemented both nationally and regionally.

I suspect that this principle is being seriously violated in the Member States.

The effect of the Union' s regional policy is dramatically weakened by governments drastically reducing national, public and structural aid and subsidies, even in excess of what is coming into a region via Union funds.

In some cases this violation is covered up by including as national regional funds development funds, which are mainly, however, targeted at the fastest growing areas.

The regional failure to observe the principle of additionality aggravates the situation with regard to internal regional disparities within Member States, which runs counter to the aims of the Union' s regional policy.

President, it is a great pity indeed that Commissioner Barnier has been unable to be present here this morning, because this is a matter within his brief which is causing great concern not only in Scotland and Wales but in other parts of the Union.

It is a matter of real concern because it is made to appear as though a scheme which is supposed to provide specific help really ends up just been a conjuring trick between the Commission and the national governments in which extra money is supposed to be coming in, but we are told afterwards it makes no difference whether extra money went into the particular region as long as it went into the country as a whole.

We are further told, however, that all is well, because the additionality rules in the regulation are being carried through properly.

Yet the Court of Auditors, in the very report that we have been talking about, says the following things: the difficulties encountered are caused by the limited development of the principle in terms of concepts and methodology and the joint failure to find appropriate and effective procedures for verifying it.

And then two paragraphs later, the identification of the structural assistance interventions in the eligible regions is unreliable, and this leads to the inclusion of a large number of estimates and hypotheses which are difficult to verify.

No wonder that this causes disquiet throughout the Community and let us ask the Commission to give it its full attention.

Mr President, one of the main problems arising in this whole issue is that there is not any legal sanction from Europe to ensure that Member States adhere to the excellent concept of additionality.

I think we must look in detail at that problem, and we need also better coordination between DGs on this issue.

Additionality is your concept, and it is up to you to ensure that it works effectively in Member States.

We understand as well, of course, the problems you are facing concerning the overlapping of programmes, creating problems of continuity for you.

Verification is another matter that needs to be tackled with Member States, because they are guilty as well.

We understand your problems, that they are not providing for you sufficient data in good time, especially with Objectives 2, 3 and 4, to enable you to ensure that the system works more effectively.

One of the worst offenders in this connection is the UK.

No additional money has been built into the budget of our Welsh Assembly.

The European Parliament and the European Union admit that our nation of Wales is poor and yet the UK government, not only the Labour government, has not complied with additionality.

It is all very well for my colleague Jonathan Evans to imply that his party is not guilty.

For eighteen long years the concept of additionality was not complied with by his government either.

I think some momentum is being lost, Mr President.

I was talking to councils in Wales yesterday.

They need this scheme to go ahead.

It is in line with the excellent principle of cohesion, and we ask the Commission to adhere to that and to assist the poorest regions in the European Union.

Mr President, I had not expected to speak today because I represent the south-east of England which is one of the more prosperous regions of England and of Europe.

We pay the taxes that make up the grants that other areas receive.

We have no Objective 1 funding.

What Objective 2 funding we had has been reduced by the present government and the Conver Fund that used to be very helpful is now being phased out.

Because even in the south-east of England there are pockets of deprivation.

In particular I want to speak of the Isle of Wight, a beautiful island with 130 000 good people but 68% GDP per head of the European average - a very poor region.

It gets no support from Europe.

It does not get the grant from Europe because at NUTS II it is classified with Hampshire.

Hampshire is a prosperous county - 100% of European average so, no money for the Isle of Wight.

Yet, it has a population of 130 000, a bigger population than the Åland Islands which are NUTS II and do get grants from the European Union.

The island has taken its case against the British Government that it feels is treating it unfairly, to the High Court in London.

I think they might win that case.

As far as Europe is concerned, on my advice, they took their case to the Ombudsman because we believed that EUROSTAT, by refusing to define the Isle of Wight as a separate NUTS II region, was treating the island unfairly.

This week, in what I would say is a landmark ruling by the European Ombudsman, he has said that constitutes maladministration by EUROSTAT and by the European Commission.

Let me read out his ruling: "In the present case the Commission has not provided the Ombudsman with elements which show that EUROSTAT, when deciding not to classify the Isle of Wight as a separate NUTS II region, has taken into account all relevant factors including Article 158 of the Treaty and the Viola report of the European Parliament" .

He has recommended that the Commission and EUROSTAT should look again at this particular problem.

I would ask the Commission to consider fairly this recommendation that has come from the Ombudsman so that I can go back to the people of the Isle of Wight and say that this issue will be looked at again, that they can expect the Commission to treat fairly the particular problems and concerns of the island.

Then we can get in on this act of additionality and take up our fight with the British Government to make sure that we get support from Europe and from the British Government to treat fairly an island which to date has not been fairly treated either by the British Government or by the European Union.

- Mr President, Tony Blair and Donald Dewar will not have slept well last night!

Their worst nightmares have turned out to be reality.

The Labour Party heartlands of Scotland have sent them an unmistakable message.

The Scottish Labour voter - for so long taken for granted - has spoken.

The Scottish Conservative Party candidate in Ayr, John Scott, has humiliated Labour into third place - 5 000 or more votes behind.

This will only get worse for Labour when the truth about their incompetent and cynical administration of the European Union's Structural Funds becomes better known and better understood.

Because of the Labour Government's tardiness in submitting its proposed maps nine months late in December instead of March last year, it is still struggling to come up with acceptable specific projects.

Scottish local authorities are left not knowing whether or not the projects which they are having to underwrite will indeed obtain Structural Fund support.

When do you expect to be able to provide certainty for the Scottish regions and the badly needed projects which are looking for EU support?

Are you satisfied with the preparedness of the Scottish Executive to provide the necessary matching funding and to assure you that it is truly additional?

Or is it all just the usual Labour/Liberal coalition hot air, all mouth, while feet drag along the cobbled streets of Edinburgh and European money is hijacked by the Treasury in London?

I have listened carefully to this interesting debate and I will transmit all the questions which were raised here to my colleague, Mr Barnier, and he will respond accordingly.

I am sure he will send you his replies at least to all those issues which concern Structural Funds and additionality.

Mr President, inevitably Commissioner Liikanen was not in a position other than to reply formally to the debate and say that he had heard what had been said and would pass it on.

That is not very satisfactory from the point of view of the many Members of this House who made important points.

I request that Mr Barnier gives a written summary of his response to these points.

I am sure that Commissioner Barnier will be willing to follow up on this interesting debate.

The vote will take place on 11 April.

Ladies and gentlemen, I wish you a good weekend and I declare the session of the European Parliament adjourned.

(The sitting was closed at 10.50 a.m.)

I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Friday 17 March 2000.

Ladies and gentlemen, as you know, on Tuesday a terrible accident took place in Kitzsteinhorn, near Salzburg.

Eleven people were killed in an avalanche and that is not the final death toll.

The next few hours will tell.

I would simply like to tell you that at these difficult times my thoughts, indeed our thoughts go out to the victims of this disaster and to their families.

Madam President, the verbatim report of proceedings for 16 March did not record my speech in full.

I should like to correct it because the meaning has been distorted.

It says: "I am therefore able to tell the House that both Felix Habsburg-Lothringen and Karl Ludwig Habsburg-Lothringen have valid passports without any form of restriction."

Now comes the mistake: "Neither signed the declarations of renunciation required by the constitutional office, because they "have distanced" themselves from the house of Habsburg" is what is recorded in the verbatim report of proceedings.

It should read "will never distance" .

Madam President, I call upon you, our President, but also upon the Council and the Commission to clarify certain questions, raised by the events of the last few days, with the Turkish government. Firstly, the existence of a blacklist of Members of Parliament and representatives of NGOs whom the Turkish government deems undesirable.

Secondly, the arrest, which took place at the very time when a delegation from the European Parliament was visiting Turkey, of Akin Birdal, a human rights campaigner who, apart from anything else, was in a very poor state of health when he was taken back into custody. In addition to this, there has been a marked return to suppression of journalistic activities, which has been documented in a report by other sources as well.

We feel that these actions taken by Turkey against Members of Parliament are cause for very serious concern.

I would like the Turkish government to be asked to clarify whether blacklists also exist for European countries other than Italy.

We shall, of course, look into the matter thoroughly.

Madam President, I am rising to speak about what has just been said by Mrs Morgantini.

In my capacity as chairman of the Socialist delegation which visited Turkey, on Monday evening, after speaking to the Prime Minister, Mr Ecevit, to raise the situation of Mr Birdal and Mrs Zana, and to express our concern - and I would like to point out that we were able to receive the first report which is being discussed by the Turkish government on adapting the Turkish constitution and legislation to the Copenhagen criteria - we held a meeting in the Commission' s headquarters in Ankara with representatives of the NGOs, including Mr Birdal, who participated very actively in the meeting.

Yesterday, Tuesday morning, Mr Birdal went to prison to serve the sentence that the Turkish courts have imposed on him.

From Turkey we expressed our vigorous condemnation of the fact that a person who has fought for human rights for many years, like Mr Birdal - who has not paid with his life in this struggle, although he has unfortunately paid with his health - had gone to prison. We also expressed our opinion - which I believe is not only that of the Socialist Group but also of the whole of this House - that, in order to set Turkey on a path which may lead to a good relationship conducive to full accession, it is clearly necessary - as the Turkish government is now saying - to amend the constitution and the legislation and also to implement a law of amnesty so that people such as Mrs Zana, who is in prison, or Mr Birdal, who has just gone to prison, do not have to pay for crimes of opinion which fortunately do not exist in any of our countries.

Madam President, you will remember perfectly that, at the last plenary part-session which we held here in Brussels, all the political groups, without exception, condemned the murder of the Basque Socialist Member of Parliament, Fernando Buesa, at the hands of ETA.

Since then, Madam President, dozens of Spanish and Basque citizens have been victims of attacks, extortion and threats of a type that can only be described as fascist.

In fact, almost every day we witness events that take us back to the darkest days of European history.

The Spanish journalist, Carlos Herrera, is a symbol of all those victims, Madam President, and I would like to ask you, on behalf of the European Parliament, to convey to him our feeling of solidarity, because this solidarity expresses the unquestionable defence of freedom of expression that we, as democrats, are obliged to make.

Of course, we all remember the very moving debate we had right here on the subject.

We can assure the journalist in question of this institution' s complete solidarity and opposition to this truly disgraceful act of terrorism.

Madam President, I would like to inform the House of an incident which occurred at a joint meeting between the European Parliament Delegation for relations with Canada and its Canadian counterpart, which was here on a visit last week.

Mr Sturdy, the chairman of our delegation, was unable to attend at that precise time, Madam President, but he has written to you this morning to confirm what I am about to say.

Something quite astonishing for this type of meeting occurred.

The chairman of the Canadian delegation suddenly launched into the most obnoxious personal attacks upon myself, for no reason whatsoever, to the point that the other members of his delegation spoke up to disassociate themselves from his words.

Everyone was quite dumbfounded by this attitude.

This is regrettable in the extreme, since this was an otherwise excellent visit, and because we wish to maintain the best relations with Canada, after so many difficult years, principally due to conflicts over fishing.

It is imperative to restore good relations, and we therefore deplore this incident most strongly.

Madam President, I should like you to ask the Canadian government for some explanation of the significance of these declarations.

This is certainly a quite regrettable incident.

Indeed, I seem to remember, as you have just stated, that the members of the Canadian delegation expressed their regrets at this incident and offered their apologies.

Madam President, 13 April will see the start of the trial, in Iran, of thirteen Iranian citizens who are of the Jewish religion.

Since they are being charged with spying for the United States and Israel - who have denied any connection with them - there is every likelihood that the thirteen citizens could face the death penalty.

Madam President, I know that you have already intervened, at the request of certain Members of Parliament, to request that a delegation of the European Parliament be allowed to attend the trial, but if I am not mistaken, the Iranian government has, as yet, neither granted nor refused our request.

I must ask you to intervene once again, and I also call upon the Commission to intervene, to ensure that human rights are fully observed in the course of this trial, so that thirteen people are not condemned to death for reasons unknown, given that this Parliament has repeatedly declared its opposition to the death penalty.

I would like to thank you in advance for your efforts and for the endeavours of Parliament and the European Commission to protect freedom and respect for the rights of the defence in the trial of these thirteen Iranian Jews.

Mr Tajani, you are quite right.

I did approach the Iranian government, but received no response.

You can count on me, therefore, to try again.

Tomorrow' s agenda includes the topic of human cloning.

It is important for Members of the House, as they prepare for that debate, to be aware that the scientists who work behind the research which led to the patent have given a categorical assurance that their project has nothing to do with cloning and it has not at any point been directed in that direction.

This does not affect any of the central questions in the debate about the conduct of the Patent Office but since it relates to the reputation of individuals I think it fair and proper that this should be noted by Members of the House.

I should also mention an interest of my own since I am a professor of the University on unpaid leave of absence from that institution which is also involved.

Ladies and gentlemen, I should like to get on with the items on the agenda.

I do not think that all these contributions are genuine points of order.

We do still have two of them, though.

Madam President, I shall be very brief.

We share Mr Galeote Quecedo' s disapproval of the displays of politically motivated violence in the Basque country.

Having said that, I think it would be a more accurate analysis and a fairer representation of the facts if we attributed this violence to its real instigators.

The murderers of the Basque country are not inspired by the doctrine of Benito Mussolini, but by Marxism.

These are the extreme left-wing ideas represented in this House.

Unless we therefore consider that they benefit...

(The President cut the speaker off)

Let us see if Mr Katiforis' contribution is a genuine point of order.

Madam President, I would simply like to follow up what Mrs Morgantini said about the lists in Turkey.

It seems that there is also a list of Greek subjects and I see that Turkey' s Foreign Minister has stated that any country can make such lists.

Naturally, I imagine, he must mean any country that does not belong to the European Union ....

(The President cut the speaker off)

Mr Katiforis, we shall look into it, thank you.

Ladies and gentlemen, on behalf of the House I should like to welcome to the visitors gallery the Scottish Parliament' s European Committee, led by Mr Hugh Henry, its convenor.

The Scottish Parliament is one of the newest institutions within the European Union since, as you know, elections to the parliament were held in May 1999 and the Parliament was opened in July that year.

Indeed it was our former fellow Member, Mrs Ewing, whom I must welcome more particularly, who opened the first sitting of the Scottish Parliament.

We will hear statements by the Commission and Council presidency tomorrow on the interception of communications.

It is a sensitive subject. It is one where the powers of the Union are strictly circumscribed and the major political groups have not wished to take a position until they have heard the Council and the Commission.

So we are asking that the vote be postponed to the April part-session and that the deadline for putting down motions under Rule 37 of our Rules be re-opened to allow the committee eventually to table a motion on this issue.

The item is on the agenda of our next committee meeting.

Madam President, I should like to speak in support of this motion.

I must say I find it extremely sensible, since the debate is to take place shortly and we are awaiting details which will enable us to give a more informed opinion on this very important issue.

I feel, in any case, that it is generally sensible, Madam President, not to give an opinion until one is in possession of all the facts, and, in particular, to wait until the speaker has come to the end of his speaking time before deciding on a point of order.

Is there any objection to Mr Watson' s request on behalf of his committee to postpone voting on the resolution on the Echelon system until the April part-session?

There do not seem to be any objections.

General product safety - BSE tests

The next item is the Commission statement on general product safety.

Madam President, there were two issues within my area of competence dealt with in the Commission this morning and I have the pleasure and the honour to report to Parliament on both of these issues.

The first one as you mentioned, relates to the proposals on the amendment of the directive on general product safety.

I am very pleased to be able to present to you the draft revision of the directive on general product safety which the Commission has approved today.

The idea behind the directive is in fact quite simple.

Only safe food or industrial products are to be placed on the market, and this means European products as well as imported products.

The two key objectives of the general product safety directive are, firstly, to ensure a high and consistent level of protection for consumer health and safety throughout Europe and, secondly, to ensure the proper functioning of the internal market.

We have undertaken an extensive stocktaking exercise on the implementation of the present directive.

The report on the main findings will be circulated in parallel to the draft revision of the directive.

While the general approach of the directive is sound, experience has revealed certain weaknesses which we are now trying to correct.

We first wish to clarify the scope of the directive.

This directive is meant to provide consistent assurances of the safety of products for consumers.

It is also meant to fill possible gaps in sectoral legislation, for instance market surveillance or emergency procedures, which are rarely foreseen in specific pieces of legislation.

However, it does not apply where a specific sector of legislation covers the same aspects under consideration.

We want to make sure that the directive gives the best coverage possible to products used by consumers.

This also means products which have migrated from the professional field to personal use, for instance laser pointers, and secondly products which are used to provide a service.

Two examples of that would be hair-dryers in a hair salon or equipment in a gym centre.

We want to have a more efficient system. This implies, therefore, additional obligations for producers and distributors to provide information.

This is probably the most important element in this amended set of provisions.

The present situation is in fact far from ideal.

It is quite extraordinary that, for example, the authorities of a Member State were informed by the United States of a particular product that was dangerous because the provisions that prevail in the European Union do not provide for this.

This notification is compulsory in the United States but not so far in the European Union.

This particular provision is designed to rectify that situation.

I also want a reinforcement of the market surveillance by Member States.

As you know, there is no good law if it is not applied properly.

Member States now will be required to strengthen the tasks of the surveillance authorities.

They will be required to establish sanctions; they will have to develop links with other Member States as well, in particular through a network of enforcement authorities of the Member States.

This is also extremely important from an industry point of view in order to make sure that a level playing field is maintained between competitors, especially in relation to imported goods.

We also want to improve the rapid alert system, a system which is operated by the Commission to monitor the information on dangerous products and measures taken.

The scope of Rapex, as it is called, is extended to cover voluntary measures taken by industry to withdraw a product.

The practical operation of the system will be improved.

We now also foresee the possibility of opening the system to third countries, in particular candidate countries.

We also intend to introduce provisions to simplify the procedures for emergency measures at Community level, so that we can take rapid action with the advice of a regulatory committee.

I will mention here that we have now introduced an export ban for products withdrawn at Community level.

Another point to which I wish to draw your attention is improved transparency.

Consumers often lack confidence because they do not know what is happening.

We believe that in line with the general policy of the Commission, citizens have the right to know which real dangers they are exposed to and the measures taken.

The limitations to this is, of course, professional secrecy, as defined in Article 287 of the Treaty, but that of course is except when there are overriding public health considerations.

To conclude, I will say that consumers should be confident that products on the market are regulated in a consistent manner, that dangerous products are monitored in an appropriate way and that information is provided.

I believe that this draft directive can effectively contribute to our common goal of ensuring a high level of consumer health and safety and I look forward to more detailed discussions with Members of Parliament in future on this issue.

Could I, on behalf of my group, assure the Commissioner that these proposals are welcome and just ask him a couple of questions about them: firstly, could he say more about the consultation programme regarding the candidate countries?

It is urgent that those countries which aspire to join the European Union should be perfectly clear about the changing nature of the acquis communautaire and the regulations that they will have to follow.

Is there to be a regular process of dialogue in which they will be involved?

Secondly, could I ask about the process whereby dangerous products, or products that are deemed to be dangerous, are removed from the market.

In this instance, is it the case that it will be possible to speed up the procedure under the rapid reaction process for taking something out of the marketplace once it is perceived to be dangerous?

Finally, could I ask him about those products about which many people, including myself, have been in correspondence with him, which are thought to be dangerous but are not so regarded at this stage by the Commission?

Flammable furniture would be a case I have in mind.

Is there going to be a widening of the area of scrutiny which will take into account products of this sort?

Thank you, Mr Whitehead for those words of support which I greatly welcome.

Let me say in relation to your question on candidate countries that there is an ongoing discussion in relation to this issue.

My service and Mr Verheugen' s service, which, of course, is the lead service for enlargement, are in discussion on this, not only on issues relating to public health, but also protection of consumers.

Issues such as this particular provision will also be the focus of our attention.

In relation to the second part of your question, the rapid removal of dangerous goods, I would like to reassure you that under the rapid alert system, the Rapex system, there will be a speedy removal of products that have been found to be dangerous from the market.

Thirdly, I am aware of your concern in relation to flammable furniture and other items, and these are being kept under review.

Commissioner, you have just made the very important point that consumers should be able to be confident.

They should be able to be confident in all areas and that a whole raft of instruments seems to have been implemented to that end, particularly the White Paper on consumption and food safety.

Today, in order to give more meaning to all the current thinking on consumer safety and in order to reconcile Europe with civil society, particularly that society which successfully made its views felt in Seattle and elsewhere, expressing its anxieties about food quality and food safety, could the Commission not take the initiative of organising a forum for a large-scale debate between, on the one hand, the responsible parties from the Commission, the representatives of governments and members of parliament, of course, but also the representatives of civil society, non-governmental organisations, consumers' organisations, and professionals involved in the sector, in such a way as to ensure that these debates filter down to the European citizen?

This would forestall fresh criticism of us as rather a remote body, a forum that does not sufficiently involve the citizen in all debates.

Would you be in favour of establishing a forum of this kind?

I can confirm that there are a number of proposals in the pipeline in relation to the very issue that you draw attention to.

For instance, my service is currently putting the final touches to the framework document on public health, and contained in that document is a reference to the establishment of a public health forum, where issues relating to public health, and by extension the food and consumer affairs you draw attention to, will be able to be discussed.

I have been concerned by the lack of the involvement of the civil society in the issues that you talk about, particularly in relation to trade.

I also attended the WTO talks in Seattle with a view to promoting the ideas that you refer to, that is the involvement of, and the provision of a voice for, civil society, NGOs and consumers generally in the talks surrounding the whole WTO issue.

So I can assure you, Mrs Auroi, that I am concerned about these issues.

I believe it is important that there should be a connection between the work in the Commission and civil society and of course this is something that the Directorate-General of which I have the honour to be the Executive Head, must be closely associated with.

I take that responsibility seriously and we will be moving along in this way.

Madam President, if there is to be an export ban on products banned in the Community, have you investigated and calculated how many jobs will be lost in Europe as a result?

Has this been agreed with the trade unions and employers' federations?

I have to stress, Madam President and Members of Parliament, that my responsibility rests in the area of public health and consumer protection.

I have said on a number of occasions, including in this Parliament, that the primary consideration must be the protection of the public.

In circumstances where there might be a conflict between the protection of consumers, particularly their health, and monetary issues, public health must, of course, take precedence.

That is not to say that the considerations that you draw attention to should be ignored.

They cannot, but in any situation of conflict where you have to choose one or the other, public health must always prevail.

Madam President, Commissioner, I wish to congratulate the Commission on this initiative, which I believe to be extremely important.

I would, however, like the Commissioner to explain how we can take such an initiative against the background of the common agricultural policy, which runs totally counter to promoting food safety and quality?

As the common agricultural policy basically pays for production, and is based solely on quantitative criteria, namely production levels, and as farmers receive money according to the amount they produce, how can we accept a directive like this unless we first make our agricultural policy a policy based on quality, a policy based on food safety?

Or is this simply a way of dealing with public opinion, as the public is increasingly suspicious of the food chain? We cannot change public opinion overnight on the basis of this agricultural policy.

Why not start by changing our agricultural policy so that it inspires complete confidence in consumers?

Let me say that the provisions that are contained in this particular legislative document relating to food will operate for such time until the general food law comes into operation.

You will be aware that our plans, which are set out in the White Paper on food safety, contain a provision relating to the introduction of legislation in respect of a general food law, and there are many other legal provisions contained in the White Paper which are designed to protect food safety, and by inference consumers.

In bringing forward that legislation, of course, it will be necessary to have detailed consultations with the other Commissioners, and in particular Commissioner Fischler, who has the responsibility for the CAP.

I can assure you, Mr Campos, that the interaction that takes place at Commission level on these issues puts a high premium on food safety.

It is my belief that there will not be, nor can there be allowed to be, any conflict between concerns relating to the development of farming and concerns relating to food safety.

Madam President, I too would like to say how much the Commission' s statements today have pleased me.

However, I would like to dwell on the point of transparency because, like yourself, I too Commissioner think that transparency is directly and mainly related to the public' s confidence in food safety.

However, you mentioned the concept of 'confidentiality' in connection with transparency, and I would like to ask you where this concept of 'confidentiality' begins and ends because I think this is the most sensitive point if we are to win back the trust of European citizens.

This particular provision deals with improved transparency, and, as I mentioned in my presentation to you earlier, we believe in the Commission that, in line with general policy, the citizens have a right to know the real dangers to which they are exposed, and what measures can be taken to protect them.

As I mentioned the limitation to this is professional secrecy or confidentiality as defined by Article 287 of the Treaty, except in circumstances where there is an overriding public health consideration.

In those circumstances, the provisions contained in Article 287 must take a back seat. In those circumstances both the Treaty itself and the legislative provision that is being brought forward here this afternoon deal with the very situation that you identify and provide adequate and full protection for the consumer and full transparency.

Let me also say that I fully agree with you that consumer confidence is best enhanced by the provision of full information.

Transparency is hugely important in this regard and any apprehension among consumers that some information is being kept from them does enormous damage to consumer confidence.

I am acutely aware of this issue and therefore I fully agree with the import of your question.

Madam President, Commissioner. Food safety, product safety - I should like to dwell on this aspect.

We know that meat production begins in the stall.

The talk at present is of a total declaration of feedingstuffs.

We have also seen that the feedingstuffs industry has gone straight on to the defensive because they say that what is being asked of them here is unrealistic.

My question is this: how can we protect our farmers as producers if, in the final analysis, they do not know what they are feeding their animals and are then held liable?

You ask how we can best protect our farmers as producers when they do not know what it is that they are feeding their animals.

There is a body of legislation in place that deals with animal feed and in the White Paper this issue is also addressed.

There are legislative provisions in the annex to the document which indicate the Commission' s intentions in relation to animal feed.

Mr President, I too would like to thank the Commissioner for this important directive, which, as he himself says, is intended to restore consumer confidence.

The Commissioner is bound to be aware of the fact that Belgian public opinion has taken quite a knock and consumer confidence has fallen in the wake of the dioxin crisis. So much so, in fact, that a committee of inquiry was set up in the Belgian Parliament at the time of the crisis.

I would like to ask the Commissioner a specific question about the rapid alert system.

The said committee of inquiry accused the Belgian government, the authorities responsible that is, of being too slow to implement the system.

This met with the response that the rapid alert system procedures are not very user-friendly, nor is it very clear as to when exactly the alarm has to be raised.

Is the Commissioner able to provide assurances that these new proposals will overcome this problem?

You are perfectly correct in what you say about the provision of information by the Belgian authorities in respect of the dioxin issue.

There was quite a considerable delay at that time which was a matter of concern to everybody, not only the Commission, but obviously Parliament as well.

It was of such concern to the Commission that proceedings were instituted by the Commission against Belgium in the Court of Justice.

That litigation remains in place, even though the other aspects of the particular problem that you raise have been resolved, because of the delay in reporting this particular matter to the relevant authorities and to the European Union.

Perhaps I might continue with the other aspect of my presentation to Parliament this afternoon, which deals with the proposal for the introduction of BSE tests, and I have pleasure in presenting this to Parliament this afternoon.

I have announced on several occasions that I consider the new rapid post-mortem tests to be one of the most important tools in our efforts to control BSE.

The Commission' s services have worked on a proposal to introduce these tests in BSE monitoring throughout the Community since September last year.

Currently we have three different tests which have been found to give excellent results when used to test animals with clinical signs of disease after their death.

The tests offer new opportunities to test a large number of animals on a routine basis.

An active monitoring programme carried out in Switzerland has demonstrated that the use of rapid post-mortem tests could significantly improve the efficacy of BSE monitoring, particularly if targeted on animals which die on farms or are sent for casualty slaughter.

Since 1998, the Community has a BSE surveillance programme in place which is based on the examination of animals with clinical symptoms suggestive of BSE.

The Commission now proposes to replace that programme with a new programme where each Member State tests a representative sample of dead-on-farm and casualty-slaughtered cattle in its territory.

Compared with the current monitoring, the sample size will be increased twenty-five to one hundredfold in each Member State depending on the size of the cattle population.

I expect that the proposed new monitoring will provide significantly better information on the incidence of BSE in the Community than we have at present.

I am also happy to be able to tell Parliament that these particular tests will produce a result within 24 hours.

We propose to test a minimum number of 65 000 animals per year in the whole Community, and the testing will start in January 2001.

The proposed decision does not in itself have implications on the Community budget but that is an issue that will be discussed in the special veterinary committee next week.

I commend these proposals to Parliament which have been put through the Commission this afternoon.

Madam President, Commissioner, it will come as no surprise to you that I am not satisfied.

I have quite a few questions.

Parliament has been calling for the BSE test to be made compulsory since the BSE control committee.

I have asked you time and again for quite some time now: do you not consider that making the test compulsory as late as January 2001 is too little by a long chalk and much too late, given that the BSE tests were assessed a year ago?

Do you also not consider, Mr Byrne, that taking dead animals and sick animals is not good enough and that you will only get a proper overview, i.e. carry out proper screening, by testing one animal in every five, six or ten thousand to be slaughtered, depending on the BSE status of the Member State?

Mr Byrne, if the only reason for this weak Commission proposal is the Member States' unwillingness to agree, are you prepared to tell the House which Member States refused to agree to a more ambitious proposal?

This particular proposal, as I have indicated, will be put before the SVC within the next week or so and, assuming that there is agreement there, it will get to the system much more quickly than envisaged.

In the event that there is not a clear agreement, then of course the appropriate procedures that are laid down have to be complied with, that is to go through the Agriculture Council and so on.

Then, of course, the systems have to be put in place in Member States to enable this to happen, so that the dates that I have put on this are, as it were, a conservative estimate.

It may very well be that it can happen in a shorter space of time.

Furthermore, a number of Member States have already announced that it is their intention to bring forward their own testing at Member State level, and it may very well be that we are going to have Member States introducing these systems in a shorter space of time.

One must always bear in mind, however, that a system such as this will require not only legislative provisions to be put in place but the technical details will also have to be arranged.

Tests will have to be available to ensure that the systems that are put in place are monitored and working properly.

All this has to be put in place to ensure that we get the best possible results for the work that has been undertaken and for the expense that is incurred.

So the best possible date that I can predict for all this to happen and the best estimate that I can give for a commencement date having regard to all these factors is January 2001.

But if Member States are in a position to do that earlier, so be it and so much the better.

Mr President, Commissioner, you have already partially answered the first question on samples.

I have a second question for you.

I am convinced that, with regard to the consumer, we would be taken more seriously by producers if we were also to do away with the slaughter of animals at risk and if we were to have the same legislation throughout the entire Community.

My second point, Commissioner, regards application in 2001.

I feel it is necessary, in addition, to include the elimination of the emergency slaughter of diseased animals, so that only actual casualties are subject to emergency slaughter.

Control would then be much tighter in the production sector, thus benefiting the consumer.

I fully agree that there is a concern relating to the high-risk offals and that is why I will be bringing forward proposals relating to the removal of SRMs.

We know that there is a proposal there already and that will now be fast-tracked.

I am hoping that this issue will be dealt with by the Agriculture Council in or about June, which will meet the concerns that are raised by the question.

Commissioner, we are particularly concerned because the decision that has been taken does not appear to be an adequate proper response to the anxiety of the consumers.

The testing is not systematic or is limited to sick animals or dead-on-farm animals, and so we are in no way giving the impression of adopting a quasi-systematic, and hence reliable, approach with regard to meat quality and to the epidemiological policy which might be implemented.

You have just said that public health takes priority over employment and economic considerations.

Do you not think that, in this instance, considerations of the costs of vaccines and money have taken precedence over consumer interests?

This particular proposal is targeted on, as you say, sick animals and animals that have been slaughtered as a result of emergency procedures, but it is not exclusively targeted on those.

The reason why it is targeted on those animals is because that is where we are likely to get the best and most accurate information.

In addition, however, it must be borne in mind that there are proposals relating to the removal of SRMs, which add another layer of security for the consumer.

Moreover you are aware of the proposals that are in existence relating to the control of animal feed containing meat and bonemeal.

So all these factors must be looked at together.

It is not just one proposal that we are putting forward to you this afternoon as being the only answer to the protection of consumers in respect of the consumption of beef.

There is a multi-layered response, there are many issues involved, and I have indicated a number of them to you this afternoon.

I wish to assure you that there is concern to ensure the maximum protection of consumers in respect of the consumption of all food, including beef.

Mr President, Commissioner. I share all the concerns expressed by previous speakers.

As a producer, it is in my interest to restore consumer confidence in the production of cattle and sheep and related products.

My question to you, Commissioner, is this: so far, thank God, Austria has not had a single case of BSE.

Will these tests also be carried out in Austria?

Yes, these tests will be carried out in every Member State, including Austria.

Only by carrying out these tests in all Member States can we have the kind of security that we believe is necessary.

Many of you have spoken about the need to put before anything else the protection of consumers, food safety and public health, and in those circumstances the scheme that we have devised for these tests is predicated on the basis that to acquire the most valuable and accurate information it is necessary to carry out the tests throughout the European Union.

Just in order to concentrate the minds of the Member States, can we ask what the Commission, and indeed the SVC, have concluded as a result of the tests which have been carried out in Switzerland with regard to the number of animals, either by number or proportion, which have entered the human food chain?

I have to say I am not in a position to read the mind of the SVC but this particular issue is going before the SVC next week, and of course my representatives there will advance all of the arguments that I have advanced to you this afternoon.

You, Mr Whitehead, are particularly familiar with these.

I expect and hope that the proposals will receive a welcome at the SVC and there will not be a need for the proposals to then go forward to the Agriculture Council.

But I regret I am not in a position to read the mind of the SVC.

I hope that we will get a good response and I believe that from the contacts that we have had with some of the Member States, there is a real apprehension in relation to these issues, not least because of the finding of the one single case in Denmark very recently.

That has tended to concentrate minds very considerably.

I have just a minor question to add to what Mr Daul and Mrs Lienemann have already said. What is to be done?

Would it not be sensible also to eliminate the animals taken to the abattoir at the last minute, which are often likely to be infected?

Surely it is better to take them out of the food chain?

My understanding is that those animals are normally taken out of the food chain.

My question to Mr Byrne relates to the recent report of the Food and Veterinary Office in Dublin on the incidence of BSE in France.

This was a report which related to a period during 1999, but which came to the European Parliament and to MEPs not very long ago.

The findings of the report make extremely alarming reading.

A large number of French departments - I think about 23 departments - had not apparently been monitoring for BSE in the cattle populations within their departments, although they were departments in which there were a large number of dairy cattle.

The conditions and the controls in the abattoirs were such that one drew the conclusion from the report that it is perfectly possible today, 29 March 2000, that animals with BSE are still entering the food chain in France.

This must be an issue of great concern to the Commissioner.

I raised this with the French Agriculture Minister, Mr Glavany, when he came to Brussels last week.

He rejected out of hand the conclusions of the Food and Veterinary Office report and the findings of the inspectors.

I would like to know what the Commission is doing about this.

I realise that my question will be more properly posed to the Agriculture Commissioner, but Mr Byrne is responsible for food safety, and clearly there is a risk to the safety of food in France if the findings of the Food and Veterinary Office are accepted.

Could I therefore ask Mr Byrne what he is doing about this report?

This particular report came as the result of an inspection which took place in June last year.

Following on from that, the report had to be written and evaluated and then discussed with the French authorities.

That was done into the Autumn and I have been assured that the issues that were drawn to the attention of the French authorities during that exercise have been addressed substantially in the responses by the French authorities.

I have to say, in relation to reports from the Food and Veterinary Office, that I have had discussions with them about the reports and we are currently reviewing how the reports are done, how they are written and what information they contain.

I was at a seminar in Dublin as recently as last weekend discussing these issues with the chief veterinary officers of the European Union and with the Food and Veterinary Office.

We have made a number of proposals and I am satisfied that when these proposals are put into place we will have met the Member States' concerns in relation to this and also, of course, taken account of consumer concerns.

I am satisfied that the French authorities have taken action.

I would also draw your attention to the fact that recently Mr Glavany, the French Minister of Agriculture, announced his intention of putting in place approximately 40 000 tests of the type that I have been discussing with you here this afternoon to determine the presence of BSE and the levels of infectivity in France.

The next item is the joint debate on two oral questions to the Commission by the following Members:

Mr Hatzidakis, on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism, on hushkitted aircraft (B5-0018/2000);

Mrs Jackson, on behalf of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, on the hushkit issue (B5-0020/2000).

Mr President, I look forward with great interest to the Commissioner' s reply to this debate.

The first question one wants to ask is: is The Financial Times accurate this morning in forecasting that the Commissioner is about to answer our questions by saying that only part of the noise regulation will come into force, the part relating to the European Union, on 4 May.

We believe that what the Commissioner is going to say is that the part relating to third countries, which should come into force from 2002, will not come into force and will in fact be suspended.

The Environment Committee is the committee responsible within the European Parliament for the original regulation on aircraft noise and we have watched with some dismay the reluctance of the United States to accept that the European Union is within its rights to insist on bringing the regulation into force by the due date.

The background to this is from our point of view continued prevarication on the part of the United States' administration whose attitude has, in the past, given us insufficient guarantees that they are willing to negotiate seriously through ICAO to find a way out of our difficulties.

The Environment Committee insists that we have every right, given the proximity of very many European airports to centres of population, to try to get lower noise levels from planes landing in Europe, no matter where they come from and who operates them.

Europeans should surely be able to legislate as they wish to protect the population of Europe, and give them the highest standards possible of noise protection.

To put it at its crudest, how will we explain the situation to the people of Europe if, after 2002, they still hear noisy old planes from third countries, fitted with the hushkits we judge inadequate, clattering round our skies?

This is, of course, a difficult issue to discuss sensibly in a United States election year.

We can understand that American politicians have little room for manoeuvre.

I think, however, that the Commissioner may be about to announce to us that light is dawning and that we can see a way forward that will enable both sides to be satisfied and to allow sensible negotiations to continue for a global solution.

The first compromise put forward a little time ago seemed to many in the Parliament to be much too shaky.

In effect the European Union would have suspended the whole regulation, and then the United States would have suspended its complaint to ICAO and negotiations would have gone forward.

The danger, it seemed to us, was that the European Union would have been left with absolutely nothing.

We look forward to what the Commissioner has to say, and I have to underline that it is very important that she should satisfy the Environment Committee and the Parliament, not least because if she is asking us to suspend the application of any part of the regulation, it will have to come through this Parliament by codecision.

Mr President, as has become clear we asked that question because Regulation (EC) No 925/99 on the reduction of aircraft noise must enter into force very soon, while in the meantime there are ongoing talks between Mrs de Palacio and the US, which has found the regulation, which was approved by the Council and Parliament, disturbing and is calling for its withdrawal and suspension.

As is clear, the regulation was adopted in order to protect the environment and the public.

At the same time, however, it seems that the regulation affects the interests of the American aircraft industry.

To show good faith, the Council and Parliament postponed the regulation' s entry into force by one year.

Despite our positive attitude, the Americans for their part have shown supreme arrogance especially towards the European Parliament, calling as I said earlier for the regulation to be withdrawn at first and then, as a slight concession, speaking about indefinite suspension.

As we know, Mrs de Palacio was authorised by the Council of Ministers to negotiate with the US.

I have no doubt that aside from being lengthy, those talks were also difficult.

A time came when it seemed that some progress had been made, though far from anything that could be considered satisfactory, but in the end even that slight progress has vanished in the last few days, since the US has petitioned the ICAO under Article 84 of the Chicago Convention against the European Union concerning the regulation whose purpose, as I said, is to protect the environment.

For our part, we wish to make it abundantly clear that we have no desire to create tensions with the US. We do not want a trade war, we want no problems in our relations, and we regard them as allies and friends.

However, as they themselves would say, they must understand that 'it takes two to tango' .

Our position, then, is as follows:

firstly, our strategy must aim for global agreement on much stricter standards on aircraft noise;

secondly, if there is no agreement, then it is clear that the European Union will have to act unilaterally;

thirdly, we consider that the position of the United States, calling for withdrawal of the regulation or indefinite suspension of its implementation, is totally unacceptable;

fourthly, we welcome the progress made within the Committee on Aviation Environment Protection towards gradually phasing out any noisy aircraft in circulation today;

fifthly, we oppose any further delay in the regulation' s entry into force for aircraft of the Member States, and this because we regard the issue as an internal one and we cannot consider the Americans competent to determine what we do about our own aircraft,

and sixthly, we are prepared to review Regulation (EC) No 925/99 on aircraft registered in third countries provided, however, that in the interim agreement is reached within the ICAO on new standards.

If good faith prevails, that agreement can become a reality.

Meanwhile, however, there is no reason to suspend the regulation for third-country aircraft, for the very simple reason that the regulation concerning such aircraft only enters into force in 2002.

In that sense I cannot understand the insistence of the US, who continually talk about the suspension of our own regulation.

And, of course, we believe the US ought to withdraw their petition to the ICAO under Article 84 of the Chicago Convention, because that kind of action blows the spirit of cooperation sky-high.

Mr President, I want to conclude with two respective observations.

The first is this: it must be made clear who is negotiating on the US side.

We know who our negotiator is, it is Mrs de Palacio, and to date she has proved a very good negotiator.

As for the other side, it is not clear who the negotiator is.

This is preventing us from having a stable position from the US, and is also thwarting our own efforts.

The second observation is this: the US must understand that the European Parliament is no longer the body it used to be, in previous decades.

It is now a powerful body.

So they must understand that besides the Council, they must also talk to Parliament and take its views very seriously, because without Parliament there can be no progress.

So if they want us to help them, they must first help us, they must first contribute towards progress by showing goodwill.

With these thoughts, therefore, I would like to ask the Commissioner and the Council what their positions are.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, one thing is crystal clear: on 4 May, the 'Hushkits' regulation enters into force in the European Union.

That is all we know for sure.

From then on we will have to see how we can carry on negotiating with the United States.

The objective of this regulation is very clear: to achieve compliance with what has been agreed within the ICAO, that is to say, that the aircraft landing at our airports genuinely conform to the noise standards of the ICAO.

This regulation has no further intention, but I believe we need to be more ambitious.

The current standards, as Mr Blokland has reminded us, date from 1978.

Since then, world aeronautical technology has made great advances.

Today, the noise levels of current aircraft can sometimes be 20, 40 or even 50 times lower than those of older aircraft.

It is therefore a question of achieving new noise levels as international standards within the ICAO.

In this respect, we need to cooperate with the Americans who, after all, are our friends and allies.

The fact that this regulation will enter into force soon does not mean that we do not have to carry on negotiating with the Americans with the aim of improving the situation with regard to noise standards within the ICAO.

Firstly, we are going to seek higher international standards within the framework of the ICAO, we are going to cooperate within the ICAO and we are going to seek a common objective, which will be to reduce noise at airports even further and thereby achieve lower noise levels, by applying more modern technologies, with a phasing out period for the most noisy aircraft with the establishment of a chapter 4.

Secondly, the Americans must suspend their complaint to the ICAO in accordance with Article 84 and we - this is something we could negotiate - could suspend the part of the regulation which refers to third country airlines; but certainly not in reference to European airlines, since that regulation enters into force on 4 May.

In other words, with regard to European airlines, there is nothing more to say: we can only negotiate with regard to third country airlines - for which we have some leeway until 2002 - and we would have to suspend that part.

Obviously, when we reach a new agreement within the ICAO, the Community standards will be adapted to the new ICAO standards, which, in any event, will be better than those laid down in the present regulations.

Ladies and gentlemen, Mr Hatzidakis asked me who we are negotiating with and Mrs Jackson reminded us of the meeting they have had with Mr Slater, the Secretary of State for Transport.

I have negotiated with many people from the United States administration.

The only problem is that what is required - and I hope that at some point we will obtain it - is not only negotiations but also the confirmation that the preliminary agreements reached with the particular negotiator on duty receive the backing of the United States administration.

I have kept you informed promptly and with complete transparency throughout all this time.

I am not going to expand on what the stages have been, since you are perfectly familiar with them.

The last took place on Monday, with Mr Slater.

Agreement could conceivably be reached on the basic ideas which I presented to him, and we will continue to work on it.

Therefore, Mrs Jackson, what the Financial Times said is not true at all.

Only if there is in agreement on the other aspects would I come to Parliament to ask for your support for a postponement with regard to third country airlines, for a suspension of the provision of the regulation in this specific respect.

I hope that, between us all, we can reach this agreement.

Mr President, I should like to have begun my intervention with the title of a play by Shakespeare: 'Much ado about nothing' , but unfortunately it would be totally unsuitable.

There is much ado about a great deal.

However loath I am to put things a little more into the right context, thereby perhaps disassociating myself somewhat from the President-in-Office of the Council, the point is: we are not talking about the environment here, which I am otherwise quite happy to discuss, as you well know, we are talking about health.

What we are discussing today has very little to do with legislation on transport or the environment; on the contrary, we are legislating to protect people.

Every scientist in the world, including the USA, has established over recent years that noise makes people ill.

Noise makes people ill and therefore not only injures and stresses people themselves, it also damages the community as a whole, i.e. the national economy.

That is something which many of us here wish to bear in mind, which is why we tabled this legislation.

That is what we wish to bear in mind, irrespective of the fact that, otherwise, we are, of course, always happy to integrate transport policy into other policy areas and environmental policy into transport.

The legislation is in force, as everyone has said here today and, commendably, the Commissioner too has again made that quite clear.

The last few times I have listened to you, Mrs de Palacio, I was most impressed by the very clear, very logical and very decisive manner in which you conveyed that.

I welcome that and I congratulate you.

The legislation is in force and I therefore wonder what the Council of transport ministers discussed yesterday. Basically, it has nothing to discuss, unless it wants to submit new legislation to us, which is obviously not the case.

Mrs de Palacio said earlier that she will need Parliament' s support at some point for the second part of the regulation, the part relating to third countries, including the United States, South America and the countries of eastern Europe, i.e. all countries outside the European Union.

That is the part which is due to enter into force in April 2002.

But if you approach us, Mrs de Palacio, and want us to defer this part, then I think you will need to offer us more than you have at the moment, as you well know. If you go back and negotiate, then one thing must be made clear and I hope and believe that the House is relatively united on this question: it must be clear that we need a declaration of unequivocal standards.

We must be clear and united on where we want to go and what the ultimate goal is.

I am not haggling over six months, but I do want clear objectives and we must have a clear timetable.

If - and I say this now completely off the record, insofar as I can in a minuted debate - if, rather than April 2002, it were September 2002 or even January 2003, I would be the last to make a song and a dance about it, but I do want a clear, binding timetable to be adhered to by everyone concerned, including the USA. Once we have all this, then I should like to see it go through the general assembly of the International Civil Aviation Authority, the ICAO, in September.

If it goes through in September of next year, then we still have enough time to suspend the regulation.

I am not prepared to consider a suspension without the conditions which I have just formulated.

If that is, nonetheless, what you come to us with, then it will be possible, but it will have to go through the normal legislative procedure and then you will need Parliament' s support - even the United States of America must understand that - and then perhaps we can finish at the end of the day with another play which Shakespeare might have called "No ado about anything" !

Mr President, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, Commissioner, I actually think it is a shame that you have had to invest so much time and energy in this issue, because as Mr Blokland said, we are spending all our time looking back at regulations from the seventies instead of looking to the future.

I think that is a particularly sorry state of affairs.

We must bring the new standard into force as soon as possible. It is in our interests to do so, but what we are lacking is commitment on the part of the Americans.

They have not given us their commitment, that is what makes us so suspicious.

They have given it to us so often.

On so many occasions they have half committed themselves and then backed off again, and so on and so forth.

As far as I am concerned it is clear that the suspicion derives from the Americans' lack of willingness to commit themselves to something that is inevitable.

Only when they actually sign on the dotted line to this effect will we in the Union be able to help to move the situation on.

We should not turn things round.

Yesterday we had a talk with the American Minister for Transport.

It was my impression at this meeting, that in common with ourselves, Mr Slater is of the opinion that the hushkits are an issue of secondary importance which stands in the way of far more important issues, and that we must put this matter to bed as swiftly as possible. But there is a huge amount of suspicion on their side too.

And so I think that it is time for a clear signal; but it must come from them in the first instance.

What we need to hear from them is that they want to find a solution, not behind closed doors somewhere, but officially, on paper.

It is not acceptable for them to ask us to defer our own regulations.

Their future commitment depends on whether or not we are willing to defer.

The complaint they have filed with the ICAO is in fact uncalled-for blackmail.

I believe they should withdraw it.

Mr Hatzidakis has said that it should be withdrawn and you have said that we should defer.

I have tabled an amendment to the effect that they should definitely withdraw the complaint.

I think we need to word what we currently have on paper a little more strongly.

What is worthy of admiration, in my view, Commissioner, is that you are presently taking the same line as Parliament and, it would seem, the Council.

That being the case, I think our position is stronger than that of the Americans at the moment, and we must do all we can to keep things that way as far as possible.

Mr President, in my opinion, Commissioner Palacio is completely right to uphold the European position against the United States.

This is not the first time that our positions, laws and regulations have differed from those of the United States. Consider the example of genetically modified organisms.

If we want to maintain our sovereignty, we must do so in every area, including this one.

Now, I feel that the issue here is not which devices should be used in aircraft to reduce noise, for standardised procedures exist to control the levels of aircraft noise, but that the important thing is for the noise limits not to be exceeded.

It does not matter whether this is achieved through the use of modified afterburners or other types of engine mufflers. What is important is that the limits which have been set to protect our communities are respected and that their observance is enforced by the competent bodies.

Mr President, Mrs Roth-Behrendt quoted from Shakespeare in her contribution and I would like to quote from Hamlet' s soliloquy: whether it is nobler to suffer the slings and arrows of outrageous fortune or by opposing end them.

As chair of the US delegation here in this Parliament, I am only too well aware of the many slings and arrows of outrageous fortune that make up the trade disputes between the EU and the United States of America.

But having said that, it is important to get each trade dispute in proportion.

Every one of us would want to welcome the small indication of progress that comes after the meetings with Secretary of State Slater and Ambassador Morningstar.

I say this knowing full well the massive pressures there are upon Congress in an election year.

I do not want to be too critical, we know only too well as parliamentarians about electoral pressures, but it is worth saying that the pressures in the United States are not so much from the citizens, from the voters, but from the big business backers of both parties and both campaigns and that makes an enormous difference.

The Commissioner and others have outlined the basis of possible discussions.

I will not go through all those again, but just say that there is a need not only for a timetable to agree stringent noise standards but also to agree a timetable in which they should be implemented.

Mrs Roth-Berendt has mentioned a target with which I will concur.

I want to make one other brief point, because this dispute highlights the need for earlier and more forthright discussions about the many issues over which there are disagreements.

The delegation for relations with the US is planning, as you probably know, a transatlantic legislators' dialogue using video-conferencing techniques so that we can discuss and understand - and clearly the Americans need to understand - what the powers of this Parliament are, the positive powers and also the negative powers and also the importance of timing in our joint negotiations.

We need to learn lessons on both sides but I very much hope that even at this late stage there can be some sort of resolution.

Mr President, I strongly support the resolutions that are on the table before us.

I do so not only because of the importance of the hushkits issue itself, although no one should underestimate the huge disturbance and the very real and significant health impacts from noise, but also because it establishes the principle of Europe setting its own regional standards.

The hushkits issue is also widely seen as a first case of how aviation issues will be dealt with in the future by the new Parliament and the new Commission.

It is very clear that ICAO standards need to be seen as a floor, not as a ceiling.

It should be quite possible and right to go beyond them.

This is a critical case because it is about how we face hard decisions about how to begin to make a deeply unsustainable industry a little less damaging.

It is about how we put into practice the Treaty of Amsterdam on integrating sustainability concerns into all policy areas, even the very difficult ones.

I wonder if we can use this conflict and these negotiations with the US to enter into a broader discussion about a proactive global environmental policy on air transport more generally.

Hushkits are important but noise pollution is only one aspect of the environmental damage from the airline industry.

It is the fastest growing source of greenhouse gas emissions and we know that it is deeply unsustainable.

We need to be looking towards a new policy architecture to deal with all these questions.

Mr President, I have problems with the genesis of Regulation 925 of 1999 to which the resolution before us refers.

It was voted through the last Parliament without any debate.

It is contrary to the principle of non-discrimination.

It offends against the fundamental requirement for reasons under Article 253 of the Treaty in that there is no explanation at all in the regulation for the use of the bypass ratio of an aircraft engine as a criteria when internationally approved noise and emissions standards certification for aircraft engines already exist.

It is contrary to the principle of proportionality and, most importantly, it is contrary to the rules of the WTO which require the use of performance standards, not design standards, as is the case in this regulation.

In whose interest was it to depart in this piece of fast-track legislation from tried-and-tested procedures and the practice of using objective performance criteria for environmental standards?

This legislation rolls out the proposal made by Airbus at an Airbus-hosted meeting in Toulouse on 29 and 30 September and 1 October 1997, effectively commercially sponsored legislation.

At that meeting the Members of the European Civil Aviation Council (ECAC) present were told by their legal advisor that they could not proceed under the ICAO Agreement as requested by Airbus and so Airbus persuaded the Commission to legislate where ECAC could not.

We now have legislation which threatens another transatlantic trade war - but that is another issue - which does not respect best environmental practice with performance criteria and which - surprise surprise - excludes aircraft using a modern US manufactured engine while permitting the continued use of the Rolls Royce engine which conveniently has a bypass ratio of 3.1.

Yes, Mr President, noise pollution affects 20% of our population, and 0.01% comes from aircraft.

I fully support the necessary standards to protect the health and quality of life for our citizens.

The strictest possible criteria to reduce noise and emissions from aircraft engines can only be achieved however by using performance criteria and not design criteria which is commercially sponsored and fast-track in anti-competitive legislation.

Environmental legislation based on design criteria, I put it to you colleagues, is without precedent, and for good reason.

I would ask with respect that the Commissioner, in the interests of probity, satisfy herself fully as to the genesis of this regulation in question to ensure the impact of its roll-out on the aviation industry world-wide.

I do not care whether it is America, Europe, China or Mars - world-wide is equitable.

Above all, it should serve as well as possible the important environmental objectives it purports to achieve.

I fully support the objective of the regulation and we must agree on a timetable to implement noise standards, but it must be one based on objective performance criteria and not design criteria.

The integrity of this House demands detailed answers to questions which raise major doubts about aspects of a regulation upon which the motion before us is based and on which we will be asked to vote tomorrow.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I think Mrs Doyle cannot have examined the genesis of the actual situation, as we have debated this issue on several occasions in this House.

I cannot imagine, Madame Doyle, that the Council was unanimous and this House almost unanimous in taking a decision based solely on the Airbus defence.

No, there are thousands of residents living in the vicinity of airports who suffer considerable noise pollution.

Obviously, this regulation offers them the best protection as things stand at present under current international legislation.

Secondly, Mrs de Palacio, Mr Coelho, in my view, the postponement of one year served no useful purpose, for the simple reason that American interests - and when I say American interests I mean the interests of one section of American industry - are clearly interests which run counter to the general improvement of standards, even more so in the case of 'hushkits' .

There are only two things that will cause them to shift position: pressure from the European Union or pressure from their own public opinion for, unfortunately, the United States is a vast territory and the environs of airports are less badly affected than the territories overflown in Europe, which is, by virtue of its geographical layout, affected more seriously by such constraints.

American opinion will therefore only be shifted significantly in turn if we first make it known in our capacity as Europeans.

My regret is that this year' s postponement may have been seen by our partners as indicative of weakness in our position.

Let me tell you, then, Mrs de Palacio, Mr Coelho, that we want to see firm negotiation.

There are no grounds for suspending regulations.

We might at best revise them, but we could do so only in one instance: if an international agreement makes it possible to improve the situation and to draw up an overall framework agreement.

An overall framework does not mean evading the issue, as I began to doubt upon hearing the views of the Council.

Do we in fact all agree on the idea that the framework agreement should apply to standards on sound levels and should not seek to cover too wide an area, which would tend to force us to accept a number of compromises regarding sound levels, at the expense of some other type of pollution, which probably deserves our attention, but not so much so as to warrant our ceding our argument.

Mr President, Commissioner, as you know, I live in Bilbao, a city in the Basque country which, like other European cities, is very densely populated.

Our airport is very close to housing and, like 20% of Europe' s citizens, we suffer levels of noise from aircraft which health experts consider to be unacceptable.

On 29 April 1999, the European Union adopted a Council regulation with a view to controlling and reducing the noise produced by subsonic aircraft engines, limiting in due course the use of silencers, which do not resolve the problem completely, and helping airlines to update their fleets with new generation aircraft which create less pollution.

This has pleased the powerful American firms, as aircraft manufacturers, but at the same time harms them because they are also owner-investors in thousands of leased aircraft in all the countries of the world. Since these aircraft are antiquated, it would be difficult for them to operate in Europe.

Neither has the European Regulation been popular with the American manufacturers of aircraft engine silencers known as 'hushkits' and, therefore, the United States has announced commercial, financial etc. measures against the European Union unless we delay the entry into force of our regulation.

I understand that we must not be inflexible. We must offer an opportunity for dialogue and understanding, but in order for this to happen, the United States must agree to adopt certain approaches.

At the next assembly of the ICAO, the United States must commit itself to the adoption of a new and more restrictive standard for aircraft noise, as well as to withdrawing its complaints and coercive measures.

Only under these circumstances could we accept a delay in our regulation for third countries.

Mr President, the British delegate has just spoken using Mr Bowe' s speaking time.

I would be more than pleased to present her with the documents I received from Commissioner de Palacio, which weaken her story, so as to enable her to have another look at them, and so as to avoid her bringing the whole Parliament into disrepute.

I think, Mr Blokland, you could have done that without actually announcing it to Parliament, but never mind.

Mr President, like most of the other speakers here, I see absolutely no reason at all for any kind of immediate suspension, or urgent suspension, of the hushkit regulations.

There are regulations, we put them in place.

I was here at the first reading in the Parliament in Strasbourg.

There were not very many of us here, a lot fewer than there are today, when we introduced these regulations in the first instance.

There are going to be useful regulations and they are going to bring positive benefit to the people of Europe.

That does not mean though that you should not negotiate.

I was fortunate to have an opportunity to talk with Under-Secretary Slater yesterday along with a number of my other colleagues.

They seem to be reasonable people who would be willing to talk reasonably with you about a better, long-term solution.

We know there are better long-term solutions because we know our regulation applies only in Europe.

Although it may have some spillover effect in the not too far distant future to third countries, we are not having a world-wide effect.

Your objective, Madame Palacio, is to get that world-wide effect.

Your objective is to make absolutely sure that whatever agreement you come up with with the Americans secures new controls on aircraft noise world-wide out of ICAO in a clear timescale.

It is not just a question of agreeing to the controls and the levels but also a timetable for implementation that makes us happy and satisfied in this Parliament.

That is the mandate we are giving you here today.

That is what we would like to see you come back with at some time in the future.

In the meantime though, enforce and implement the regulations as we expect them to be enforced and implemented.

Tell the Americans that if they want to talk in an atmosphere of confidence and trust and goodwill, the first thing they can do is to suspend their Article 84 complaint in ICAO.

They do not have to withdraw it, they do not have to take it away, they just have to make sure it does not go on the agenda of the next meeting.

Suggest that to them, Madame Palacio.

Start the negotiations and then come back to us with a reasonable compromise.

Mr President, first of all I wish to thank all of you for your speeches and especially the Portuguese Minister for Transport, the President-in-Office of the Council.

Yesterday we discussed this matter and I received the full support of the Council, for which I would like to publicly express my gratitude.

Ladies and gentlemen, it should be made abundantly clear that our ambition must not be to conform to the 'Hushkits' Regulation, to the regulation on silencers.

The regulation on silencers means nothing more than implementing the noise levels of 1978 and we are in the year 2000.

We must reach an agreement within the ICAO, and to achieve this, the support and cooperation of the United States is essential.

The United States should not be the only country with which we cooperate, but we certainly must cooperate with the United States and with the United States in particular.

We must move beyond what has been reactive behaviour, that is to say, behaviour that has worked on the action-reaction principle, and move towards an approach which is ambitious and which looks to the future.

In this respect, there are two issues we should be discussing: in domestic terms, we must talk about the communication on air transport and the environment which Minister Coelho referred to, which we discussed yesterday in Council and which involves many other things, apart from simply noise, such as emissions, and a series of other issues. With regard to the United States, we must try to find a form of cooperation that goes much further than current cooperation within the ICAO.

We must try to create a common transatlantic aviation area which is a regional area in which we can achieve greater integration of the markets on each side of the Atlantic, because it is a geographical area with similar levels of development and which has the highest level of air traffic in the world.

Clearly, the tensions and confrontations involving the 'Hushkits' issue hinder this type of action.

We must therefore try to reach an agreement which will allow us to overcome the current situation of conflict.

I wish to make it very clear that the regulation on silencers comes into force on 4 May for European airline companies.

There is nothing more to say about this.

We have proposed to the Americans that, if they consider the definition of 'bypass ratio' to be a form of discrimination - and we think it is not - that we try to find a different definition.

However, the United States have not wanted to enter into this type of discussion.

The regulation comes into force for European airlines on 4 May.

Nevertheless, ladies and gentlemen, if we could reach an agreement with the United States to act jointly, in order to obtain lower levels and greater requirements in terms of aircraft noise emission, I would be prepared to make a proposal to this Parliament and the Council to suspend the provisions of the current regulation with regard to third countries.

As Mr Sterckx has said, we must overcome any mutual distrust, we must overcome situations of confrontation and I believe that a gesture of this type, if backed on the American side not only by this commitment but also by the withdrawal, or even suspension, of Article 84 of the ICAO Convention, would be valuable if, in exchange, we manage to move forward together to achieve better international standards which will also be applied here in Europe, and which will allow us to go much further than we can go with this regulation on silencers at the moment.

That is all. Thank you very much, Mr President.

I would like to thank you once again for your support and I would like to thank the President-in-Office of the Council on Transport and the Council on Transport as a whole for the answer they gave me yesterday.

I have received one motion for resolution from the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy pursuant to Rule 42(5) of the Rules of Procedure.

The vote will be taken tomorrow.

The next item is the joint debate on twelve oral questions on Mediterranean policy by the following Members:

Napoletano, Sakellariou, Obiols i Germà, Naïr, on behalf of the PSE Group, to the Council (B5-0015/2000);

Napoletano, Sakellariou, Obiols i Germà, Naïr, on behalf of the PSE Group, to the Commission (B5-0016/2000);

Rutelli, on behalf of the ELDR Group, to the Council (B5-0202/2000);

Rutelli, on behalf of the ELDR Group, to the Commission (B5-0203/2000);

Morgantini, on behalf of the GUE/NGL Group, to the Council (B5-0204/2000);

Morgantini, on behalf of the GUE/NGL Group, to the Commission (B5-0205/2000);

Queiró, Muscardini, on behalf of the UEN Group, to the Council (B5-0210/2000);

Queiró, Muscardini, on behalf of the UEN Group, to the Commission (B5-0211/2000);

Fiori, on behalf of the PPE/DE Group, to the Council (B5-0212/2000);

Fiori, on behalf of the PPE/DE Group, to the Commission (B5-0213/2000);

Bautista Ojeda, on behalf of the Verts/ALE Group, to the Council (B5-0214/2000);

Bautista Ojeda, on behalf of the Verts/ALE Group, to the Commission (B5-0215/2000).

Mr President, great is the frustration and disappointment of the European Parliament, almost five years on from the Barcelona Declaration, at the lack of progress made in the implementation of the programmes and objectives it set out.

Disappointment and frustration which are all the greater when we consider the substantial progress of European policies in other fields, for example regarding the East, Central Europe and the Balkans, and also relations between Europe and Latin America.

It is obvious to all of us that the Euro-Mediterranean Partnership has to complement the European policy for the Mediterranean Basin.

I would like to stress the basic points upon which we expect a detailed response from this debate: the clause which sets out the basis of the agreements, on respect for human rights, the undertaking to draw up ratification instruments for giving effect to the association agreements, and the development and acceleration of new linkages for a cooperation process with Libya, provided that the requisite political conditions are in evidence at the Cairo Conference on 3-4 April 2000.

Mr President, I would also like to stress the need to forge ahead with objectives that facilitate a greater involvement of civil society in creating networks linking cities, ports, universities, trade associations, entrepreneurs and non-governmental organisations, for the INTERREG programmes to be used to promote balanced development with regard to trade and territory through the modernisation of economic structures, so that the MEDA programme, which has received such a disappointingly small amount of funding, can at last bear fruit.

Finally, Mr President, may I say that the Union' s Mediterranean policy could become one of the common strategies laid down by Article 12 of the Treaty on European Union regarding foreign and security policy, and that we could also promote the political dimension of the issue through parliamentary debate.

Mr President, our group has joined with other groups to hold a debate on Mediterranean policy, and I cannot deny that this initiative stems from a two-fold concern.

The first is a general consideration.

I would like to make this very clear to the representatives of the Council and the Commission: as a group, although I imagine that we are not the only group to feel this way, we are concerned that the Mediterranean policy which, in 1995, was at the centre of a major project, the Barcelona project, no longer appears to be a political priority for the Union.

This is a general political concern.

We feel that Mediterranean policy needs to be thoroughly analysed and relaunched, on a par with enlargement, or perhaps more so than this, seeing that the enlargement strategy is now safely underway.

The second point is more specific.

In our view, Barcelona defined the major points of this policy, but, with the passage of time, these have been lost from sight.

Our feeling, which will become apparent from the resolution which is to be put to the vote, is that complete priority has been given to a procedure for the development of a free trade area, shifting the emphasis from other policies which, in our opinion, should go hand in hand with the objective of building a free trade area, which we fully support.

This means that the pillars which were the basis for Barcelona must be adopted and perhaps even reinforced. I refer to a policy of support for investment, support for employment, support for decentralised cooperation and support for a policy of joint management of migratory flows, and also a policy for culture, schools, young people and for setting up dynamic, worthwhile exchanges between these countries and their communities.

Furthermore, we stress the fact that, although the association agreements are important and their ratification procedure does need to be speeded up, they cannot be used as the basis for a policy which must, by nature, be multilateral.

And this is a weak point.

We therefore welcome the major step taken by Parliament in deciding, through the Presidents of the Groups, to convene the Interparliamentary Forum.

We agree to support the civil forum.

We welcome the French presidency' s announcement in its programme of its intention to hold the next Euro-Mediterranean Conference in Marseilles, but we feel that the Marseilles Euro-Mediterranean Conference must be more than just a run-of-the-mill administrative conference.

The political signal which we must all send out together and the instruments which are decided upon must be capable of successfully relaunching this policy and restoring its status.

I hope I have been clear. We feel very strongly about this issue.

Mr President, the Confederal Group of the European United Left are extremely concerned at the stagnation of the Mediterranean partnership and we see can no justification for the Commission and the Council' s reluctance to reopen the debate.

And yet two of the fundamental causes of the breakdown in the debate have now been eliminated: a new Commission is installed in Brussels which numbers the creation of a Euro-Mediterranean area of peace and stability among one of its priorities, and peace negotiations between Israel, Palestine, Syria and the Lebanon are once again in progress.

It is time for Europe to send a political signal to reopen negotiations with non-member countries of the Mediterranean, and this is why we welcome the idea from the future French presidency of the Council of organising another Euro-Mediterranean Conference.

However, the agenda must tackle the central issues and not skirt around them, as it currently threatens to do.

We are also concerned at the total lack of interest shown by the Commission in reopening the debate.

And yet much remains to be done in order to relaunch the three cooperation chapters decided upon in Barcelona.

A large workshop needs to be opened on promoting the protection of human rights in the area of justice, in a framework of mutual respect, for we cannot make concessions for anybody on human rights issues, not even civil Europe.

For a long time now, Parliament has been proposing to create a Euro-Mediterranean Court of Human Rights modelled on the Court in Strasbourg, and also to set up mutual consultation mechanisms to facilitate applications for peaceful solutions to conflicts and the fight against organised crime.

Political dialogue must be structured and take the form of regular consultations.

To this end, we propose that Summits of the Heads of State and Government of the Mediterranean countries of the European Union should be held regularly, and that the role of the special envoy for the Middle East should be consolidated, so that we do not relinquish the political role we desire to the United States.

There is now no reason to exclude Libya from the debate, and it should therefore take part in the next Euro-Mediterranean Conference.

With regard to economic and financial cooperation, the Commission has the duty to relaunch negotiations for the signing of trade contracts which are socially sustainable.

This is extremely important, for the mutual benefits are very great.

At the same time, however, I would stress that the bilateral approach hitherto adopted by the Commission does not seem adequate to meet the numerous challenges presented by the Mediterranean.

Economic cooperation must include multilateral/bilateral approaches facilitating the promotion of trade among Mediterranean countries and south-south trade.

This multilateral approach must also be mirrored in the fields of cultural and social cooperation.

The promotion of a culture of diversity, of individual freedoms applicable to all members of a multi-cultural society, of peaceful coexistence and of dialogue across religious divides with respect for universal human rights, and the affirmation of women' s rights and freedom, hinges on multilateral cooperation programmes, which must include a number of countries.

In this sense, it is essential, in addition to being the Union' s responsibility, to support democratic organisations from the civil society of Mediterranean countries and parliamentary dialogue modelled on the Euro-Mediterranean Forum.

Mr President, Commissioner, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, the need to create a Euro-Mediterranean area of peace, economic justice, citizenship and stability is common to both sides of the Mediterranean.

It is a major challenge, a foreign policy which the Community institutions must undertake to pursue in order to provide the Union with a political and cultural project which will bring about peaceful coexistence and growth in the face of different territorial and cultural conditions, and, putting aside the myths and legends of days gone by, make the Mediterranean a genuinely peaceful area, and not one of conflict or of abuse of power or where impoverished immigrants lose their lives attempting to reach Europe.

Mr President, the development of the Mediterranean requires, first and foremost, political strategies which do not allow bureaucracy to take over and stifle the whole process.

Europe stands for the noble values of peace, freedom and social development, values which have to be constantly defended for the very reason that they were won at a high price.

However, the economic progress of Europe is now threatened by globalisation, and our continent is in serious danger of recession due to competition from South-East Asia - where labour is one tenth of the price - the United States and Japan.

Our defensive strategy of enclosing ourselves in a single market and barricading ourselves in will ultimately prove to be a losing one.

We cannot shirk the challenges thrown up by globalisation, but have to learn how to approach and exploit them.

The Mediterranean is still the greatest benchmark of Europe' s capacity to exert influence beyond its borders.

The present issue consists in developing a Mediterranean policy in a Union which is skewed towards the north-east and is focusing less and less on the Mediterranean Basin in the South.

The Mediterranean policy is set in a context of wide-ranging interests and latent tensions, and it therefore has to include various different elements such as the development of peace-keeping initiatives - now that the Middle East peace process has been relaunched - and we are grateful for the way that the Pope' s visit to the Holy Land is improving relations between the different religions, leading them towards mutual understanding and support, and the creation of partnership projects involving Northern and Southern Europe, for the very reason that the objective of transforming the Mediterranean into an area of dialogue, tolerance and cooperation that guarantees peace and stability cannot be achieved without firm political will and sustainable, balanced social development.

The need for a different, more efficient Mediterranean policy for the developing countries in the Basin cannot be disregarded.

Too many unnecessary interventions have been made, while the need remains for aqueducts, schools and the means for young graduates to build a life for themselves.

Therefore, Mr President, much work still remains to be done.

Mr President, this is a decisive moment for the future of the European Union. We are preparing for unprecedented enlargement and, at the same time, we are working on reform of the institutions in order to be able to best manage such a large political entity.

We cannot underestimate the value of the Mediterranean region: it must be a privileged partner in our policies, an important border on which we must focus our attention.

The process defined in Barcelona in 1995 for building an effective Euro-Mediterranean Partnership is still ongoing, despite the intention expressed by the European Union governments to include the Mediterranean policy among their priorities, an intention fully supported by our group.

Despite the progress made at bilateral and multilateral levels, the Charter for Stability and Security is still awaiting completion.

The Partnership is still far from achieving its objectives.

The forging of multilateral relations has not led to sustained expansion, and the cultural, social and human partnership is highly inadequate.

Since the completion of the peace process is essential for the smooth development of the Euro-Mediterranean Partnership, does the Commission not consider that the Commission and the Union should take resolute action to further the Middle East peace process?

With regard to the economic and financial partnership, in addition to creating a free trade area by 2010, would the Commission specify the actions it intends to promote in the countries concerned in order to accomplish the objectives of macroeconomic stabilisation and the process of liberalisation and privatisation, to simplify laws and to consolidate social policies.

By what means is the Commission going to make the MEDA programme more efficient?

What are the actions it is going to undertake to reduce income discrepancies and to encourage the creation of infrastructures and the reviewing and updating of trade agreements?

What are the specific actions that the Commission intends to adopt to create a genuine cultural, social and human partnership?

Let us go right back to Barcelona and return to a global tack, fostering the priorities that have been ignored and promoting the development of civil forums, to encourage the active participation of civil society.

Let us make it our firm political will to relaunch the Mediterranean partnership, defining a new generation of programmes to prevent fragmentation, improve coordination and ensure the efficient use of resources.

Our group has faith in the Mediterranean, and wants the European Union to accord to it the strategic, economic and political importance it once had.

Mr President, enlargement is essential. It is genuinely important for the future of the European Union, as it is the only way to prevent Europe becoming an island of prosperity surrounded by poverty.

However, if enlargement towards the East is inevitable, how can we explain that enlargement should only happen in one direction, taking us further away from the Mediterranean, which is so near by, forgetting how near the countries of the Maghreb are, some of which enjoy a special association status with the European Union, and that our future is intimately connected with theirs.

This is no need to remind you of the important common interests we have with those countries in terms of agriculture and fishing, nor the serious shared problems relating to immigration between Andalusia and Morocco, which create added difficulties.

European regions such as Andalusia, which are very close to the countries of the Maghreb, share more interests and problems with those countries than they do with other Member States of the Union, and far more than they do with the future candidates for enlargement.

In fact, this love-hate situation between certain Community regions and the Maghreb creates unnecessary tensions, both economic and social, which we must resolve by putting all our powers of negotiation on the table and by using all the existing mechanisms, or new ones which should be created, in order to relaunch Euro-Mediterranean cooperation.

In this respect, do the Council and the Commission believe that the creation of an inter-regional body or council for the Straits of Gibraltar, consisting of political representatives of the bordering countries and the European Union itself, could be useful and allow for the decentralisation of cooperation?

Mr President, on behalf of my colleague, Chris Patten, I have the following comments.

The Commission agrees on the need to reinvigorate the Barcelona process and will soon be putting forward ideas which should enable us to move the process forward this year, particularly in the light of the Euro-Mediterranean Summit which is likely to take place in mid-November.

The text of the Charter for Peace and Stability should be agreed at the meeting in mid-November. It should be as meaningful and far-reaching as possible.

I should like to see regular security and stability discussions open to all partners willing to participate.

In addition, we should develop cooperation on drugs, terrorism, migration, good governance and conflict prevention, at least with the Maghreb countries.

I also want to see an enhanced human rights dimension in the partnership.

We should have a frank and open dialogue on the policies needed by partner governments to improve the situation in this respect.

We shall use MEDA and the specific MEDA democracy programme to support positive actions, particularly by NGOs, to promote respect for human rights and democratic freedoms in the region.

The economic objective of the partnership is to create an area of shared prosperity through the progressive establishment of free trade accompanied by substantial EU financial support for economic transition and to help the partners confront the social and economic challenges which this implies.

Programmes financed by MEDA are in place to support industrial modernisation, structural adjustment, development of the private sector, training and promotion of small and medium-sized enterprises.

All programmes contain conditionalities ensuring that their social impact is taken into account.

I intend to ensure an even tighter focus on priorities in our financial cooperation in the future, particularly by concentrating on sectoral adjustment facilities.

These will enable us to focus on the key objectives of the partnership and will also improve the disbursement rate on MEDA.

The implementation of MEDA has been subject to criticism, some justified, some not.

It is a young programme with specific objectives linked to the implementation of free trade with the partners.

Often the final beneficiaries are not the partner governments. This has, in itself, increased the complexity of implementation.

The Commission has put forward a proposal to amend the MEDA regulation to ensure a more strategic approach to programming, better coordination with other donors, including the Member States, and streamlining of procedures.

The proposal is still under discussion in the Council, and I fear, that far from supporting these objectives, the Council may be moving in the direction of making the procedure even heavier.

I count on the Parliament to support our efforts.

For my part, I shall also ensure that internal Commission procedures are reformed in a way to speed up delivery.

Investment is a major issue which was addressed at the important conference held in Lisbon on 29 February and 1 March.

That conference showed that the key to increasing the regions' attractiveness to investors is for the partners to have flourishing, open, competitive economies with a secure and predictable legal and administrative environment.

We shall use MEDA to support the partners' efforts in this respect.

Regional cooperation to ensure that the region presents a unified market is also vital.

Sub-regional free trade areas should be supported as a step towards the global objective.

I want to encourage the harmonisation of single market measures among all partners - an action programme should be agreed later this year - and to offer diagonal cumulation of origin to those partners who agree free trade among themselves.

Regional infrastructure is essential to economic development.

MEDA supports, among other things, the interconnection of infrastructure as regards energy, transport and new technology.

Investments in these areas are primarily supported by loans from the European Investment Bank as well as other donors.

I shall continue to ensure that the right mix of funding is used to ensure that public and private actors can play their appropriate part.

As far as agriculture is concerned, there should be a thorough consideration of all of the issues related to this sector with a view to seeing what we can do to improve market access with the objective of free trade.

In addition, we are considering the introduction of a regional cooperation programme which could focus on processing and conservation, quality standards and animal health.

Support for civil society is key to the development of the human dimension of the partnership.

I shall ensure that civil society is supported but as far as the old decentralised cooperation programmes are concerned, I shall not repeat the mistakes of the past regarding financial management and administration.

NGOs can benefit from a number of programmes.

The SMART Programme on the environment, the Cultural Heritage Programme, the EUROMED Youth Programme and MEDA Democracy, for example.

I will consider what more we can do while respecting the need for sound financial management.

Mr President, at this stage it is obvious that this parliamentary initiative is born out of a general sense of concern in this House about the slowness, and even paralysis in some areas, in implementing agreements reached within the framework of the Barcelona Conference, almost four years ago.

For some reason or other, these agreements have not been implemented.

It would certainly be cause for satisfaction, and would be a significant step in the right direction, if this debate were to persuade the Commission to promote a more active attitude to the relaunch of the Euro-Mediterranean association agreement.

From reading Parliament' s joint motion for a resolution, which we will probably approve tomorrow, we can certainly observe specific proposals which we can use as a starting point.

I am sure that we all agree on the strategic importance, which is crucial for the European Union, of its Mediterranean influence; politically, since, being neighbours, we are required to build a relationship which goes beyond the constitution of a simple free trade area; economically, because I am convinced that opportunities for mutual benefit are being created which we are not taking sufficient advantage of; also, socially, because the problems of the extent of economic inequalities and of the great pressures resulting from migration require coordinated and structural solutions and, of course, we also have to mention the question of security.

From this point of view, Parliament is justified in repeating its request that the European Union make a more decisive contribution to the peace process in the Middle East, especially given that the parties in the conflict requested this explicitly during the recent visit to the region by the President of the European Parliament.

We are convinced that, in order to be successful, a European Union common foreign and security policy must be based on the concept of balance in order to respond to the sensibilities of all the Member States and, therefore, of all the citizens.

Mr President, in November, five years will have passed since the signing of the Barcelona Declaration.

The moment has therefore arrived to make an assessment of the Euro-Mediterranean policy, an assessment of the results achieved and also of this policy' s delays and shortcomings.

In this respect, this debate and the motions for resolutions tabled by the Groups in this Parliament are very appropriate initiatives.

This assessment certainly includes some positive aspects.

On the one hand - and this is no small thing - the process has continued, despite the negative factors that have affected the Middle East peace process.

The summits and meetings have always been held with the presence of all the countries involved, including Syria, Lebanon and Israel.

Secondly, although progress has been slow, we have seen the signing, ratification and implementation of a series of association agreements.

Thirdly, we have been developing a permanent routine for intergovernmental cooperation and we have been implementing the different financial aid projects of the MEDA programme.

However, these results cannot lead us to ignore the delays and shortcomings which, in part, have frustrated the hopes and expectations raised at the first Euro-Mediterranean Conference of November 1995.

Firstly, there has been no decisive political thrust when we really needed it.

Strictly speaking, it could be said that, in political terms, Mediterranean policy should today be the main priority of European Union foreign policy.

Enlargement towards the East, in strategic and historic terms, leads to a scenario in which the only uncertainties are the timetable, pace, cost and means for achieving it. Even allowing for possible new regional conflicts, it is difficult to imagine any outcome other than the culmination of the enlargement process.

On the other hand, there is no certainty whatsoever when it comes to the future of the Mediterranean.

It will depend to a large extent on the policy of the European Union as to whether this region becomes a 'sun belt' with a new economic and social balance in a context of security, development and peace, or a 'slum belt' where the norm will be an increasing imbalance between north and south, galloping poverty in the south and the progressive emergence - forgive the repetition - of every type of emergency: violence, instability, terrorism and uncontrollable migratory pressures.

Secondly, I believe that, as a result of this lack of political direction, the economic and financial dimension has experienced obstacles and delays.

In this respect, we should point out the difficulties involved in launching the MEDA programmes, the excesses of centralisation, the heterogeneous nature of aid criteria, the lack of joint reflection on the possibility of a common Mediterranean agricultural policy and, thirdly, and as a consequence the tiny amount of direct investment in the south: just 2% of the total of the European Union' s direct foreign investments.

This is an illustration of what could be described as the "strategic blindness" of the European system as a whole.

In conclusion, a new phase is necessary, with the Portuguese and French presidencies, a brand new start for Euro-Mediterranean policy, which could promote a 'virtuous' circle encompassing the objectives which were correctly drawn up at the Euro-Mediterranean Conference in Barcelona in November 1995.

Thank you very much, Mr Obiols.

I have allowed you the extra minute since you are chairman of the Maghreb delegation.

Mr President, the Council and the Commission should take good note of Parliament' s practically unanimous position in favour of the relaunch of the Union' s Mediterranean policy, as was established at the Euro-Mediterranean Conference in Barcelona in 1995, under the Spanish presidency, and whose characteristics have already been highlighted here.

On the other hand, we know that certain obstacles, basically political ones, have hindered its correct application.

I would simply like to remind you that, within a few years, the population in the south of the Mediterranean will be greater than that of the north, but that practically all the wealth will be in the north rather than the south.

If the European Union does not act quickly to redress the balance of this situation, both from a demographic point of view and from a social, economic and political point of view, we will be creating an explosive situation for future generations to deal with.

It is therefore a political priority to show political leadership, obviously accompanied by economic cooperation in order to improve the expectations of these populations and bring prosperity and stability to the whole of the Mediterranean, because the prosperity and stability of the European Union also depends on this.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, in Barcelona we signed with due formality the Charter for the Mediterranean which we had ensured would focus on the rule of law and human rights.

I am very pleased to see that the joint resolution adopts the suggestion we made to ask the Commission and the Council to publish an annual report on the situation regarding human rights and the rule of law in the countries of the Mediterranean.

I believe, however, that it is not enough to make declarations of pious intent about human rights and the rule of law and then forget all about them, the way many things are forgotten. No, this policy must be made a key element in bilateral relations.

We should therefore tell those countries where human rights are not observed that bilateral relations may be forced backwards, and we should tell the countries where there is real progress, such as in Morocco or elsewhere, that bilateral relations may go forwards.

Let me take Tunisia as an example, one of the first countries with which we signed a partnership agreement.

The situation of the rule of law and human rights in this country is scandalous.

Right now, there are people held there as prisoners of conscience.

The Tunisian government declares itself to be in favour of opening up economic relations, but who is entitled to a passport in order to be able to leave Tunisia?

Who is entitled to travel and to make use of the Mediterranean area?

Not the opponents of the regime.

Right now, there are two people on hunger strike in Tunisia because they want passports in order to be able to travel, specifically a publisher, the wife of Mr Ksila who was one of the people nominated for the Sakharov Prize.

I am bringing up these subjects because I believe we must not cease to remind the countries of the Mediterranean of their responsibilities as regards the rule of law and human rights.

It is not enough to have a healthy economic balance sheet.

It is not enough to achieve good results in agriculture or anything else.

Respect for human rights must take precedence in our policy, and that is not the case at present.

It is not the case, and it is something we have to change, and that means Parliament, as well as the Commission or the Council.

Mr President, the Euro-Mediterranean Partnership launched in 1995 has broken down. It is official.

The relaunch of this policy announced by the forthcoming French presidency of the European Union bodes well, since the countries in this region have to face extensive and urgent challenges.

In order to respond effectively to these, it is crucial that the interests of the peoples around this central sea are truly taken into consideration, and that the people participate actively in the partnership.

Let me say from the outset that the time has come to change the course of Euro-Mediterranean policy.

First of all, the objective of a policy of this type must be to tackle the blatant disparities between the northern and southern shores of the Mediterranean, which keep the peoples of the south in an explosive economic and social situation.

Poverty, a high level of illiteracy, massive unemployment, particularly among young people, extreme inequalities and an increasing technological deficit compared to Western countries.

There are considerable infrastructure needs, not to mention environmental challenges.

The effect of this widening gap can only be to increasingly foster the most violent forms of nationalism, fundamentalism and war.

Indeed, the weight of foreign debt, the drop in the prices of raw materials and structural adjustment plans have already forced these countries to adopt swingeing austerity programmes and have wrecked their capacity for development.

The prospect of a free trade area, a sort of regional MAI, is liable to dangerously exacerbate these power struggles.

Studies show that two thirds of Tunisian industry would not survive the opening of frontiers.

The slowdown in the process indeed stems as much from the deadlock in the Near-East peace process as from the many concerns expressed increasingly overtly: for instance, the first Euro-Mediterranean trade union conference held a year ago which highlighted the complete absence of the social dimension.

There are, however, advantages to establishing things from scratch.

Citizens, NGOs and trade unions are committed on a day-to-day basis to supporting solidarity between peoples and to putting many local cooperation projects into practice.

The Euro-Mediterranean process thus calls for a pooling of resources which should be advantageous to all concerned in moving towards a common area of prosperity, which was the objective set in Barcelona.

There are many possible ways out of the dogma of free trade that was challenged in Seattle.

It is more than time to wipe out the debt of the countries of the South, and to engage in technology transfer and cooperation in the areas of training between public services.

I should finally like to say that, besides working towards peace in the Middle East, which the European Union must continue to strive for, I am just as keen to seeing Europe play a much more active part in ensuring that the referendum on self-determination in the Western Sahara, which is under serious threat, is held in the conditions stipulated under UN authority.

The credibility of European foreign policy is at stake here.

Mr President, while Parliament is getting bogged down with details, here we are, forced to deal with one of the key areas of European concern, the Mediterranean, in a great rush.

Because of the complementarity that actually exists between the interests of the two continents of Europe and Africa, this vast Euro-African entity which necessarily revolves around the Mediterranean, our Mediterranean policy is invested with an importance, and I might say a seriousness, which unfortunately finds little reflection in the programmes carried out to date by the European institutions and the fact that, as in the case of MEDA, three quarters of the programmes adopted are still not applied.

Everything goes to show that, in fact, in this matter we are truly unaware of what is at stake.

We have heard it said that the stakes are vast, and it is worth repeating.

If we manage to create a unified, fraternal union between the lands to the north and the south of this sea then we shall continue to hold a position at the centre of world balance instead of being consigned to the sidelines in favour, it goes without saying, of other geostrategic formations, those of the Atlantic, primarily, or the Indian Ocean, or, above all, the Pacific, centres on whose periphery we are increasingly nothing more than supernumeraries.

There is no salvation to be found here, except by a proactive approach which - let me say quite bluntly - involve our regarding transatlantic communities of interest or relations with the continent of Asia as secondary and focusing on privileged relations, 'privileged' in the precise meaning of the word, with the Arab world.

This would mean, for example, accepting countries such as Morocco, Tunisia or Algeria into the Union as Member States in their own right.

Without this proactive approach we should have no chance of gaining control of the balances, or rather the increasing imbalances in the world, or any control of economic flows - I am thinking particularly of raw materials, but also of agricultural production - no control of demographic flows, where balances are disrupted at great speed and to our disadvantage, as everyone knows, but also no control of cultural flows, for we certainly have no better allies than our Arab and African partners in resisting what is hastily termed globalisation, but which I feel is rather the general Americanisation of the world.

Our nations will remain great powers in the next century only insofar as they have successfully met the challenge of the Mediterranean partnership.

I hardly need express our pessimism in this regard.

Firstly, because this key aspect is struggling along lethargically, with vague impulses served up in the form of speeches, witness the so very insipid Barcelona Process, this pathetic alibi for our basic indifference.

Pessimism, too, because our transatlantic partner, the United States of America, has fully understood that there is no better way to subject Europe to its domination than by cutting the productive links Europe may establish with its neighbours around the Mediterranean and is striving to erect a vague but effective wall between the two sides of the Mediterranean.

Episodes such as the Gulf War and the proscription of Libya, and even of Syria from the international arena, in which we were skilfully manipulated by Washington, were just the most recent illustrations.

Pessimism, finally, because Europe remains too divided on this point, with too many states, particularly northern European states, preferring the Atlantic connection to the Euro-Arab or Euro-African connection, as evidenced by the gradual abandonment of the Lomé policy and the weakness of our Mediterranean policy.

All in all, on this matter, as on other matters, it is only the nations that can attempt to take up this great challenge, primarily France, which is still the leading power on the Mediterranean coastline, by means of its Arab policy and its policy of establishing links throughout the French-speaking world.

France may be acting alone, but it is acting for the benefit of Europe as a whole.

Mr President, in principle we must welcome the fact that the Mediterranean area is again being seen more as a partner of the European Union.

I think the inclusion of Libya is crucial.

Libya in particular has a great deal of catching up to do in telecommunications now that the embargo has been lifted.

I visited Libya a month ago and found the people, especially the young, to be open-minded and most interested in Europe.

It was clear from talks with the rector of the university and students that the long-term embargo has left many young people traumatised by a feeling of powerlessness and being distanced from the north.

I think that now we must all do everything we can to prove to the people in all the Mediterranean countries that we recognise them as equal partners and offer them assistance, both in order to restore their trust in us as well as to solve their economic and social problems.

This will certainly be in the interest of both sides.

Mr President, I believe that this debate is appropriate at the end of the five-year period for which MEDA was programmed, but I also believe that we are going to have time to discuss this new regulation, which at the moment is being debated in this House.

What I mean to say is that, in any event, I share the Commission' s concern and I think the proposal to simplify the procedures is a positive one.

I hope that this Parliament will support it.

In the few seconds allocated to me, I will simply refer to two aspects which I believe should be dealt with urgently in relation to the MEDA programmes.

Firstly, decentralised cooperation and the activities generated by the Barcelona Process between the most active social operators from the non-Community Mediterranean countries and the European Union. These are projects, which, as well as having intrinsic value, create growth in the social sectors in these countries.

It seems essential to me, since we want an area of free trade and prosperity, and since we also want to push decisively for democratisation in this area in the southern Mediterranean, that we support the men and women who are trying to work in this field.

We must put an end to the poor esteem in which they currently hold the Union and we must once again ensure that their expectations and ambitions are supported by the Union.

I believe furthermore that the Commission must have sufficient human and material resources to do so.

The second issue which concerns me is the inclusion of immigration in the regulation.

I am concerned about how this issue will be dealt with in the Mediterranean area.

We must not only create agreements on the readmission clauses, and not only provide resources for guarding borders. We must also, by means of imagination and new measures, create the capacity for co-partnership with these countries, so that we can adopt a legal approach to the issue of immigration and so that people do not simply feel that we have closed the border to them but that they can move freely within this free trade area.

Mr President, Commissioner, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, this is a good day to raise a series of Euro-Mediterranean considerations, since a series of cultural, social, religious and political events are taking place which cannot pass unnoticed by those of us, looking on from Europe, who wish the best for the countries bordering the Mediterranean which furthermore, throughout history, have lived alongside certain European countries.

This debate is also appropriate because this Parliament' s delegation for relations with the Maghreb countries visited Morocco and Tunisia last week, with a full working agenda.

It is true that the situation is different to the situation some years ago, since we can see certain slight improvements in specific areas such as human rights and in the economic field, despite certain difficulties.

In general, we have seen a common desire on the part of these countries to associate themselves with their neighbours in the north who form part of the European Union, since they see us as their sole hope of solving the problems they are facing on a day-to-day basis.

That is why the different European institutions, Parliament, the Commission and the Council, must make an effort so that these people in the Mediterranean area may improve their situation.

To this end, we must carry out a decisive and courageous policy which will allow us to successfully confront the Euro-Mediterranean challenges which have arisen in this globalised world.

The Mediterranean and its peoples need us.

We cannot leave them to struggle alone.

Mr President, the basic economic instrument for the implementation of our Mediterranean policy, resulting from the Barcelona Process, is undoubtedly the MEDA programme, on whose activities it is my task to report, and for which my fellow Member, Mr Valdivielso de Cué and I are currently involved in amending the regulations.

Let me draw the attention of our fellow Members to these reports which are currently being discussed in committee and which are to be presented before the House in June.

At this juncture, I should like to highlight two important points: firstly, MEDA is a good programme, a young programme, which has to date suffered from inefficiencies in its implementation.

Less than 30% of the total appropriation in the order of EUR 3 500 million for the last four years has been paid to date, what with delays in payment, observations from the Court of Auditors on the examination of the files and excessive time periods.

The regulation must be amended and Commission staff must be increased.

We shall have proposals to present to Parliament to this effect in order to ensure better examination of the files.

Next, 90% of the appropriations are reserved for bilateral cooperation, but only 10% for regional cooperation, which is of great interest to us.

This must be increased, decentralised cooperation must be stimulated and the participation of civilian societies must be utilised.

Secondly, this programme does not focus solely on economic matters and free trade.

There is also the definition of a common area of peace and stability, and the concern for rapprochement of peoples by means of a social and cultural partnership.

Finally, it plans to bring third countries up to par in terms of respect for human rights and, in this regard, in many countries the situation is showing no signs of improvement.

We therefore request that the Council and the Commission publish a report annually, or every two years, on human rights in the countries participating in the Barcelona Process, which could be used as a basis for the implementation of cooperative operations between the European Union and third countries.

Tunisia, which Daniel Cohn-Bendit has just mentioned, has alone received 10% of the MEDA appropriations, almost all of which have been paid.

This is something that we must take into account specifically in order to ensure that it is the European Union which is actively directing the projects and that the projects are not just decided according to ...

(The President cut the speaker off)

Mr President, I wish to say that the debate is important, but I feel there is a certain lassitude and perplexity about it, especially from the answers given by the President-in-Office, whose intentions are clearly good.

I think that we can learn something from the concerns expressed on all sides.

In the minute I have, let me say that the European Union' s Mediterranean policy lacks strategy, and it lacks a timetable and clear objectives in contrast, if you will, to its policy on Eastern Europe.

It would be impossible to summarise the Minister' s answer in five lines, because he referred to all the issues but did not answer the key questions.

Secondly, in my opinion, there is a lack of generosity.

The European Union is stuck on free trade, despite free trade zones having negative economic and social consequences in those areas. It could, on the other hand, be adopting direct, specific and effective measures on issues such as debt or technology transfer, where we see hesitancy and a lack of effectiveness.

The third point is that in my opinion the European Union has no autonomy.

We see this in the Middle East vis-à-vis the USA and on a broader scale, too.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, the European Union' s professed determination to have an ambitious Mediterranean policy is not a new one, at least in terms of the speeches made and the declarations of intent, and our discussions this evening only confirm this.

From Lisbon in 1992 to Cannes in 1995, and especially in Barcelona that same year, there have always been requests for a strong Euro-Mediterranean Partnership to be established.

The European Union and twelve Mediterranean countries were consequently pleased to adopt the famous Barcelona Declaration in 1995.

This declaration had particularly great ambitions in economic and financial, political and security, social, cultural and human terms.

As others have said before me, however, our partners have felt even more disappointed since this date: with very few association agreements and no agreements actually implemented yet, considerable amounts of European appropriations anticipated, but fewer allocated and still less actually paid, as all our partners keep telling us time and again.

Generally, moreover, the technical problems, the political problems, the limited direct investment, the inordinate debt of our partners are plain for all to see and to deplore.

The results of all this are disastrous: the disillusionment of our partners, inadequate economic development, illegal immigration into Europe and a general upturn in fundamentalism.

It is therefore necessary, as everyone this evening has said, to relaunch the Barcelona Process, to simplify its administrative procedures, to agree to open our European markets further and to cancel debts, all this in return for the necessary efforts of our partners in matters of human rights, and all this in the context of an overall Mediterranean vision which will have to ensure balance and peace between all the areas which, together, form the Euro-Mediterranean area.

Indeed we do not have any alternative, and I wish, this evening, to thank the President-in-Office of the Council for all the important and relevant information he has given us.

As a Socialist, I therefore support the substance of the proposals included in our joint resolution.

Presidents all, Commissioner, on the occasion of this debate I should like to highlight the importance and the impact of the Pope' s visit to the Holy Land.

Whatever our beliefs or religious convictions, we are forced to acknowledge that John Paul II' s message is a major contribution to progress towards peace in the region.

In an area where pitfalls abound, in a context where every word and every gesture is weighed to assay its symbolic meaning, in Jordan, Israel and the Palestinian territories the Supreme Pontiff has found the right way to discuss persistent problems between the communities.

The Holy Father shows us that the religious aspect of the conflicts cannot be disregarded, and that dialogue between religions is just as much a factor in stability as political dialogue.

This visit has been an exceptional demonstration of the understanding that can be achieved between all parties.

My feeling, on the occasion of this debate, is that it is worth paying tribute to the actions of this great man of peace, this indefatigable pilgrim.

I should also like to ask two questions of the Council and the Commission, the first on regional cooperation between the countries of the southern shore of the Mediterranean, and the second on the role of the European Parliament in the Barcelona Process.

Firstly, with regard to regional cooperation - and the presidency has just answered this in part - the Union bases its Mediterranean policy on the Barcelona Process.

This approach is supposed to be global and regional and treats the Mediterranean Basin as a regional entity.

It is reasonable to think that cooperation between the Mediterranean States should be much stronger.

The second question concerns the role of the European Parliament, and it must be noted that, at present, it is too limited.

So, as I pointed out, the Union' s Mediterranean policy is supposed to be global.

The European Parliament is, in fact, only consulted on the occasion of bilateral agreements.

It would be necessary either to reconcile the European Parliament with the Forum, along the lines of the ACP-EU Joint Assembly, or to organise the more active and regular participation of the European Parliament in ministerial meetings.

Mr President, the Union' s Mediterranean policy must not only gain shape, but also gain substance. It should be filled with content and not emptied.

It is essential that we strengthen political, economic and social ties and continue to move forward.

We now have an association agreement with Morocco, in force since 2 March, which makes that country a privileged partner.

However, there can be no close cooperation with Morocco without dealing with an activity - fishing - on which the economies of many European regions depend.

I would like to mention the fisheries agreement between the European Community and Morocco, which expired on 30 November last year.

Well, four months later, we are in a vacuum.

We still have no date for a start to negotiations.

Not to renew that agreement would be a backwards step in our Mediterranean policy, because if that policy is to be more than empty rhetoric, we must make progress in specific cases.

Mediterranean policy takes its name from the sea where, for centuries, European and North African fishermen have fished together.

The Commission should fulfil its duty and ensure that these negotiations finally begin.

Mr President, if, by means of this debate, we manage to focus the attention of the Council and the Commission on the importance of the Southern side of the Mediterranean to European policy, we will have partly achieved our aim.

As has been said, a delegation from this Parliament has just visited Morocco and Tunisia.

Human rights, the Western Sahara, fishing, agriculture, investment, MEDA and emigration were discussed by MEPs, the authorities and representatives of civil society.

As a result, we have been asked to ensure that the Union has a greater political involvement in the Mediterranean.

There are fears about enlargement and there is a feeling that the balance is more in favour of the north and the east and less in favour of the south.

It would be good if the representatives of the Commission and the Council present here today could answer this question.

On the other hand, we have to encourage investment in the region, and, respecting the idiosyncrasies of these countries we must cooperate with them so that they may make progress in their democratic processes and their respect for human rights. We must accept their pace but at the same time make it clear to them that the European Union does not only want to invest in economic development, but also in peace and stability, based on respect for peoples' fundamental rights and on people being able to exercise their liberties in a democratic way.

This is not an easy task, and only dialogue, and not confrontation, can achieve it.

European Union actions are still very diffuse and complex in this area.

The Barcelona Conference corresponds more to political will than to a genuine strategy aimed at creating a real Euro-Mediterranean area, where economics play an important part, but only one part, in a permanent dialogue and political cooperation in the social and cultural areas and also in the defence of mutual interests in order to guarantee the peace and stability which we all wish to see in this region.

Mr President, I did not want to speak earlier in order not to interfere in the debate.

I simply wanted to express my total disagreement with the previous President chairing this sitting with regard to speaking time, since he has not respected the time allocated to the Groups and the time which is, of course, distributed amongst the MEPs.

The previous President has clearly discriminated in favour of other MEPs who have been allowed to speak longer than they should have done.

Once we take our places, all MEPs are equal and all of us have to respect the Rules.

Therefore, although this humble MEP does not represent a multinational lobby, he asks that the time allocated to his group be respected.

Mr Bautista Ojeda, your comments will be recorded in the Minutes and will be passed on to the Bureau.

Mr President, my thoughts go automatically to the debate we held here about five years ago, when the Commission at the time bombastically announced the EU' s new Mediterranean policy.

Today, we all agree that most of what was announced then has not been achieved.

The reason behind those poor results is a combination of a lack of political will on the one hand, and lack of money on the other.

I think we should place greater emphasis on Mediterranean policy, based on the diptych of democracy and development.

Democracy in the countries of the southern and eastern Mediterranean because that will help us to understand one another, and development because, apart from anything else, development will reduce the flood of immigrants we have and will continue to have in years to come.

The Council and the Commission, then, must make every possible effort to reanimate the Euro-Mediterranean Partnership agreed at the Barcelona Conference.

It is also important to give new impetus to the MEDA programmes and at the same time to strengthen programmes such as MEDA-Democracy, Euromed-Audiovisual, and sub-regional training programmes for journalists.

Parliament has also long been proposing the implementation of a programme of interregional and transnational cooperation aimed, by effective financial and systematic coordination of the INTERREG and MEDA programmes, at achieving effective economic and social integration of the participating countries and regions on both sides of the Mediterranean.

I would also like to dwell on another issue which may not seem important to you, but which is important to me personally.

I think that an important and catalytic role in ensuring the successful outcome of the Euro-Mediterranean Partnership must be played by the Mediterranean islands, such as Malta, Cyprus and Crete, as the middle ground between the two sides of the Mediterranean.

Since those islands have traditional links with both sides, they can be the centres of that cooperation and I think we ought to direct many programmes in the context of MEDA towards that.

I have received 6 motions for resolutions pursuant to Rule 42(5) of the Rules of Procedure.

The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.00 a.m.

I would like to take this opportunity to tell you that the Secretary of State has formally apologised for being unable to remain with us for the continuation of the debate.

High Level Working Group on Asylum and Migration

The next item is the debate on the report (A5-0057/2000) by Mr Hernández Mollar, on behalf of the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs, on asylum seekers and migrants - action plans for countries of origin or transit - High Level Working Group [(C5-0159/1999- C5-0160/1999 - C5-0161/1999 - C5-0162/1999 - C5-0163/1999 - C5-0164/1999 - C5-0165/1999 - C4-0133/1999 - 1999/2096(COS)].

Mr President, firstly, I would like to express my thanks to the political groups in this House who have supported the report of the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs, and who have enriched it through their participation in the intense debates which we have held.

Furthermore, I also wish to recognise the positive and cooperative attitude of the Commission to whom, Commissioner, I would like to express my personal thanks.

The action plans for the six countries selected by the High Level Working Group on asylum and migration represent, and this seems to me to be important, the first external action of the European Union in the field of immigration and asylum, and as Commissioner Vitorino correctly said in Strasbourg, they are priority objectives for the Member States and I hope they continue to be so.

My report, Mr President, on the one hand reflects the critical feeling of all the groups with regard to aspects of form and substance in the presentation and preparation of the plans.

We have not been able to examine each one of them individually and we have had to limit ourselves to very general considerations and, on this basis, make proposals which I hope will be taken into account by the Commission and the Council for these and for future action plans.

Mr President-in-Office of the Council, Commissioner, the very fact that these action plans are to be implemented is positive in itself.

It is also positive that we have combined action plans in the fields of foreign policy, cooperation and development and in adopting measures to regulate migratory flows.

However, what has not been positive is the way that the Council has presented these plans to Parliament, which has remained silent on the way in which they have been selected and drafted.

Our basic concern relates to the possible effectiveness of the actions planned for countries such as Afghanistan, Somalia or Iraq, where political instability is combined with constant violations of the most basic human rights.

Quite different is the case of Morocco, or even Albania or Sri Lanka, where there is a greater likelihood of multi-sectoral cooperation, and there are countries with privileged situations such as Morocco, where we have just implemented an association agreement.

In addition to the fact that it is impossible to comply with the time limit laid down for the majority of actions, there is also a lack of budgetary contribution for some of the measures envisaged, as more than 50% of them have no financial resources.

That is why one of our proposals is to create a budget line for 2001 to cover these needs.

I would also like to draw your attention to the imbalance between the measures to control migratory flows and those which promote genuine cooperation in the development of the countries selected, including measures for integration.

We cannot criminalise immigration, whether it is for economic or political reasons.

It should be understood that it is crucial to implement the provisions of the Treaty of Amsterdam and the Tampere Summit on the 'communitisation' of asylum policy and the fair and humanitarian treatment of refugees and immigrants.

We should put emphasis on the humanitarian conditions in reception centres and also take advantage of the experience of some countries with regard to regional approximation.

As well as economic immigration and cooperation with countries of origin, we should deal with the question of labour market legislation in the Member States themselves, the social integration of immigrants and the fight against the mafia-types involved in the trafficking in human beings.

The problem cannot be resolved solely by means of readmission and border control agreements, although they are necessary. In terms of the action plans, these measures seem to be given priority over the ones I have just mentioned

I also consider it necessary to create an immigration monitoring centre because, in addition to coordinating statistical data, this would allow sociological studies to be carried out on the phenomenon of migration, which would help in the decision-making process.

With regard to respect for human rights, there must be greater cooperation in order to modernise the administrative structures of some of the selected countries. We must also cooperate in the training of police forces and, in particular, open them up to cooperation with the NGOs, which have a social role to play in this area.

Finally, Mr President, I hope that, with regard to these plans and the plans to come, the defects highlighted in this resolution will be corrected and that there will be closer cooperation, especially on the part of the High Level Working Group and the Council, with Parliament. I also hope, of course, that the Commission will be given the resources to carry them out.

The success or failure of the European Union' s first external action in an area as sensitive for European society as immigration and asylum, depends on the success of these plans.

- (PT) Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, first of all I would like to congratulate Mr Hernández Mollar on the outstanding work that he has carried out and on the excellent report that he has presented to us.

He has already emphasised, and rightly so, that although migration and asylum are closely related issues, they are nevertheless substantially different and require different responses from the European Union, although it should be borne in mind and recognised that in both cases there are advantages in applying a cross-pillar and global approach.

We know that increasing numbers of people are seeking better opportunities or protection through migration, in order to escape war, persecution, poverty, unemployment or violations of their human rights.

We know that there is an increase in illegal migratory movement, for the most part controlled by criminal networks that often create situations involving exploitation and blatant violation of human rights.

We obviously support a global approach including support for democratisation and promotion of the rule of law, support for the prevention of conflicts and for reconciliation, respect for human rights and the development within countries and regions of origin and of transit of the fight against poverty, by improving living conditions and by creating greater opportunities for employment.

In order to achieve all of this, and despite the criticisms that Mr Hernández Mollar has just presented to the House, which related specifically to action by Parliament and the effectiveness of this action in some of these countries, Parliament' s commitment must be serious and consistent.

We cannot herald good intentions and then fail to put them into practice because of a lack of funding.

Information campaigns must be undertaken in close cooperation with the countries of origin and of transit, publicising the real opportunities for legal emigration, in an attempt to reduce or eliminate the problem at its source.

We must step up the fight against illegal immigration, ensure that the rights of the victims of criminal networks are protected, and step up efforts to prevent all forms of trafficking in human beings, paying particular attention to the situation of women' s and children' s rights. We must also detect and break up the criminal networks involved in these activities.

Within the Union, we must make a detailed assessment of the situation in the various Member States and harmonise national legislation on conditions of entry and residency. In doing this, we must take into account economic and demographic changes in the Union, each Member State' s ability to receive immigrants and the historical and cultural ties that the Member State may have with the countries of origin.

In short, we agree with a common European policy on asylum and immigration based on four pillars: partnership with the countries of origin, a common European asylum system, fair treatment of immigrants from third countries and more efficient management of migratory flows.

Mr President, I would like firstly to express, on behalf of my group, our unease at this Council proposal at a time when, within the Union, we are working - and this is shown in the initiatives which the Commission has taken and is taking - on the communitisation of what we have called the 'Third Pillar' and on the development of an immigration and reception policy for citizens from third countries.

We are uneasy because we do not understand very well where this High Level Working Group comes from or why it is being maintained, why the Council is making a proposal in this way and why that proposal was taken up at Tampere; what the Commission is going to do in these action plans and what coherence there is between this proposal and the work carried out by the Council' s High Level Working Group and the rest of the Commission proposals on policies to be implemented in the Union.

I believe this is important and I would like an answer from the Council.

Secondly, I would like to say that we have mixed feelings with regard to these action plans.

On the one hand, what they say seems reasonable; it seems reasonable to establish bilateral policies between the European Union and some of the countries in which the problem of the exodus of migrants and refugees is greatest; this seems useful.

This is the case with Morocco, for example, with whom we must establish a serious and significant bilateral relationship in order to ensure that the immigration originating from that country remains within the law.

This may also be the case with the Balkan countries, where it is clear who our partners are.

On the other hand, however, there are countries on this list whose governments do not even deserve to be described as such, and countries with which I do not think we should speak, such as Afghanistan.

I would like to ask the Council if it intends to go to Afghanistan and say, 'Good afternoon.

We have come to tell you to respect human rights because you are sending us too many refugees.'

This would be absolutely incredible or, at least, very naive.

Furthermore, it seems to me that broaching this issue with these countries is difficult and dangerous.

I believe that there are some people that we should not even speak to on principle.

Therefore, since we cannot adopt a cross-pillar approach - that is to say, between the Third and the First Pillar - taking the shortest route, I believe that the Council should once again consult this Parliament on each and every action plan which is to be set up, in accordance with the provisions of the First Pillar.

I have pointed out two problems: who is going to take charge of these action plans and with whom?

There is a third problem: how are we going to pay for them?

There is no budgetary contribution set aside for them and the measures which provide for some degree of funding will apparently take money, for example, from cooperation programmes such as MEDA.

It is difficult to see how the idea of codevelopment and the idea of working with these countries in order to tackle immigration at source can be compatible with the idea of taking away funds earmarked for cooperation in development, in order to guard external borders.

I believe this warrants some reflection.

Finally, the development of action plans is on the 'scoreboard' .

This is a good thing, but I would like to remind you that there is an action plan that has been implemented, that of Iraq, on which nobody has ever provided us with any information.

Mr President, I would like to start by congratulating Mr Hernández Molar for the excellent work that he has done on this report and for the spirit of cooperation with which he has sought an all-party consensus behind his recommendations.

I would like too to pay tribute to the work that the Commission has done in this area.

We face a number of challenges in a world where the drive for emigration and the drive for immigration into Europe is still substantial.

Clearly, we face a situation where there are push factors in countries of origin and pull factors in our own countries.

It is important that we approach this debate with a very clear distinction between asylum and illegal immigration.

It is important that we retain the commitment set out in the Geneva Convention and a humane approach.

If I would pass one message to the governments of the Member States, it is that all too often they fall into the temptation to seek easy headlines by taking the populist approach to the so-called problems of asylum seekers and illegal immigration.

Too rarely do they look to the principles to which they have signed up and try to deal with this problem seriously.

This report sets out a number of proposals for action which are, in my view, to be welcomed.

In particular it looks at immigration and at the inadequacy of current data.

It looks at the problems of the action plans that have been drawn up which fail to strike the right balance between security and immigration.

It looks at the policing of illegal immigration and calls for focus on combating trafficking and combating illegal employment.

These are the things our Member States should be doing.

And, of course, most importantly, it looks at budgets and the fact that under half of the measures proposed have budgetary allocations so that if we are to be serious about this, then an approach will be needed by the Council to give a legal base to the budgets which are being proposed.

So in conclusion, Mr President, and on behalf of the Liberal Group, I welcome this report which we will vote on tomorrow.

Mr President, unfortunately the action plans of the High Level Working Group on Asylum and Migration hardly do justice to the task in hand.

If you read the action plans carefully, you will see that most space is devoted to measures to combat illegal immigration.

This is not the only problem, however.

No consideration is given to development policy or foreign policy measures to deal with the reasons which make people flee and emigrate from these regions.

Although the High Level Working Group itself has concluded that human rights violations are an important reason why people flee, too little account of this is taken in the action plans.

Let us look at the situation in Iraq.

Clearly it is not easy at present to make suitable proposals for Iraq which might have some chance of being implemented, given the current political situation.

The same applies in Afghanistan, where one is uncertain as to whom one should even start discussions with.

Whom should we urge to respect human rights?

The way in which the High Level Working Group was set up and operates also gives cause for criticism.

The European Parliament was consulted on neither the appointments to the group nor the crisis regions selected.

Mr Hernández Mollar' s report is highly critical of the work of the High Level Working Group.

The report now gives us the opportunity to develop a new basis on which to evaluate the work of the High Level Working Group and my group therefore supports the rapporteur.

Mr President, I hope that honourable Members will forgive me if I stand back and ask a fundamental question.

Why does the European Union need a common asylum policy?

No one would deny that this is an area where countries can gain from mutual collaboration but, of course, there is nothing new about cooperation among our home countries in the asylum field.

Since long before the signing of the Treaty of Rome, the Member States of the Union have been bound together by a complex web of agreements covering the right of asylum, the treatment of refugees, the principle of non-refoulement and much else.

We must not make the mistake, as we so often seem to do in this House, of believing that the only alternative to EU action is some kind of anarchy wherein no nation consults with any other.

On the contrary, the alternative to action at EU level is a negotiation of bilateral and multilateral accords among independent nations.

Such accords have two potential advantages it seems to me over Community action.

First, they are often well tried and well trusted and established and second, they can, of course, apply to states outside of the European Union.

In my own constituency of South-east England the local police and immigration services long enjoyed excellent relations with their French and Belgian counterparts.

Indeed, it is at least arguable that we cooperated more closely with other Member States ten years ago than we do today following the entry into force of the Dublin Convention and its flanking accords.

Now, how can this possibly be?

Well, it was Aristotle who first adumbrated the principle that which no one owns no one will look after.

His precept surely holds true among nations as it does among individuals.

Put bluntly, a border guard who sees that a traveller is heading for a destination beyond his own frontiers may have little incentive to detain him and so to provoke an asylum application within his own jurisdiction.

According to the United Nations High Commissioner for refugees, 93 000 people applied for sanctuary in the United Kingdom last year.

This makes Britain the most common destination for asylum claimants in Europe, a position we hold jointly with Germany.

But what is most astonishing is that this figure has risen in the United Kingdom by some 40% since the mid-1990s while across the European Union as a whole, it has remained relatively stable.

I say 'astonishing' because the vast number of applicants in my constituency have passed through several safe countries prior to their arrival there.

Now surely a genuine refugee' s priority is to get out of the particular country, not to get into one.

Barring exceptional circumstances it is not unreasonable to expect that someone escaping from oppression would apply for sanctuary as soon as he reached a safe state.

I am proud of Britain' s role through the centuries as a safe haven for those fleeing from injustice and wrong and I know that Members across this House will feel a similar pride in the honourable record of their countries.

That record depends on our ability to distinguish between economic migrants and genuine refugees and it depends critically on our having the resolve to secure our borders against false claimants.

As cooperating states we can do this, as a single territory the evidence suggests that we cannot.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, this report highlights the many errors and omissions which the action plans contain.

First of all, there is the question of partnership, particularly the place given to NGOs.

Their opinion has not been sought or has not been taken into consideration.

Another error is that questions relating to asylum and those relating to emigration have been dealt with in the same way.

It is true that one cannot attack the causes of migratory flows without talking about human rights.

I am going to talk about asylum.

With some countries Europe is signing agreements which include readmission clauses authorising the deportation of third country nationals without the political, economic and social situation of the individual or the country being taken into account.

This clause is a violation of international law.

It refutes the principle of not expelling people before considering whether they are being sent back to a safe country.

Just how is it possible to believe that people sent back to certain countries will be safely welcomed there when human rights, particularly those of women, are violated on a daily basis in those countries?

Just how can we agree to making development aid conditional upon the signature of such agreements?

Europe must cease to turn a blind eye.

The best solution to reduce the flow of migration is to support development in these countries and support the welfare of these peoples.

This means cancelling the debt of developing countries.

Cancelling the debt would make it possible to develop educational, social and medical structures, which would directly benefit the population.

Moreover, it would be better to improve the host structures for refugees and asylum seekers, who are currently treated as if they were criminals wishing to take advantage of the system.

They must be adequately looked after, and, in particular, given access to medical care, social entitlements, and education for children.

In conclusion, would it not be more urgent to harmonise our asylum and migration policies and to establish a genuine Community policy on the subject?

Mr President, each of the countries referred to in this report is different and each of the plans varies accordingly.

I will speak only about Sri Lanka, a country I have visited, and a country many of whose citizens have sought refuge in London and other parts of the European Union.

It is a country, President, in which a civil war has raged for the past eighteen years - eighteen years which have seen the proportion of defence spending by the Sri Lankan government rise steadily.

This money is spent fighting a war that the Sri Lankan government cannot win and it is a war that the Tamils cannot win either.

The only solution must be a brokered peace.

It could be that the European Union, with its historical links, could act as that intermediary.

My colleague, Anna Terrón, has said that this report is naïve.

I feel that the report skirts around the real issue and is a diversion from the debate that we ought to be having on Sri Lanka and the other countries.

The report says that there is no end to the ethnic conflict in Sri Lanka.

It speaks of human rights abuses, cases of aid not reaching the most desperate areas and of economic deprivation.

That is the effect of the war and it says that we should work more closely with the Sri Lankan government.

Yet it is they who are controlling what we know and it is they who control what coverage we get and we must be circumspect.

We all know about the well-publicised cases of Tamil action against government forces.

We have heard less about the hospitals and schools being destroyed and of torture by Sri Lankan government troops.

So when the report says, Mr President, that we should look for ways to find a political solution to this conflict, I agree.

Nothing else will solve the problems or lessen the human rights abuses.

Nothing short of a cessation of the conflict will end the misery of the Tamils in Sri Lanka and nothing else will end the number of people seeking refuge in the European Union.

Nothing else will stop people from fleeing the country.

A high-level action plan, Mr President, that does not recognise these fundamental reports is - I would argue - not worth the paper it is written on.

Mr President, I would like to congratulate the rapporteur, but the European Union deserves no congratulations whatsoever, for in the area of civil liberties it appears unable to focus on anything but repression.

I am therefore all the more content to see that this report includes a reference to the key study which has just been published by the United Nations on replacement migration, as this study contains data which can only give cause for concern, revealing the current relentless advance of the process of population ageing and decline.

The population of Europe will fall by 12 percent in the next 50 years if current levels of migration are maintained.

Declining birth and death rates will halve the worker/pensioner ratio in the European Union from four workers per pensioner to less than 2 in the year 2050, and this will lead to a drastic reduction in pension and welfare payments to offset the sharp drop in contributions.

Any meaningful migration policy cannot fail to take these considerations into account, for this demographic holocaust, soon to become an economic disaster, calls for proposals for migration policies which are liberal, antiprotectionist and geared to economic requirements and labour market demand, to counteract the prohibitionist and protectionist, nationalistic, ethnic, inhumane policy currently in force in Europe. To date, this has done nothing but criminalise immigrants, who are needed by the labour market, and deliver illegal immigrants into the jaws of crime, starting with the arrangements for their entry onto European territory and ending with their involvement in the black market and other unlawful activities.

To sum up, while the United States are negotiating with Indian universities for the best graduates in new technologies, Europe prefers to barter with the Taliban regime with a view to repatriating some of the women once persecuted there.

Mr President, I must make it quite clear that I do not agree with the conclusions of my fellow Italian who has just spoken.

However, I would like to join him in congratulating the rapporteur and his committee on their excellent work.

What conclusions can we draw from this report?

Basically, that the positions of Parliament and the Council are poles apart.

This has always been the case, but today we are formally recording it in a document: on the one hand, we have the Council, which maintains a particular line through the individual States of which it is composed and which makes recommendations on the basis of the decisions of those States and, on the other hand, we have the Community, or, rather, Parliament, which advocates a different, more harmonised, more coordinated and more homogeneous approach.

I feel that this distinction is important: Parliament' s approach is more idealistic, optimistic and utopian, whereas the individual States are more concerned with practical issues and have to answer to their citizens, who are not easily convinced by hopes and illusions but are well aware of the reality of present conditions which, in many cases - both in Italy and in many other European countries - have resulted in uncontrolled immigration.

Therefore, in view of the security issue and the problem of migration, which has its roots in poor countries which are beset with problems, where individuals, groups and families need to find not only a means for self-expression but also a completely different, secure environment, I feel that it is essential for Community policy to be comprehensive.

- (PT) Mr President, the action plans under way in the Council' s High-Level Working Group are, as we all know, an unreliable instrument for jointly tackling a problem which, for some, is merely one of security and for others is merely one of integration, and it is usually impossible to tell where the line between the right to asylum ends and the right to economic survival begins.

I say that it is an unreliable instrument because it does not seem that the studies on which the action plans are based provide useful new features requiring effective policy measures - usually in the form of generic proposals for classic external policy or for development aid - which would only succeed with target-country authorities that were legitimate and stable, which unfortunately is not generally the case.

Hence the temptation in the action plans, in the measures that have been proposed, to place a far greater emphasis on managing illegal immigration than on integrating people. They place a far greater emphasis on repression and control than on a European asylum policy and a genuine system of temporary protection for those who come and knock at Europe' s door, for whatever reason, but always in a genuine state of need.

The action plans that Tampere accepted and stated should continue, in spite of their inability to cope with the complexity of the problem, could nevertheless be improved until the European Union can equip itself with an asylum and immigration policy of its own.

What these plans must not do is to fluctuate between relative ineffectiveness and worsening of the situation in terms of human rights, although, as asylum seekers, immigrants cannot be considered as potential criminals. It would be better if, instead of being treated like 'police cases' , they were treated, as a matter of course, as cases of universal exclusion.

Ladies and gentlemen, this is an excellent report. It touches on all the sore points in this saga, but it would be better if we had proposals by the Commission before us rather than reports by government experts.

Let us not lose hope, however, that we will soon be debating these issues here with Commissioner Vitorino. That will be a sign that Europe has moved towards common policies based on a balance between security and integration, and that it has finally opted to put an end to uncertainty.

Mr President, the Commission would like to thank Parliament for the opportunity of having this debate and I would like personally to warmly congratulate the rapporteur, Mr Hernández Mollar, for his excellent report and the excellent motion for a resolution.

I appreciate that Parliament can support the proposed integrated and cross-pillar approach which - and I quote the report - 'may' produce positive results.

I understand that the Parliament is taking a cautious approach to these action plans and the Commission would like to follow the same line.

On the one hand, the Commission is pleased to see that in broad terms the approach of the Council in developing these action plans is very much in line with the approach advocated by the Commission in its communication on migration of 1994 that enjoyed broad support in this Parliament.

On the other hand, one must be aware that, for the time being, these plans only exist on paper.

Implementing these plans will need, as has already been stressed by several Members of the House, a combination of very different policies: political cooperation, human rights, rule of law and democracy, commercial, social and development policies, economic assistance need to be fitted together with measures aiming at better management of migration flowing from these countries and regions.

Clearly this is not an easy task.

Please allow me to highlight, and subscribe to, a number of important elements of your draft resolution.

The partnership with the third countries concerned will be always a key element for the success of such a policy with a view to promoting co-development.

I would therefore support your view that we will need to initiate a political dialogue on the implementation of the action plan on an agreed basis of mutual benefit both for Member States of the Union and for the third countries.

We have to recognise that this political dialogue will have to take into account the very different political situation in each of the five countries.

Therefore, I would like to emphasise the important role that non-governmental organisations will have in the implementation of these action plans.

We are all very well aware of the fact that migration problems will not be solved within the coming month.

We have to bear in mind this very serious limitation when the European Council in December this year receives the first assessment of these action plans.

I would very much agree with your observation that the European Union should adopt a long-term structural policy to tackle the causes of migration and I therefore agree that the deadlines set in the action plans are rather optimistic.

The action plans, however, can be considered as a first step in creating an external policy on migration of the European Union and should therefore be given a chance.

I also agree with your view that reception in the region does not absolve Member States of the Union from their duties towards asylum-seekers under the Geneva Convention.

When implementing the action plans, it is extremely important to keep the balance between the various measures so that efforts are not concentrated exclusively on the short-term defence actions.

The Commission stresses that it will play an active part in maintaining that balance.

Implementation will require close cooperation between the Council and its competent bodies, the Commission and Member States in accordance with their respective responsibilities as defined in the treaty.

The important role Member States have to play was, by the way, acknowledged at the Justice and Home Affairs Council of last Monday, 27 March.

The presidency has called on the Member States to turn their political commitments into real activities, a request that the Commission has supported.

The Commission is, of course, ready to play the active role it is expected to play, especially in areas such as development and economic assistance, human rights, good governance and institution building.

In order to play a similar role for other measures, the Commission currently lacks the financial means.

I therefore very much welcome your recommendation for the possibility of allocation of extra funds to cover cooperation with third countries in the fields of justice and home affairs with particular reference to immigration.

These budget lines should, above all, consider not only providing humanitarian assistance, including the improvement of basic living conditions, as we are already doing using the funds of ECHO, but also different initiatives aimed at economic development, improving respect for human rights, improving the independence of the judiciary, improving equal opportunities of men and women in the third countries, but also assisting the third countries to put in place the legal and practical mechanisms for dealing with asylum-seekers and refugees.

Mr President, finally I note that you consider that the action plans pay too little attention to the internal policies.

However, I understand the primary aim of the action plan to be to contribute to the development of an external policy of the Union on migration.

Let me assure you anyway that the Commission will take its own responsibilities in the development of a common internal European Union immigration and asylum policy as foreseen in the conclusions of Tampere.

A detailed breakdown of our intentions is presented already in the scoreboard that was endorsed by the Justice and Home Affairs Council last Monday and which was communicated to the Parliament earlier.

In autumn this year we will have a new opportunity to discuss the priorities of a comprehensive immigration policy of the Union when the Commission presents to the Council and to Parliament a review of the communication of 1994 in order to bring on board the new dynamics, the new social, political and economic realities of the world we live in as far as immigration policy is concerned.

The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 a.m.

Mr President, Commissioner, in relation to what Mrs Haug had to present, a banker might say that the budget for the other institutions is peanuts; small budgets which are not as significant, including from the political standpoint, but which are important nonetheless because they allow the other institutions to make their work transparent and thus, I think, to look their citizens in the eye.

What are the challenges which we must take into account in the small budgets for the coming year?

First, and this applies to all the budgets, budgetary rigour.

When I see that we alone in the European Parliament are planning an increase of 0.07% in comparison with the year 2000, then this rigour is guaranteed and we can show our face.

Compared with a total budget of EUR 965 million, that does not represent too big a bite out of the cake at our disposal.

What are the challenges of Activity Based Budgeting?

Of course this is a question which we must also apply to the other institutions, as and where it is sensible to do so.

If I look around me here, I might wonder what the costs are in relation to the number of members present.

That is not what we mean by these questions; what we mean is transparent expenditure in the budget lines, so that everything is comprehensible.

We must draw up a medium-term personnel plan in order to meet the huge challenge of the enlargement of the European Union.

This is a huge challenge for us in Parliament and for the translation services in the other institutions.

We have been preparing for this over recent years and we must start to take up the challenges and manage personnel developments accordingly in 2001.

This gives rise to a second thought which we must consider.

How can we work together with other institutions in the area of personnel recruitment?

We shall have similar positions to fill in individual areas in the coming years and it makes perfect sense to consider organising and centralising these activities.

We must bear in mind that there are also new challenges in the legislative area since the Treaty of Amsterdam entered into force.

I only have to look at the Commission' s work programme, with its 108 codecision procedures, to see that this is a challenge which we did not have to face in the past.

Even in the peak years at the beginning of the 1990s, when we were implementing the internal market programme, we only had a third to a half of the labour costs now being proposed by the Commission and we must organise our work more efficiently and provide the resources so that we can carry out our work accordingly.

This includes preliminary scientific work, I should like to be quite clear on that.

We are dealing with a Commission which has a joint research centre.

We are dealing with 15 Member States which have their own national resources and, as a legislator with equal rights, Parliament must naturally make use of its opportunities here.

I suggest, and the Committee on Budgets agrees with me here, that we introduce improvements in the area of public relations, so that we have a starting point at which citizens who want to find out more about the work of Parliament can do so without needing to be in an official group of visitors.

We suggest that we make provision for new posts in certain areas, but only where absolutely necessary.

We shall have to examine this very closely over coming weeks and months because we have some room for manoeuvre.

We have taken a very reasonable approach to buildings policy, as far as the costs of the European Parliament building are concerned, but it makes no sense if we again destroy our new found freedoms straight away in 2001.

As far as the other institutions are concerned, I only have a few comments to make.

I think we should try to ensure that the interpreting service starts working more closely with the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions forthwith.

There is potential for collaboration here.

We shall have to monitor the Court of Justice very closely.

I hope that new rules will be developed for the Court of Justice during the review of the Treaty which will allow it to operate efficiently and which will ensure that there is long-term financing for personnel planning.

I should expressly like to praise the Court of Auditors which not only monitors us strictly, it also honours its undertakings to the letter, and I think that we must also ensure that funds are used economically as regards the Ombudsman, especially as far as new posts are concerned.

I should like to thank everyone who worked with us on this, especially our own administration, for their correct and very positive preliminary work, and all the honourable Members who made it possible for us to present a proper result to plenary despite the limited time available.

Mr President, I welcome this procedure this year because it is the earliest start we have ever had and this will enable us, I hope, to give more serious consideration and more detailed consideration as the process develops.

So I treat this as a beginning and not an end.

As a beginning, I would say the Environment Committee would like to reiterate the demands it made last year with regard to the budget.

We have a persistent and clear need to continue to work towards greening the budget in all areas of policy activity and I want to see further work on this this year.

In addition, we are spending a lot of money on our external policies, particularly through the PHARE and TACIS programmes, on ways of developing the important role of the environment and the sustainable development of those areas so close to our own borders.

I want to see more work from the Commission showing us how that money is being properly and correctly applied and what the positive outcomes are.

I also want to give more consideration to what the agencies are doing and take a more differentiated approach to them depending on their particular roles and activities which we have not done in the past.

In particular we want to consider the problems that the Treaty of Amsterdam presents and the fact that the full financial implications of the Treaty of Amsterdam are only being realised this year and we have to take account of that.

The committee also wants to reiterate its support for continued financial assistance to NGO participation in much of the technical committee work of the Parliament and the Commission.

Finally, Mr President, I would say that we continue to oppose the tobacco subsidies which are continuously being paid by the Commission and the sooner we get a chance to do something about it the better.

That is the view of this Parliament.

Mr President, the Committee on Women's Rights and Equal Opportunities requests that the Committee on Budgets incorporate the following conclusions into the motion for a resolution which it adopts:

The Committee highlights the importance of appropriate training for women, moving beyond the traditional mould, promoting on-going training, specialisation and the integration of women into the phenomenon represented by new technologies, so that society may gain a large number of highly qualified women whose participation at all levels - business, political and social - results from both qualitative and quantitative criteria. It also requests that a new priority line be added to the e-Europe initiative, bearing in mind that the information society has enormous potential for women, not only with regard to training and access to knowledge, but also because of the opportunity of new jobs or new working methods which may help to reconcile family life.

The Committee highlights the need for adequate appropriations to be provided and for the relevant comments to be added to the budget with regard to the strict application of the principle of mainstreaming which guarantees equal opportunities between men and women in the planning, implementation and assessment of all European Union projects and programmes.

The Committee requests that the Commission support the Fifth Action Programme for equal opportunities, drawn up with the aim of overcoming the difficulties of the previous programme and asks that the principle of equal opportunities be applied in all Community policies.

The Committee requests that a programme for employment be created, specifically targeting women and, to this end, requests that a budget line be created to finance it, with the fundamental aim of achieving equality between men and women in the workplace, not only by means of measures to protect that equality but also by means of special formulae, which will allow women to integrate fully in the labour market without jeopardising other aspects of their lives.

The Committee stresses the importance of the collaboration between those non-governmental organisations and associations, whose activities complement the Community action programmes, to achieving the European Union' s aims with regard to equal opportunities between men and women.

- (PT) Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the guidelines for the 2001 budgetary procedure as laid down in the Haug report are a starting point for a debate on the European Union budget for 2001 which promises to be both arduous and heated throughout the year.

I must emphasise that the amenability of the rapporteur, whom I congratulate, has enabled a broader consensus to be reached.

Going back to the first four paragraphs of the motion for a resolution, which identify the European Parliament' s political priorities, and then those that contain the essence of its position, I would like to highlight the following aspects: appropriate funding is being promoted for the new policies introduced by the Treaty of Amsterdam as well as for the policies that have been strengthened by the Treaty in the fields of internal and external action.

In this way we are sending out a clear political message.

The provisions of the Treaty are designed to be implemented. It is not merely a declaration of intent, which would be a serious example of political hypocrisy as well as completely unacceptable.

The substance of the Treaty must be implemented.

The report broaches the issue of employment in terms of job creation, which in turn is connected to micro, small and medium-sized enterprises, as well as to the use of new technologies.

This, for us, is the crucial approach.

It is vital for new jobs to be created and this depends on the initiative and the creativity of entrepreneurs.

Let there be investment, then, in a culture of initiative.

The report restates the need for a sustainable and multiannual contribution to financial aid for the reconstruction of Kosovo and for the stabilisation of the Balkans as part of a review of the financial perspective.

It rejects such financing if it is to be provided at the expense of existing commitments, either involving external actions or through cuts in the common agricultural policy or other policies.

New money must be found for new requirements, with the condition, as always, of judiciously identifying those requirements, and the rigorous use of funds, as should always be the case. In relation to Kosovo, this concern seems to be particularly reasonable.

The report insists on the need to reform the European Union' s administrative system, which is essential if there is to be efficiency, responsibility and transparency.

This debate has launched the budget procedure and, at the end of the year, when the final assessment is made of the draft budget for 2001, it must contain the essence of this Parliament' s position.

Unless that is the case, the democratic legitimacy that Parliament gives to the actions of the European Union, particularly in the budgetary process, would be an enormous confidence trick, which the public would see through and for which they would not forgive us.

Mr President, I would like to start off by congratulating Mr Ferber on excellent guidelines.

I welcome the clear orientation of the report to planning for enlargement.

The drive towards efficiency is especially vital in the context of enlargement.

It is important even at this early stage that we have a clear strategy on how the institutions will respond to the accession of new members.

We need to be imaginative about how we address the issues of staffing and building requirements.

The institutions cannot respond to enlargement by just adding an extra post here or an office there.

We do not want a Lego approach to enlargement.

What we need is a major rethink about management of operations and that involves all the institutions exploring alternative ways and embracing new information technologies wholeheartedly.

This is especially important in relation to linguistic support.

I am totally in support of the idea outlined by Mr Ferber regarding the setting up of an interinstitutional recruitment office because I believe it will help reduce costs and reduce competition between the institutions in attracting new personnel.

As everybody here needs to recognise, there are major limitations in relation to resources that will be available as a result of enlargement and there are implications for the financial perspective in relation to Category 5 expenditure.

However, these guidelines are not just about enlargement they are about policy direction for all the institutions next year.

Therefore, greater accountability and transparency have to be top priority because the European citizen does not distinguish between the different institutions.

All the other institutions have to undertake a fundamental review along similar lines to those proposed by the Commission' s reform agenda because what the European taxpayers want is the reassurance that they are getting value for money and that includes not just the institutions but also political parties, Members of Parliament and staff.

Any changes have to be clearly justified and transparent.

Improvements and efficiencies need to be demonstrated by every institution and I believe that this can only be achieved through tools such as activity-based budgeting and thorough examination of current policies and systems and procedures.

One of the biggest inefficiencies that we have is the location of EU institutions and if we want to be taken seriously we need to focus our work on one seat.

I appreciate we have obligations under the treaties to two different locations but we should make sure that these are not expanded.

Many of you are aware that the UK is reluctant to expand the scope of qualified majority voting but this is one issue where the UK would gladly see majority voting take place.

To conclude, our group' s priorities are that these guidelines are budgetary prudence, improving efficiency, more effective budgetary control, better use of resources and general improvements in services and management, so I call upon all the other institutions to take these on and implement these improvements vigorously.

Mr President, Commissioner, the rapporteurs Mrs Haug and Mr Ferber have drafted their first report on next year' s EU budget.

I wish them both luck in the task facing them.

Drafting the budget means spending taxpayers' money.

For that reason the work is important and calls for stringent budgetary discipline.

There are many areas that call for financing, but there are only a few vital ones.

Only the vital areas can receive public funding.

In addition to stringent budgetary discipline we wish to stress the following: our Group gives its full support to the package of reforms as proposed by Mr Kinnock.

Activity-Based Budgeting and management will be the cornerstones of these reforms.

They will emphasise the importance of personal responsibility, diminish the bureaucratic load and enhance efficiency.

But the reforms will require cooperation with the staff.

That is why we have to prepare carefully for the forthcoming talks regarding the reform of staff regulations.

The current staffing structure has to be clarified and made more flexible, so as to facilitate the reallocation of funds, for example.

The work of reform might also demand additional budgetary proposals, which we urge the Commission to be prepared for.

Mrs Haug' s report stresses the importance of culture as a means of creating jobs.

Culture as such falls within the competence of the Member States.

However, culture as a means of livelihood is an area which is rapidly growing in importance.

For that reason we support the report insofar as it emphasises the importance of developing this within the framework of structural action.

In a later debate on the budget we wish to draw attention to the matter of sufficient appropriations for science and research and financing the fight against exclusion in all its forms, within the meaning of Article 13 of the Treaty.

Our group also believes that Category 1 of the financial perspective - agricultural expenditure - should not be used as a primary source of financing in response to needs that become manifest in external policy.

With regard to Mr Ferber' s report, we would like to remark that we are disinclined to take a position on the details as yet, including the establishment of posts.

Nevertheless, we consider it vital that reforms concerning members' rules be established promptly, in accordance with earlier agreements.

Mr President, Commissioner, I must say that I feel rather uneasy when confronted with this report, especially after the amendments by the Committee on Budgets.

Mrs Haug is not to blame.

Taken in isolation, a good number of her subparagraphs are acceptable, and some are even excellent, and my group will vote in favour of them.

On the whole, however, without even mentioning specifically those paragraphs which we find quite simply unacceptable, I consider that this report lacks the clear political will, the strong ambition, the resolute decisions which Parliament should, in my opinion, be expressing at this stage in the budgetary battle, for this year' s battle promises, once again, to be a hard fought one.

Each and every one of us can remember the trial of strength we had to take part in last year with the Council because the Council wished to complete the funding of the reconstruction of Kosovo by drawing particularly on the appropriations for cooperation with the countries of the South.

In the end, the majority in Parliament agreed to vote in favour of the budget in return for a limited concession from the Council but also, above all, an undertaking from the Council to accept a review of the financial perspective in the year 2000, if the development of the Balkan situation should require resources significantly greater than those for which provision has already been made.

This is clearly the case today, but neither the Commission nor the Council seems resolved to respect the spirit of this commitment and fund our new priorities without compromising our traditional priorities.

However, while the report recitals clearly record this position, particularly recitals A, B and D, on the other hand, subparagraph 22, which has already been mentioned, advocates, 'equal' distribution of the financial consequences of special budgetary needs instead of a limited revision of the financial perspective, with additional resources.

Once again, there are plans to rob Peter to pay Paul in accordance with the sacrosanct budgetary Stability Pact.

For my part, I remain convinced that we must, on the contrary, ask the question clearly: do we wish to play an active part on this continent and throughout the world?

If we do, then we should provide ourselves, in moderation, but steadfastly, with the financial resources to do so.

The same reasoning is equally applicable to other priorities, which have been advertised but not acted upon, such as social aspects, employment or even cooperation with the countries of the South.

I hope that, beyond this vote, there will be enough of us to relaunch the initiative in time, in this spirit, and, this time, to hold out until the end.

Mr President, I would like to start by thanking Mrs Haug and Mr Ferber for their reports, which are doubtless comprehensive and very detailed in terms of all the guidelines.

I would also like to stress from the outset that, if we want to boost employment in the European Union, it is of fundamental importance to build on the role of small and medium-sized enterprises for, when all is said and done, they are the hard core of our undertaking in Europe.

With regard to the reference to the cultural economy and new technologies, this should also be included in the Lisbon report, and my view is that we will be able to use these bases to boost employment substantially.

We often talk of a new economy, but if, then, at the end of the day, we ourselves do not focus on the potential core factors, which, in this case, are culture and new technology, then we will certainly not be able to produce solutions.

In addition to this, I welcome the fact that the item of natural disasters occurring within our nations has been reinserted in the budget.

Because in this way we can help Member States when they suffer natural disasters, such as earthquakes, for example, because otherwise people will fail to understand why it is that we intervene in countries such as Kosovo, and yet do not seem able to intervene in our own States.

And so I welcome the reinsertion of this item in the budget as a major step.

However, on a more antagonistic note, I have to point out that we cannot make cuts in agriculture as a matter of course.

Naturally, we must finance the Kosovo mission as a fundamental political objective, in order to erase the effects of the war and to prove the existence of a political objective, but we cannot always do so at the expense of agriculture.

I would also stress that we need constant guidelines from the Council and the Commission, for we cannot manage on the same budget as last year. It was only thanks to the patience and tenacity of President Wynn that we were able to reach the end of the year.

We cannot go on like this. Finally, I would stress the need to restructure the budget - for example, we could axe TAOs - and thus secure new resources.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the Committee on Employment supports the general rapporteur' s initiative to give employment policy priority once again this year and, more importantly, to give small and medium-sized enterprises support in the field of information and communications technologies.

However, the social aspects must, of course, not be forgotten in the process, which is why our Committee is calling for an own initiative, mainly to ensure that everyone has an equal stake in the new technologies.

So far, only some 30% of women have access to the Internet and high earners have three times more access to the Internet than low earners. This is not on.

There is another important point in this budget.

We are calling for sustainable financing for civil dialogue and for the non-governmental organisations involved in it, in order to support their important role as the voice of the disadvantaged.

Mr President, Commissioner, naturally, the question of employment also plays a decisive part during budgetary discussions in the Committee on Fisheries.

Healthy growth and low unemployment are what we all want.

Europe needs to set the framework, which is one of the reasons it created the Treaty of Amsterdam.

But the real responsibility for employment, and this is not the first time that I have stressed this, lies with the Member States.

A greencard alone, such as that for which provision has been made in Germany, is not a practice which makes perfect.

It is in practice that a Member State demonstrates at home if it is being innovative or if it is hiding with an innocent expression behind the EU.

That would be cheap and it would not be right.

We need to manage a plethora of international fisheries agreements and conventions over the coming year, all of which have budgetary implications, because if we want to keep our products on the global market, we need raw materials and imports and they do not come cheap.

However, we in the Committee on Fisheries cannot really go to town, Commissioner, because you have still not provided us with the long-promised cost-benefit analyses on our fisheries agreements.

How can we stand up to the Committee on Budgets' demand for rigour in these circumstances?

The EU will have a new fisheries policy from 2002, a huge, fascinating venture with a global dimension.

We are already making the necessary preparations, which is why we also need the strong guidelines planned by the main rapporteur in the fisheries sector.

Later we will need the commensurate funds.

Thank you very much, Mrs Langenhagen.

I congratulate you on being able to express yourself in less than the time allotted to you.

Unfortunately, others do not tend to follow suit.

Mr President, securing the future has always been a difficult issue, irrespective of whether it takes the form of a White Paper, deregulation, partnership or structural adjustment.

It is the financial situation which dictates future development.

The major topics are correctly positioned in the main report, but the report lacks content.

Fighting unemployment through economic growth is the greatest challenge facing Europe.

The Lisbon Summit announced the direction to be taken up to the year 2010.

We must therefore expect future intergovernmental conferences to substantiate how this is to be done.

Farmers and cooperatives expect the European Commission to reduce the amount of red tape in the agricultural economy and adopt budgetary guidelines based on calculation, reliability and progressive structures.

The Berlin resolutions set out agricultural policy up to the year 2006.

Farmers and politicians fought hard for this position.

If a premature review should be necessary, because the social analysis uses different standards, then let it only be in comparison with facts and figures, and let us retain what was successful, i.e. reliability, rather than dismantling Agenda 2000 piece by piece until what is left is hardly recognisable.

The ink was barely dry on the budget 2000 when Mrs Schreyer demanded a financial review and financial perspective for the priorities, together with action on negative expenditure.

Unless these funds are channelled back into the agricultural budget, Agenda 2000 will be jeopardised, especially as further technical inconsistencies are to be expected.

This is a policy based on rough estimates and founded on pure observation.

Of course, the Balkans must be reconstructed but, overall, in a spirit of social solidarity.

Then, and I am convinced of this, the farmers and cooperatives will also make their contribution.

Mr President, we cannot give our assent to the general economic rationale of the resolution on the budget guidelines for the 2001 budgetary procedure as it now stands.

Indeed, we would protest against the veritable misappropriation of funds which is proposed: the inappropriate use of resources reserved for agricultural expenditure under Category I of the financial perspective as a source of funding to be used to meet funding requirements in the sphere of foreign policy.

We find this attempt to fund the reconstruction of Kosovo at the expense of European farmers, and to convince us that there is no budgetary solution other than this outrageous deception, absolutely iniquitous.

Quite the contrary, we should maintain expenditure on agriculture, the compulsory expenditure, and moderate expenditure under other categories, where there are unquestionable margins.

We must therefore reject annual funding of the EUR 5.5 billion intended for the Balkans, an amount calculated by the European Commission on who knows what basis, by raising the ceiling for external expenditure and lowering that under the agricultural categories, on the erroneous grounds that appropriations would not be taken away from agriculture but that it would be appropriate to release the margins for 2001 and 2002.

Well, we are all aware that the mid-term review planned by the Berlin Summit is due to take place in 2003.

When this occurs, there is no doubt that if the dubious practice proposed by the Commission, and forcefully denounced by our Group, is endorsed by Parliament, it will then be claimed by many as an acquired right.

It therefore constitutes an extremely dangerous precedent as far as our farmers are concerned.

This, moreover, is the message clearly expressed by the European Council in Lisbon, whose conclusions unequivocally refused to incorporate the Commission' s wish to reduce the agricultural budget by EUR 300 million in 2001, and by the same again in 2002.

Regardless of the background, we do not accept the challenging of the conclusions of the Berlin Summit represented by this continual demand for the financial perspective and the various categories to be revised.

We accept it still less in light of the fact that the calculations for the European Commission' s ambitious Balkans programme lack both discipline and precision, that the Union' s existing appropriations for Kosovo cannot be spent in full and that other donor states are not meeting their financial commitments.

So I repeat, Mr President, there are no grounds for the call for the revision of the financial perspective.

Mr President, I would first like to say that I agree with the political priorities expounded by Mrs Haug.

Nevertheless, we are still lacking explicit support for such relevant fields as scientific research, technological innovation and development.

Failure to take these into account in the Union' s budget is equivalent to going out on a rainy day without an umbrella.

Without a constant and intense effort in these fields there will be no competitiveness and a lack of competitiveness means no new jobs will be created.

We have therefore introduced an amendment to cover this.

Another amendment that we have suggested, in accordance with what was agreed at the European Council in Lisbon, refers to the fact that employment is one of the Union' s great political priorities for the coming years and that objective is unfailingly expressed, as Mrs Haug correctly points out, through policies which favour small and medium-sized businesses.

However, it is not enough simply to give them access to new communication and information technologies.

The Internet is a tool, not a magic wand.

Without a decisive programme for basic structural reforms, which improve the ability of European business to compete, the digital era will be a time of frustration for Europe, hence our amendment designed to remind us of this fact which is so obvious and yet so worrying.

Lastly, with regard to what Mrs Haug describes as the "cultural economy" , we have pointed out that she mentions it amongst the political priorities, and then it fails to appear elsewhere in the text.

In order to deal with this methodological inconsistency, we have proposed an amendment which expands on this thought-provoking concept.

In any event, the rapporteur has, in our judgement, correctly established the bases which will set the course for Section III of the Union' s budget for 2001 and we are happy to offer her our sincere congratulations on her work.

Mr President, I want to concentrate mainly on the revision and just say to those who have been making comments condemning the Commission on the proposal for taking money from 1A: 'Let us wait and see what the PDB brings forward' and not write off everything at this time.

Ralf Walter made the very pertinent point that agriculture expenditure will actually increase and if money is taken from 1A it will be from surpluses, but let us wait until the PDB comes along.

We are working on assumptions when we present this report from Mrs Haug.

I am just referring to the Haug report not to Mr Ferber' s.

I congratulate the pair of them but in this Haug report we make certain assumptions about the revision, about redeployment in Category 4 and about the needs of Kosovo.

However, I need to remind the Council - and at least we have one willing scribe down there if no one else is doing the night shift for the Council to get the message across - that really, if the Commission makes the proposal which we expect them to make, then they are duty bound, because of the interinstitutional agreement, to discuss with Parliament what that revision should be before their first reading.

My gut feeling is that there will be no agreement with the Council on getting a revision of the financial perspective.

Well, if that is the case, the message needs to go out now loud and clear that we will have the same bumpy ride with the budget this year that we had last year and you will not win.

We will be determined to do our best for the Balkans and Kosovo but, at the same time, we will be realistic for those other policies which Parliament considers to be important.

The trouble with the Council is that everything revolves around what was agreed at Berlin.

We keep being told that Berlin is set in concrete.

Well, in the words of Hugh McMahon who was one of my colleagues up to the last Parliament, in a debate on shipbuilding, he once said, 'We don' t want it set in concrete, we want it set in runny cement' , and I presume that what we want in this day and age is to have the Berlin Agreement in a type of runny cement so at least you can be flexible enough to agree with us that things have to change.

I make the point, Mr President, as I did yesterday in the Budgets Committee, in the twelve years of the financial perspective there have been 38 revisions totalling over EUR 7 000 billion of monies that have been involved in those revisions.

Kosovo is one of those occasions where the financial perspective is not flexible enough and it needs to be changed and that message has to be got through otherwise there will be problems.

Mr President, it takes some nerve to state that employment is, and I quote, a constant priority of the European institutions at a time when the European Union has 18 million unemployed and when, at this very moment, a number of the most wealthy of all major European businesses are announcing savage job cuts without the said institutions lifting a finger to prevent them.

It is not that it would be impossible to put an end to unemployment immediately, but it would take a proactive policy that was not reluctant to draw on the profits of financial and industrial groups or the personal fortunes of major shareholders.

Then, what word other than hypocritical can be used to describe the European institutions' claim to wish, and I quote, to eradicate poverty wherever it exists while still permitting industrial groups to exacerbate poverty right here in the richest countries of Europe, and providing political instruments for these same groups in order to promote the criminal plundering they undertake in the poorest countries.

We are aware that it would be futile to ask the European institutions to do something of which they are incapable, designed as they are, like the national states, to favour profits and represent the interests of the wealthy classes.

The members of Lutte Ouvrière will therefore be voting against the Haug report.

Mr President, I congratulate both rapporteurs on their reports, which have received a high degree of consensus.

The Ferber report is a very courageous exposition of the present and future needs of Parliament.

A European Parliament interested in the new information technologies, a European Parliament aware that its organisation must, as a priority, revolve around the new tasks which the MEPs are obliged to carry out under the Treaty of Amsterdam.

This report proposes changes. Changes always meet resistance in institutions and we should therefore be especially grateful that the rapporteur has wished to draw up this report with the support of the PPE, and, we hope, of the other political groups in Parliament.

The rapporteur, Mrs Haug, has reached broad areas of compromise in her report, which we hope will be respected in the vote, and which we hope will strengthen Parliament' s commitment with regard to employment, culture, the new Amsterdam policies and, no less importantly, the budgetary obligations and rights.

This House voted by a majority for a financial perspective which respected the political balances of Berlin, even when we were all aware of its shortcomings in the face of unexpected external events.

Last December, this Parliament voted to maintain the financial perspective and the interinstitutional agreement despite the fact that, at that time, the Council drew out the negotiation to unacceptable limits.

Today, the Council, Parliament and the Commission are bound by a signed commitment.

This is a very serious commitment.

If we have to finance new policies, we have to find new funding.

If the Council intends to finance actions in the Balkans at the expense of current external or agricultural policies, it would not only be showing a lack of political vision but it would also be failing in the commitments it has signed up to.

Mr President, I want to thank the rapporteurs for their work and say that they have found a decent consensus and produced good reports.

I want to wish the new Commissioner well in her first budget and say that I sincerely hope that we can have a smooth and effective procedure in which all of us will do the best we can to produce a sensible budget in a most efficient way.

If there are to be problems - and sometimes there are problems - it will be around this whole question of the proposal to finance the shortfall in Category 4 with money from the agricultural section of the budget.

This proposal is more likely to create psychological problems throughout the European Union in rural areas than real problems.

We have to reassure European farmers and say to them there are regulations in place, those regulations grant entitlements to European farmers and there is no possibility whatever happens that those obligations can be denied by the European Union.

Nevertheless, we do have a fall in incomes.

We did have a statement by the Commission for 2000-2006 and that set out certain perimeters within which agricultural spending would be provided for.

Now we hear new proposals coming forward that if we have a situation of enlargement, we have entirely new proposals for entirely new policies towards the new Member States and without any provision as to how these will be financed.

We need a little bit more clarity and there is tension building up between the institutions on this question of the Balkans.

The sooner the Commission can propose to us clear figures for year-by-year spending the better.

I do not actually think that it is necessary to take any money from agriculture in order to finance a decent programme within the amounts of money set out - EUR 5.5 billion - considering what the obligations of the Union are, what the Member States will put up and what is likely to be called upon because of the situation in Serbia.

So why generate a battle about some EUR 300 million that, in the end, I do not think that we will have to call down from agriculture?

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, to reflect the priorities of European policy in the budget of the European Union, that is the objective of this highly premature debate on the budget 2001.

It is the first budget for which the new Commission has drawn up a preliminary draft budget and the first budget in which I, as a new Commissioner, shall be involved right from the outset.

I think it is really useful that we already have a joint procedure between the European Parliament and the Commission, an understanding of which priorities require financial cover in the 2001 budgetary year.

We are not yet at the stage of talking specific figures, not yet at the input stage; in fact what we are discussing now is the output.

What do we want, what objectives do we want to achieve or support with this budget?

In my opinion, setting the priorities like this is the best way of starting the debate on a budgetary year.

I note in connection with the priorities being set for the next budgetary year that the reports, that the priorities which you are setting, tally closely with the priorities being set by the Commission.

I think that this paves the way for bringing the budgetary procedure to a successful conclusion.

I should like in particular to thank the two rapporteurs on behalf of the Commission.

I should like to comment on Mr Ferber' s report first and thank him for the support which he has expressed in his report for the Commission' s attempt to gradually convert the budgetary reporting procedure to activity based budgeting.

The report suggests that the other institutions will also gradually follow this lead.

Above all, the report expresses support for the Commission' s administrative reform and I should expressly like to thank the rapporteur for that.

Of course, the Commission will be pleased if the other institutions are also called upon to consider, for their part, which administrative reforms would be advisable and which can be implemented.

Mr Ferber, you referred in your report to other problems which need to be resolved.

I would like to single out the question of financing for political parties.

I think that this is an issue on which we need to take joint action to find a speedy solution.

Now to Mrs Haug' s report.

Mrs Haug, allow me to congratulate you on your report and on successfully concentrating on the priorities, because I can imagine that you must have received a lot of requests, a lot of letters to Santa, asking you to include everyone' s pet concern.

You have concentrated instead on the real priorities and I think that is very valuable if we are to reach an understanding.

You laid particular emphasis on external policy tasks, which I shall come to in a moment.

But you also stressed the importance of setting priorities and focal points for research - the Commission shares this view - and the fact that the development of a viable economy also needs to be fostered through budgetary endeavour.

At this point, you have already debated this, I should like to comment on the results of the Lisbon Summit.

I think that, on balance, the Lisbon Summit was a success for the European Union because everyone agreed that we now need to take huge steps to promote information and communications technologies and that considering how account can be taken of this priority in the budget should be a matter of common concern.

Mrs Haug, I should like in this context to welcome a statement which you made in your speech: you said that we do not want to compete with the Member States' employment programmes; instead we want to consider what the special European dimension is in relation to each initiative, what can be specifically promoted at European level.

I should like to comment on your question as to how great an effect the European budget has on employment.

Of course, the programme financed by the Structural Funds is one of the most important instruments for promoting employment.

We have again set a horizontal objective for the new period for the Structural Funds, requiring lists to be drawn up even during ex-ante evaluations, setting out and calculating how these special programmes will affect the labour market situation.

I am also extremely pleased that my colleague, Mr Barnier, has said that the Commission will not be satisfied with woolly statements but wants specific calculations so that everything can be checked.

As far as the Commission' s priorities are concerned, I should like to point out that the Commission conducted the priorities debate at its meeting on 23 February where it came to the conclusion that particular account should be taken in the budget 2001 of the stronger foreign policy commitments of the European Union and of the important objectives of promoting rural development and supporting the transition to an information society.

I should like to comment specifically now on the question of the expenditure needed for the Stability Pact in the western Balkans.

It was also the central theme of today' s debate.

The Commission too has based its conclusions on the priorities for the budget 2001 on an estimated financing requirement in the order of EUR 5.5 billion for the period up to 2006.

It has been pointed out on several sides that demands are being made on the Commission.

You demanded this of the Commission and the Council in your resolution of 16 December.

The Commission is being called upon to submit specific estimates of the funds needed in April and, at the same time, to state the extent to which the financial perspective needs to be reviewed.

The Commission came to the conclusion in the priorities debate for the budget 2001 that the funds needed cannot be found merely by redistributing foreign policy funds, although we have, of course, also considered where we can redeploy funds from the foreign policy area.

My colleague, Chris Patten, took on this task together with Mr Nielson.

However, we came to the conclusion that additional funds are needed which can be financed through other measures, which I shall come to in a moment.

I should like to stress at this point that the figure or estimate of EUR 5.5 billion for the period up to 2006 is being analysed, and rightly so.

I should like to point out in this context that EUR 4.5 billion was channelled to the regions from the budget of the European Union between 1991 and 1999.

If we now quote a figure of EUR 5.5 billion, of course that represents a considerable increase, but it is not an exorbitant increase and is in proportion to past assistance.

I think we are all in agreement on the fact that, in comparison with the last decade, we must focus more strongly on financial assistance and financial aid for the regions.

I should like to comment now on the financing proposal, especially the point relating to redeploying funds from the agricultural policy area.

This is a matter of particular concern to me insofar as anxieties may have been aroused in the debate here which, in my view, are not really justified.

Mr Walter, you referred to this in your intervention: the point is not whether agricultural policy expenditure will be reduced in 2001 in comparison with the year 2000; the point is what increase is needed.

According to the financial perspective, compared with the budget 2000, an increase of EUR 3.1 billion for agricultural market expenditure would be possible from a purely theoretical point of view, according to the figures.

The Commission proposal makes provision for a further increase of EUR 2.8 billion for agricultural market expenditure.

I would be obliged if you could take note of this and not say that we are letting a genie out of the bottle in the area of agricultural market policy which will then jeopardise all expenditure.

I say again quite clearly, and the Commission also says, that direct income support for farmers will not be affected by the resolution; on the contrary, provision has been made for an overall increase in the order of over 7% for agricultural market expenditure and a really exorbitant increase of 9.5% for rural development.

I hope that this will also be supported by the budgetary authority because I think that this rural development programme offers a great deal of scope for promoting new endeavours in agricultural policy.

Allow me to say a few words on the overall increase in the size of the budget.

We have already had the opportunity to debate this twice in the Committee on Budgets.

We shall doubtless need to engage in intensive debate with the Council as to the rate by which expenditure needs to be increased.

I should like to point out here that a considerable increase is needed on the expenditure side simply in order to be able to honour old commitments made in the past which, of course, have to be paid for.

I should like to note, on the question of the financial perspective, that the Commission proposes, following the European Parliament' s petition and demand, to include expenditure for promoting Cyprus and Malta under enlargement expenditure in the future, i.e. under the heading of Category 7.

I think this move would seriously improve the transparency of the budget and I hope that the Council will not stand by its initial rejection of this suggestion.

I should perhaps come back to the budgetary procedure for the budgetary year 2000.

The budgetary procedure last year was extremely exciting, to put it diplomatically.

I had a good opportunity to get to know you really well and found that the Committee on Budgets was a very robust committee with excellent staying powers.

I assume that the Committee on Budgets of the European Parliament is resolved to take a very decisive position on the budget 2001, but that it is also prepared to negotiate from this very decisive position.

However, I hope for all our sakes that the 2001 budgetary procedure will not necessarily put our endurance to the test once again and will be marked by greater consensus.

I am also convinced that, should we come to blows again, the Committee on Budgets will demonstrate the same staying powers.

I can assure you that the Commission will again be at your constant disposal so that we can achieve a positive result.

The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 a.m.

The next item is the report (A5-0052/2000) by Mrs Klamt, on behalf of the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs, on the communication from the Commission to the Council, the European Parliament, the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions on the implementation of measures to combat child sex tourism (COM(1999)262 - C5-0096/1999 - 1999/2097(COS)).

Mr President, child sex tourism is not a national or a European problem, it is a global problem which has become more and more explosive and more and more extensive over recent years.

The motion for a resolution which has been tabled takes account of this fact.

It no longer has a selective, national or European dimension.

The worrying increase in the number of cases of sexual exploitation of children shows that the European Union and its Member States need to use every means at their disposal in order to protect the weakest members of our society, i.e. children.

The motion for a resolution therefore contains two central demands.

First: unilateral criminality should apply in cases of child sex tourism; that means that even if the country in which the offence is committed does not punish sexual abuse, it must nonetheless be possible to prosecute offenders in their country of origin.

Secondly: account must be taken of the principle of extraterritorial jurisdiction.

We need standard national legislation throughout Europe which punishes Union citizens who engage in child sex tourism, irrespective of where the offence was committed.

Europe must take responsibility for its citizens, even beyond its borders.

These demands can be succinctly summarised: children are no less deserving of protection because their home country denies them the necessary protection, and there is all the more reason not to turn a blind eye to incidents within the European Union.

Each of us knows of cases of child abuse in our own country.

The Council and Commission have indeed supported the principle of extraterritorial jurisdiction, but these drafts still allow for the criterion of dual criminality in exceptional cases.

In other words, in exceptional cases, it would still be possible for sex tourists who have abused children to escape punishment if the country in which the offence was committed does not punish child abuse.

The European Parliament flatly rejects this regulation on possible exceptions.

The Member States must be proactive in opposing anything which encourages or plays down child sex tourism.

Respect for the rights of the child must be anchored in the European Treaties if we are to guarantee protection for children in principle.

Measures taken so far must be examined to see how effective and efficient they really are and EU funds must also be made available in the future to fight child sex tourism.

The role of NGOs is particularly important in this context.

The Commission is called upon to draw up a survey of national laws in this sphere and, if necessary, to submit suitable proposals setting out the constituent elements of offences.

All the points which it has now been decided should be regulated and taken into account in the future within the European Union must be given the same consideration in accession negotiations, in relations with third countries and, most importantly, when deciding how development cooperation funds should be deployed.

The freedoms and rights of citizens include freedom from physical and mental harm.

This applies not only to our children but to all children.

It is our duty to implement this with all the means at our disposal.

Everyone involved agreed on this consensus.

In my view, this resolution sets an example for constructive and fruitful cooperation which goes beyond the party political divide.

I should therefore like to thank all my fellow Members, especially those from the other committees involved, whose positions have been worked into my report.

This is also an explanation of the fact that numerous proposed amendments were rejected by my group.

They are already contained in the report, even if some are formulated differently.

I am convinced that this is a good, sensible resolution which will allow us to protect children.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, first, I should like to thank Mrs Klamt for this comprehensive and thorough report. I am glad, too, that the opinion of the Committee on Women' s Rights has been incorporated into the report.

Child sex tourism does not take place only in Europe, but throughout the world.

Child sex tourism is a tragic and distressing fact of life and this problem has become worse and more serious in certain regions of the world over recent years.

Parliament' s approach to the fight against this evil must therefore go beyond the borders of Europe.

In addition to the situation in the Far East, there is also that on the German-Czech border, which is why this problem needs to be clarified in no uncertain terms during accession negotiations.

It is important to clarify the legal situation and to dispense with the notion of dual criminality.

The law of the offenders' country of origin must be binding for the purposes of criminal prosecution.

Offenders should not imagine themselves to be safe in some law-free zone.

It must be possible to punish offenders, even if abuse is not a punishable offence in the country in which it is committed.

This problem cannot be solved through national measures.

We need a common approach in the European Union and in the Member States, in cooperation with the third countries in question.

Children as persons with their own, inviolable rights deserve our special protection, irrespective of the country in which they live.

This protection must be guaranteed in both theory and practice.

Sufficient funds must be provided to support an effective, victim-orientated fight against this evil.

In all the Member States of the European Union, the necessary legislative measures must be taken and the laws harmonised in order to guarantee the protection of children.

Last but not least, protection of children as separate personalities with the right to freedom from physical and mental harm must be included in the Charter of Fundamental Rights.

Mr President, I wish to congratulate the rapporteur, Mrs Klamt, on a splendid and successful piece of work.

Swedish travel agents are to be the first in the world to actively combat the child sex trade, which is rife in many so-called tourist paradises.

All the major players in the Swedish tourist industry have already promised to comply with a special code of conduct.

Once they have shown that they are fulfilling the requirements of the code, they will be duly approved or certified.

As early as the beginning of April of this year, a campaign was begun to make travellers aware of what is happening.

There are TV and cinema advertisements, posters at the airports and large placards.

Behind the code of conduct lies the Swedish branch of ECPAT, an organisation which works to end the sexual exploitation of children.

Among the requirements made of travel companies are that they should train their staff, both at home and at the resorts, as well as inform travellers.

They are also to see to it that, for example, hotel owners and staff are aware of, and contribute to, the work being done to combat the child sex trade.

It is about touching people' s consciences.

Allow me to conclude my speech by talking about children - our greatest gift, the most precious thing we have.

They are innocent and defenceless and they seek security.

We must awaken citizens' consciences where our children are concerned.

I also want to talk about the sexual dimension to life.

Adult society cannot escape from its failure to adequately foster an appreciation of both the wonder and the responsibility entailed in sexual experience.

It is about showing love and tenderness, about the gift of life, about carrying life forward and about faithfulness.

We must awaken citizens' consciences regarding the place of love in our lives.

Mr President, I should first, of course, like to congratulate Mrs Klamt on her report.

It is not only excellent in quality but also extremely useful.

Everyone agrees on the idea that children are the future of the world but, at the same time, they represent one of the most vulnerable groups in the population of this planet.

Indeed, the United Nations Convention of 20 November 1989 granted them specific rights and all our actions should take their inspiration from recognition of these rights.

We must tackle a dreadful scourge, the sexual exploitation of children.

There are 'clients' , if one can use the word in such a horrifying situation, who buy children in order to indulge their sexual fantasies.

These clients, from Europe, the United States or Japan are the hard core of child abusers.

This horrendous phenomenon occurs principally in third countries where there is great poverty.

The chief causes are poverty and social inequality, the collapse of family and community protection, discrimination against girls and ignorance.

All these causes combine to form a melting pot where lives are shattered by the greed of some parties and the deviance of others.

We might remember the old Japanese proverb which says, 'The traveller knows no shame' .

Some people have no qualms about doing in another country what they would not do at home.

It is a compound of anonymity and impunity coupled with a scorn one might describe as racist, which permits some individuals to treat a child as an object to be used, defiled and rejected.

Most child prostitutes are part of the general prostitution market run by Mafias of procurers.

It is very hard to locate these children and to extract them from a life of prostitution.

Unfortunately, some individuals use the Internet to provide details of their base acts and addresses where children can be procured.

We cannot remain indifferent to this scourge which represents an appalling infringement of children' s rights and human rights, and we must protect these children by attacking the origins of the problem and by pursuing the paedophiles.

The origins of the problem can be attacked by tackling poverty and ignorance.

There must be criminal penalties for child abusers.

The first chapter of the European Charter on the Rights of the Child states that 'child' refers to any person under the age of 18.

I suggest that we adopt this age limit and say that all minors must absolutely be protected.

It is our duty to this generation which represents our future, a generation which expects us to protect and respect it.

This report and the Commission communication to which it responds makes two major contributions to progress in seeking to reduce sexual exploitation of children through so-called sex tourism.

The first is in contributing to the construction of an international human rights community: in all kinds of ways there has been increasing recognition that Europe must promote international standards of respect for human rights, for instance in the international criminal tribunals on Former Yugoslavia and Rwanda, the agreement on the statute of the international criminal court, the Pinochet case, the intervention in Kosovo to stop ethnic cleansing - all these things have been developing momentum.

Saying that we will not allow our citizens to sexually exploit children abroad fits into that pattern, and the part of Mrs Klamt' s report that talks of how we must insist that double standards are unacceptable is very well put and particularly valuable.

It is not acceptable that our citizens should behave abroad in a way that they would not behave at home.

Secondly, this report makes a contribution to police and judicial cooperation in the European Union.

This is a strong example where those Euro-sceptics who resist cooperation in this field are wrong.

It is only by joint across-the-board action that we can tackle this issue, not least by agreeing to extra-territorial application of criminal laws.

Approximation and mutual recognition of national criminal provisions, which is not the same as harmonisation, will be of the utmost utility, as will cooperation through police forces and Europol, insisting all the time, as the Parliament does, on adequate parliamentary and judicial scrutiny.

So I congratulate Mrs Klamt for a very valuable report and I hope it will continue to be built on in future.

Mr President, confronted with the worrying development of sex tourism and, more generally, the sexual exploitation of children in Europe and throughout the world, Mrs Klamt is quite right to put forward measures in her report which are adequate to deal with the serious problem before us.

I particularly recall measures such as the inclusion of children' s rights in the Charter of Fundamental Rights and the setting up of free telephone helplines for children.

There is an urgent need for a coherent policy for the protection of children to be implemented.

I therefore support Amendment No 4 calling for a European centre for missing children and victims of sexual abuse to be set up in order to coordinate the activities of the organisations set up in the Member States.

The Commission must undertake to actually establish this European database.

I wish to point out that Parliament has already adopted resolutions on this subject.

It must be noted that the proposals made have only been implemented in part.

Much more effective measures are required.

Finally, I must alert the House to the latest developments.

It is now not just sex tourists who are travelling to third countries; we now have children being sent here, to Europe, like so many items sent by parcel post.

Considering, then, the transnational nature of the problem, I think that we should demand that Europol supports national and transnational inquiries and gives an annual report of its work.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I too would like to offer my sincere congratulations to Mrs Klamt.

I feel that she has produced a report which proposes practical solutions, as many of us wished, and I thank her for that.

I also think that she has avoided the pitfalls of sexophobia, which was not lacking in some contributions.

It is an extremely serious problem.

The report is a good one, but I would not like to see it sabotaged or even drastically cut by one section of this House tomorrow, as I fear it will be.

It is all very well to discuss the problem in the third world, but I believe, as previous speakers have said, that there are also major problems within the European Union, and I have just learnt that the Group of the Party of European Socialists has requested a separate vote on the important sections of this report.

A separate vote means that some parts of the text may be removed.

In particular, the Group of the Party of European Socialists is asking for the suggestion for the establishment of a committee of enquiry to be removed.

I find that cause for extremely serious concern.

We are aware, for we have already discussed this, of the seriousness of the situation in some countries within the Union, particularly in Belgium.

As I speak, the lid is being lifted on the infamous Dutroux case in the form of an excellent investigation on the Belgian national television station, RTBF. Unfortunately, I was not able to see the whole thing.

It showed that the highest authorities in this country did all they could to hold up this inquiry by indulging in constant obstruction, transfers of police officers and magistrates and the defamation, and worse, of the victims who came forward to testify.

These are extremely serious matters, involving high-ranking personalities, but it is all still perfectly concealed, completely outside the scope of the justice system.

I think that we can and we must look at what is happening in the third world. We can and we must, and let me once again thank Mrs Klamt, propose solutions.

I agree with Mrs Ludford: we must think in terms of institutions, in terms of an international court, and consider already extending the jurisdiction of international courts, but we must not neglect our own doorstep.

There are some extremely serious situations within the European Union as well.

It is a matter of urgency that, pursuant to Articles 6 and 7 of the Treaty on European Union, in the event of a 'serious and persistent breach (of the principles of) human rights, fundamental freedoms, and the rule of law' , the Union, and hence Parliament, which has a responsible part to play in this, should, at last, tackle, since the relevant Member State cannot, this very serious matter of the hundreds, nay thousands of missing children, including, as you know if you have seen the posters in railway stations and at bus stops, at least 150 children still missing in Belgium, who have been not only raped but also killed, sacrificed in the name of some dubious pleasure.

Mr President, the matter addressed by Mrs Klamt' s truly excellent report is one of the most burning and ever growing issues of our time, to which a solution must urgently be found.

Of course, the Commission' s initiatives, especially the activities to increase awareness, should not be underestimated but unfortunately they are proving to be inadequate since the sexual exploitation of children and child tourism are continually assuming greater dimensions, not only in 'traditional' underdeveloped countries but within the European Union itself.

We therefore urgently need an integrated and cohesive Community policy on children and it is really sad - as others too have said - that the Treaty of Amsterdam does not provide the necessary legal base.

Yet, the provision for the creation of a new area of freedom, security and justice in the immediate future, which presupposes police and judicial cooperation in combating international organised crime, reinforces our hopes of a more effective approach to those circles which both supply and demand child sex services.

For that reason, it is vital to include the rights of children, exactly as they are laid down by the UN Convention of 20 November 1989, in the European Union' s Charter of Fundamental Rights which is currently being drawn up.

We also need legislation which is binding on an extra-territorial scale, to punish culpable acts perpetrated abroad, with strict provisions for the prosecution of travel agencies and haulage companies which promote the abomination of child sex tourism.

We need more resources for the implementation of specific schemes, and we need closer cooperation between the Commission and the tourism industry to define codes of ethics.

We should look towards the good example set by Sweden.

Finally, we must also act to protect and support children who are victims of sexual exploitation, and young refugees and immigrants who are a particularly vulnerable group.

In summary, I think we need a common front and a common strategy at three levels.

Firstly, at the level of awareness, secondly, at the level of suppression, and thirdly, in the direction of protection and rehabilitation of victims.

Mr President, in November 1996, the European Commission adopted its first communication on combating child sex tourism.

A year later, in November 1997, a European Parliament resolution and a Council statement on 'Tourism' revealed the general consensus among the institutions on the broad lines of the Commission communication.

Since then, this support has been implemented in practical terms by the setting up of a new budget line, with the funds made available intended for campaigns to raise awareness, within the European Union, and to combat the development of child sex tourism.

It has since been expressed in the Council conclusions of 21 December 1999, which display a new firm political commitment to resolving this significant social problem, which we are pledged to do.

If, as it is to be hoped, the European Parliament reiterates its support for this approach, then this will strengthen the determination of all the operators involved in combating this scourge.

At the same time, further progress in this direction will contribute to our response to the concerns expressed by European citizens at the development of this scourge.

Mrs Klamt' s report follows up the Commission communication of May 1999 presenting the operations carried out in the period 1997-1998 and specifying follow-up operations necessary to initiate and/or implement new actions.

You will have noted that Community measures combating child sex tourism is progressing at a sustained rate along the lines of the strategy initially agreed, aiming, on the one hand, to reduce demand, particularly by means of cooperation with the tourist industry and the relevant NGOs, and, on the other hand, to tackle the sources of supply in tourist destination countries by any appropriate means, including Community policies for external relations and development cooperation.

The importance of this second aspect was, moreover, highlighted by the Commission as early as 1998 when the support strategy for the development of sustainable tourism in developing countries was defined, which stipulated that the problem of child sex tourism should be taken into specific consideration as the subject of structured political dialogue with the countries most affected, particularly at regional level.

The development of child sex tourism flies in the face of the very idea of a human community united on the basis of ideals such as respect and dignity, and public welfare and remembrance.

Furthermore, it could be said that, rather than fuelling the 'regulation versus self-regulation' debate, the need for efficiency requires us to concentrate on investigating and maximising the use of the synergies between these two modes of operation which, in the case in point, are broadly complementary.

Especially since, alongside the progress made towards effective self-regulation, i.e. including mechanisms to monitor the execution of commitments made, the development of police and judicial cooperation in Europe cannot fail to have a positive effect on the suppression of child sex tourism.

The Council joint action of 24 February 1997 on combating the trade in human beings and the sexual exploitation of children, stipulating that each Member State should undertake to review its own national legislation on measures relating to types of deliberate behaviour, is exemplary in this regard.

The fact that it is actually possible to be prosecuted by the authorities of two countries, in exceptional circumstances, must not disguise the main contribution of this joint action, to wit, affirming the principle of extra-territorial jurisdiction applicable to one of its nationals or to a person usually resident on its territory.

It is therefore easier to understand the great interest generated by legislative reforms on the subject, as well as their practical interpretation, in terms of the everyday application of the legislation, hence the importance which the European Parliament attaches to assessing the degree to which the Member States actually meet their obligations under this joint action.

This assessment may provide the opportunity to focus on suppressing child sex tourism, and to draw up an initial status report.

In operational terms, the raft of planned operations has been implemented steadily.

Combating child sex tourism offers the Commission an opportunity to enlist its various services to step up internal coordination. It also affords the Commission the opportunity to step up its cooperation with the national administrations, professional associations and non-governmental organisations involved.

Other Commission initiatives in the context of the increased involvement of the tourist industry have also had practical results, particularly in terms of drawing up and strengthening codes of conduct and other self-regulatory mechanisms in the tourist industry.

As I am sure you are aware, your support will give us further incentive to pursue this avenue with yet more determination.

The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 a.m.

The next item is the report (A5-0061/2000) by Mr MacCormick, on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market, on the Commission Green Paper 'Liability for defective products' (COM(1999)396 - C5-0184/1999 - 1999/2158(COS)).

It is an honour and a pleasure to have the opportunity to present this report to Parliament today.

It is on the very important subject of product liability on which the European Community first introduced legislation as long ago as 1985 in the form of a directive.

This was transposed in a somewhat leisurely way, and in some cases we might even say in a shockingly slow way, by Member States.

So it is only fairly recently that there has been across the Union experience of the working of the product liability regime, which of course is not absolutely uniform in any event across the countries, because there are areas where different views may be taken consistent with the directive.

This legislation substitutes distributive justice, in a sense, for corrective justice in this very important area of the law of civil liability.

The idea is that if a defective product is sold and used and injures in any way a consumer, the consumer should be entitled to compensation without proof of fault on the producer' s part, merely proof of causation of the damage by the defective product.

This is a very good idea.

It helps to spread the risks of injury widely and ensure compensation.

Of course, it does not in itself ensure product safety.

That is better done by other regimes regulating various industries, and we have a good regulatory regime in most of our industries in the European Union now.

Moreover, it should not be thought that this is the only basis upon which people who are injured can be helped.

We have other systems of distributive justice on this side of the Atlantic, not paralleled in, for example, the United States of America, which has a different but somewhat tougher product liability law than we have.

There, however, it is a kind of forensic lottery, as academics have called it, because many people who are injured get nothing at all and some people who are injured get enormous damages.

It is generally, and rightly, thought that plaintiffs' lawyers are the people who do best out of the deal.

We should stick to our own view on social security as the main basis for help, but then have this product liability regime as well.

The Green Paper raised the question of whether this scheme should be extended and whether some changes should be made.

This was in response to debates in Parliament last year, which led to the amendment of the directive to include primary agricultural products.

It seems to me that the Green Paper, although it has started the debate well, will not finish it completely.

It gave a useful summary of the way the law has developed and been applied, and then asked a series of questions of interested parties and required replies in by the end of November last year.

That is a good way of finding out if there are alarming and urgent matters needing swift action.

It is a bad way of producing a thorough and scientific study of the impact of a body of law on civil society and on life in our Union.

We need more and deeper study for that purpose.

In the meantime we could take this view, and my report suggests that we take this view: unless the evidence produced shows a strong factually-based need for early change, we should have further and deeper reflection on the matter, and we should have a debate that ranges wider than the debate triggered by the Green Paper itself.

There is a great deal of very interesting work of a scholarly and scientific kind and there could be more if it was known that this was properly under consideration.

I know that this approach has disappointed some colleagues, particularly those who raised the debate last year, and it has been suggested that the Parliament would simply walk away from important issues if we left it at that.

I would not myself like to leave it at that.

I have therefore suggested some compromise amendments which suggest that there must be a further and deeper dialogue about this which pays close attention to the points which have been raised without prejudging what is the right answer to them.

I do not think it should be prejudged.

I would not myself like to be a party to imposing on Europe the "tort tax" under which Americans have made themselves suffer.

So I suggest that we urge the Commission to hold a longer and deeper dialogue about this; not to precipitate action but to measured consideration.

We have a good law and the saying "if a thing ain' t broken, don' t fix it; but do not be complacent about it either" applies here.

Mr President, yesterday, ladies and gentlemen, an American court awarded the nicotine victim Leslie Whiteley compensation of no less than USD 44 million.

A week ago, the European Council in Lisbon spoke out in favour of a Europe of innovation.

Under these circumstances the question which arises is, do we need to review our European liability law?

Do we want to mimic the Americans in our liability law?

How can we formulate a liability law which promotes rather than hinders innovation?

We welcome the fact that the Commission has initially submitted a Green Paper on this issue because we consider it sensible to start by evaluating experience with the present directive before we start laying down new rules.

As the Group of the European People' s Party (Christian Democrats) and European Democrats, we are in favour, in the interests of legal security, of a clear division between compensation and punitive sanctions, a division not possible under American law.

In the interests of medium-sized enterprises, we want to prevent incalculable liability risks and avoid excessive compensation for parties which have suffered minor damage at the expense of consumers as a whole since, at the end of the day, it is they who must pay for such compensation in the form of higher prices.

We want a liability law which promotes innovation and does not conceal incalculable liability risks for companies launching new products.

In evaluating the opinions submitted on the Green Paper, we should like the Commission to have a free rein when it assesses the need to reform the product liability directive.

We would like you to evaluate the reports which you receive impartially.

We think, at first glance, that the present liability law achieves a fair balance between the interests of consumers on the one hand and the interests of product manufacturers on the other.

Companies must assume liability for damage to consumers without fault.

At the same time, liability is statute barred after ten years and capped at EUR 75 million.

We therefore take the view that a review should only be started if there is clear proof of the need to amend the directive.

Caution and level-headedness are needed. Millions of cases are affected day after day.

We wish the Commission every success in evaluating the results of the Green Paper.

Mr President, our honourable friend, Mr MacCormick, has made a thorough and critical appraisal of the Green Paper on civil liability for defective products and he deserves our thanks for his work and for his cooperative contribution.

I should just like to make a few more comments on behalf of my group on a number of necessary amendments on which both we and the Group of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party reached extensive agreement in the run-up.

I refer to the checks which your department needs to carry out, Commissioner Bolkestein, and the question of the burden of proof which, according to Article 4, rests solely on the injured party.

My group believes the Commission should check if prima facie evidence and circumstantial evidence can also be taken into account at all levels at which evidence is taken.

This is particularly important because the product world is becoming more and more complex and it is becoming more and more difficult for individual persons who have suffered damage to provide proof in this area.

There is also the question of derogations from general manufacturer' s liability, especially the so-called development risk.

We need to examine if these derogations are expedient and conducive to the balance between manufacturers and consumers.

This applies in particular in the case of foodstuffs and medication.

We do not want to see the consumer alone bear the risks inherent in technical progress.

In my view, applying the directive solely to private use and consumption is a questionable move.

The Commission should consider if the directive should not be extended to commercial goods.

The material damage sustained by a company is, in principle, no different from the material damage sustained by a private individual.

And the smaller the enterprise, the heavier the burden of this unequal treatment.

Harmonisation of laws at Community level would be in keeping with the purpose of the product liability directive, especially as increasing flexibility in the world of work is tending more and more to blur the clear distinction between the private world and the world of work.

We also need to think about the way in which liability is statute-barred.

It is clear from the case of BSE that a standard ten-year limitation on liability may be insufficient under certain circumstances.

We could perhaps consider gearing the limitation period to the type of product.

However, it is not only these individual points which are important; we also need to seize every opportunity to harmonise product liability still further in the form of comprehensive consumer protection in the European Union.

If we supplement the MacCormick report in this direction, the European Parliament will have done a good job in the eyes of the consumer.

Which is why we have been elected.

Mr President, I would like to welcome what is a very well considered report, which invites us to stand back and take stock before embarking on further legislation in this field - a refreshing welcome from the tendency of this House sometimes to rush, or to be pushed to rush, at complex legislation.

I would particularly like to focus my comments on the issues raised by this report on the further harmonisation of private law.

In our enthusiasm we sometimes forget what a sensitive subject the harmonisation of private law is; it touches the national legal traditions in our Member States, legal traditions born of our differing histories and cultures of separate nations and jurisdictions.

Professor MacCormick will be acutely aware of this in Scotland, with its own legal heritage.

I am not in any way opposed to further harmonisation, it can be helpful to the good functioning of the internal market, but imposed legislative harmonisation needs to be carefully and openly considered, or we may find we have left our citizens behind in this project.

The traditional push towards harmonisation has been the internal market to which we can now add the aspirations of Tampere for a single area of European justice.

But harmonisation must respect subsidiarity - we have no need to rush towards uniformity of civil law in this area of product liability.

We should be aware that uniformity can stifle innovation and prevent adaptation to local or national circumstances and problems.

It is a truism that European law has been able to benefit from the ability to draw on rich comparative material of varying legal traditions in our different Member States.

It would be dangerous to stifle this by uniformity.

Let me suggest that the aspirations of Tampere can be better met in the public law area of the intended Charter of Fundamental Rights than by further imposed legislation which harmonises our private law traditions.

Research seems to show that our traditions are tending to converge slowly.

Let us perhaps be prepared to assist and guide that convergence and respect the conditionality of the further harmonisation which is integral to Professor MacCormick' s proposals.

Mr President, I would like to join my colleagues in giving a warm welcome to Professor MacCormick' s very realistic report.

In considering the whole issue of product liability we have to say that the current directive appears to have functioned well.

There is not a great deal of evidence that consumers are at the moment being seriously disadvantaged.

I would argue quite strongly that we have achieved a very fair and reasonable balance of interests.

I want to pick up the point made by my colleague Mr Wuermeling that we must take particular care about development risks in the environment within which we now find ourselves.

It was a crucial issue at the Lisbon Summit and new product innovation is one of the key competitive aspects of European business.

If our regulations on product liability stifle competitiveness and innovation, I suggest that consumers will be at a major disadvantage as well.

Consumers will be the ones to lose out, if a flow of competitive and innovative products is stifled.

So let me echo Mr MacCormick: there is a need for much more clearly-based factual evidence before we make changes to this legislation.

Mr President, I am afraid that my opinions will differ from those of Mr Harbour or Mr Wuermeling, because, although the 1985 directive on civil liability was a milestone in the field of consumer protection and furthermore a chapter in which the Commission played a very important role and adopted a strikingly progressive approach, I think that, at the same time, several years have passed since it was adopted.

I therefore feel that it is notable and praiseworthy that the Commission has decided to review it.

This Green Paper represents a first step towards this review.

We must bear in mind the fact that in 1985 certain principles that are today considered to be fundamental were not incorporated, and at that time could not be incorporated into the text of the directive, because debate on the subject had not reached a sufficiently advanced level.

Amongst these principles, the first we should highlight is the importance of the manufacturer accepting, at least in certain areas, the development risks.

I come from a country, Spain, where consumer legislation dictates that the manufacturer bears responsibility for development risks.

There have been no bankruptcies among insurance companies or manufacturers, nor has technical progress been hampered as a result.

For too long the consumer has had to bear the full cost of this risk in the cause of progress.

The second principle consists of removing the burden of proof from the party that has suffered the damage.

We are talking about an objective responsibility and therefore the burden of proof imposed on the victim must be made as light as possible.

The third principle concerns setting levels of compensation.

The directive does provide for this eventuality, but we must bear in mind the fact that judicial bodies are used to seeing this setting of compensation as interference by legislative authority in its duties and this issue must therefore also be reviewed.

The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 a.m.

The next item is the report (A5-0078/2000) by Mr Turmes, on behalf of the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy, on electricity from renewable sources and the internal electricity market (SEC(1999)0470 - C5-0342/1999 - 2000/2002(COS)).

Mr President, what is the purpose of a directive on renewable forms of energy, or an own-initiative report from Parliament?

I think we must place this report, and also the directive which is in the pipeline, in the context of the European Union' s energy policy with its three objectives of competitive pricing, security of supply and environmental protection.

Since 29 February 2000, we have had a common electricity market but, regrettably, still with considerable distortions of competition which still, unfortunately, work to the disadvantage of both renewable energy cogeneration and energy management and the forms of energy of the future.

The reasons for this are energy prices which do not incorporate the external costs, with the sizeable subsidies which are still available to the nuclear sector as well as the fossil-fuel sector.

The directive which is currently being prepared should, in my opinion, have two objectives.

Firstly, the current imperfect market must be adjusted as necessary in order to protect the still tender shoots of the plant which is renewable energy, and also to lay the foundations for renewable energies so that they head in the direction that they need to before the year 2030 or 2040, when they must be capable of providing the greater part of the European Community energy mix.

We have many reasons to move in this direction.

Firstly, the protection of the environment, but also the creation of jobs.

We have studies, backed up with figures, to show that renewable energies create more jobs than conventional forms of energy.

We know that we must make Europe ready for a world renewable energy market and there are also geostrategic advantages to our reducing our dependence on regions which are often in crisis.

What must the cornerstones of this forthcoming directive be?

It must, in the first place, be based on the Treaty articles relating to both the internal market and the environment.

It must have ambitious, clearly defined objectives at European level in the order of those given in the Commission White Paper, i.e. 12% for energy and 23% for electricity.

After setting these objectives at the European level, there must be 'burden sharing' negotiations between the Commission and the Member States in order for reciprocal agreement to be reached on the specific national objectives which, when added together, will combine to form the European objective.

As regards the instruments to be implemented, my report advocates subsidiarity.

I believe it is too early to pass judgement on the various instruments that can be classified.

On the one hand, there are the fixed-price systems which have launched the renewable energy industry in Europe.

On the other hand, there are the trading systems which have just been created in the Netherlands and Denmark, where there are still many administrative and technical problems to resolve.

We therefore propose that the Commission makes an assessment of the various instruments in 2005, and that, until that date, subsidiarity should be maintained and the Commission should refrain from regulating subsidies to the renewable sector.

I would argue that it is pointless to make cuts in subsidies to the renewable sector when there are much larger subsidies going to the nuclear and fossil-fuel sectors.

There is one last point which I wish to put forward, namely the need for a system for labelling and providing information on all forms of electricity.

In an internal market, the consumer should be informed, and this information should be provided for every form of energy, not just green electricity.

I would like to thank all the people who contributed to this report, which is the result of a real team effort, and I await their comments with interest.

Mr President, I should like to congratulate the rapporteur on an excellent piece of work.

We have what are per se excellent basic documents in the field of renewable energy sources, such as the White Paper referred to, which contains a brilliant critical analysis.

But, on balance, everyone is in favour.

Everyone says yes, we need these new sources of energy.

They are a fundamental component of the 21st century, of the 21st century way of thinking.

But everyone has slightly different ideas and, as a result, we often fail to find a standard line which will allow us to achieve these objectives.

The second point is that we tend to polarise, and that causes problems.

On the one hand, we say, there are the advocates of renewable energy sources, ecologically-minded, forward-looking people.

On the other hand, there are the energy suppliers, oil traders and oil producers, who want exactly the opposite.

All we are doing is fanning the flames of enmity.

I think we should put this enmity behind us and acknowledge that these renewable sources of energy only have one enemy.

That enemy is our ignorance of the fantastic opportunities which they offer us.

First, there are ecological advantages and, secondly, there are job opportunities.

Thirdly, I think that whatever we invest in this area is neither subsidy nor promotion but sensible investment from a national economic point of view.

Fourthly, we must bear in mind that sources of fossil fuels have been accompanied recently by price fluctuations ranging from 10 to 30 dollars a barrel.

Fifthly, more and more studies are implying that actual sources of fossil fuels are much smaller than we perceive them to be today.

Sixthly, we are conducting discussions throughout the world - and we can see this happening from Chechnya via the Gulf to Africa - about earth' s remaining resources.

If we now recognise that you are also a bringer of peace, then we will probably have made a huge step if we accept this report tomorrow.

Mr President, Madam Vice-President, ladies and gentlemen, Parliament has basically been in agreement on this question since 1996.

It was Parliament, may I remind you, which had to push the previous Commission in the direction of this policy.

It did not start with the White Paper, but with an initiative by Parliament, and I remember because I was the rapporteur at the time.

We need a much higher proportion of primary energy used.

We have already come a long way, but not far enough by a long chalk.

We need it for climatic reasons and for industrial policy reasons, because there is a global market to fill here.

In this respect, I should like to thank the rapporteur on behalf of the committee and note that, consequently, 80% of the resolutions tabled are therefore uncontested.

For the rest, an aside: everyone still here this evening must have not renewable sources of energy but an inexhaustible supply of energy!

We are represented in accordance with the subject matter!

Unfortunately, I note that the report contains a number of statements which are incorrect, which violate the Treaty or which are politically untenable.

For example, elevating the feed-in system to a universal panacea is wrong.

It is true, of course, that the countries with feed-in systems have made a great deal of progress, but that is not on account of the feed-in system but because of the financing which is in place there.

We must make a distinction between these causes.

As a result, we and the Commission are of the opinion that the Member States should now be allowed to experiment.

It is too early to see one system as a universal panacea and dismiss another.

Secondly, the report also contradicts the Treaty at certain points.

This applies in particular to the statements on aid policy.

It is true that renewable energy needs aid now, and probably will for some time to come, in order to get started.

That is quite right and it complies with the Treaty.

But it is certainly not right to give them the same aid as all other forms of energy because they make a totally different contribution to the energy mix, and it is not right to link aid for one to the lifetime of the others.

My third comment also concerns a point at which the resolution does not comply with the Treaty.

We here in the European Union cannot impose mandatory obligations on the Member States.

The European Union has no legal basis and no credentials for doing so and, because of that, it cannot impose sanctions.

Anyway, that is precisely what the Lisbon Council has just agreed to reject in connection with the job markets.

That is why it is right to regard this as a matter of economic policy of common interest; hence the burden sharing negotiations.

More importantly, I cannot agree when there is talk of the curse of the lowest bidder.

Statements like this show disdain for the consumer and disregard the principle of supply and demand.

In addition, as I am sure you will understand, we cannot get excited about new forms of bureaucracy, even if it comes along in the jewel-studded cloak of an EU agency.

That is why, Madam Vice-President, I have three recommendations to make to the Commission.

First: you should use your directive, the draft of which we are waiting for, to promote the use of all renewable sources of energy and, if possible, you could suggest a uniform development framework.

Secondly: as far as financial assistance is concerned, a distinction should be made between everyone and those who need this financial assistance.

The distinction is easy to make.

Thirdly, and I consider this extremely important in the interests of investors: if a new system should replace the systems currently being tried out in Europe, either in the Member States or in the Union, it should not, of course, penalise those who have already made investments.

We want both the competition and energy departments of the Commission to make a clear statement on that to the markets.

Mr President, I too should like to thank Mr Turmes on behalf of my Group for the excellent and detailed work contained in his report.

We certainly have no lack of reports.

We have had the Mombaur report, the Rothe report, the former member, Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz, drafted a report, Mrs Ahern drafted a report and, if I remember correctly, I also drafted a report on this subject once.

So there is no shortage of reports and they have all been translated into every possible language.

What we need now are initiatives to implement our decisions.

We have decided that the share of renewable sources of energy should rise from 6% to 12%.

At present, if I remember the figures correctly, we are not yet even quite at 6%, but at 5.4%.

In any case, I am merely repeating the Commission' s figures.

Biomass and hydroelectric power account for 95% of renewable energy sources in the European Union.

Wind, solar energy, photovoltaic energy etc. only account for 5%!

In other words, if we decide to double these figures and if we come up against purely physical limits with hydroelectric power, if we cannot build more large power stations as and where we please, and there is a limit to what we can do in the Alps, then we have to think of something else, for example a bridge with agricultural policy.

I should like to ask you, Commissioner, to build a bridge with agricultural policy, to enter into an alliance.

If, for example, the enlargement of the European Union encompasses countries such as Poland, which have large agricultural areas and a high proportion of their population working in agriculture, most of whom will become unemployed over the next 10 or 20 years as these countries engage in intensive farming, then there is room for manoeuvre here.

There is, of course, the question of how we can finance this, but at least we have technical room for manoeuvre.

As far as renewable sources of energy and financing them at national level is concerned, I have just a few brief comments.

The systems are so different that they must, at all costs, be made compatible in the medium term, so that we can create a real European market here.

Not radically degressive perhaps, otherwise there is no end result, but it must show a downward trend in order to ensure that the best technologies are used, because there is constant technical progress even with renewable sources of energy.

I can easily imagine, and here I do not share Mr Mombaur' s view, that we may need to consider sanctions, otherwise the whole thing makes no sense.

For example, we undertook at Kyoto to adhere to certain quotas.

No one can be punished for failing to keep to the quotas.

Had we introduced the euro like that, if no sanctions had been imposed for failing to comply with requirements, the euro would not have been a success.

In the case of renewable sources of energy or the CO2 policy, nothing will be achieved in the long run without sanctions.

We cannot enter into commitments willy-nilly and then fail to honour them.

I keep coming back to this: without sanctions, this joint energy policy, because in the final analysis that is what it is, will not function.

It is perhaps an unpleasant thought, but it will not function otherwise.

Mr President, I would like to reiterate the thanks to the rapporteur for the extremely cooperative manner in which he has embarked upon this important report and I am pleased to participate in the intimate gathering of renewable fanatics so late at night.

Three points - firstly, the whole issue of a level playing field.

It seems to us essential that if we are going to give renewable energies the breathing space and the momentum that they merit, it is right to try and aim for a level playing field.

That requires, above and beyond everything else, downward pressure on the unacceptably high and legally dubious levels of subsidies which continue to flow to fossil energy sources in the European Union, notably, but not excusably, the coal industry in a number of large Member States.

As long as those market distorting subsidies to fossil fuels continue we cannot realistically talk about a fair or level playing field in the European Union.

In that context we join with the rapporteur in feeling that some kind of special provisions concerning subsidies are merited as long as those market distorting subsidies continue elsewhere.

On targets, I very much side with Mr Linkohr.

We cannot be serious about this without trying to add teeth in some form, moral, financial or otherwise to the concept of targets.

We were not very happy with the early versions from the rapporteur because we felt the targets were there to almost micro-manage the market in renewable energy sources.

That is neither viable nor desirable, but a mixture of the pressure towards targets, combined with competition between effective renewable energy industries, seems to us to be the long-term approach we should all adopt.

Finally, I would make a plea on behalf of my group: let us not set up yet another agency.

Paragraph 22 of this report calls for the establishment of a European sustainable energy agency.

This Parliament and the European institutions have been spawning a blizzard of new agencies all over the European Union.

It does not necessary help us to follow the policies which we wish to follow - it could actually have the effect of ghettoising the policy altogether.

Mr President, I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on his hard work and particularly the excellent definition of renewables.

This directive should be solely directed towards supporting new renewable technologies that are not yet commercially viable.

The directive, as some of the speakers have already said, needs to have binding targets in order for the Member States and the entire EU to achieve a significant increase in the share of renewable energies in the total energy market.

I note that the Commission is proposing a review in 2005 but I would urge that you also ask the Member States to make annual reports on achieving the targets in the White Paper.

I would also like the directive not to establish any ceiling or limitation on direct support mechanisms chosen by the individual Member States.

It should also encourage fair and non-discriminatory network access as its most important item.

The directive should also contain mechanisms to discourage, as we have already heard, the Member States from their market distorting subsidies to traditional forms of energy, particularly fossil fuels and nuclear.

There are a lot of covert subsidies to the nuclear sector that have been there for a long time and that are long overdue for a considerable review if not a total ban.

Attempts to say that support for renewable energy is a distortion of the market in the context of the vast subsidies for nuclear and fossil fuels that exist in the European Union are totally spurious.

I hope that the Commissioner will really take that point to heart.

The directive should explicitly propose a system of support and advantages for the small and medium-sized companies in decentralised production and distribution of renewable energies.

It should include incentives allowing the Member States to clearly support advantages for the regions, especially rural areas, in respect to labour intensive green production.

Most importantly, the directive should propose mechanisms for the internalisation of external costs of traditional energy production.

Finally, I would urge that it is important that some of the undertakings by Member States to include renewables in the energy mix in the electricity sector be at least equal to the total EU commitment made in the White Paper on renewable energy, as endorsed by the Council and this Parliament.

I would like to make particular reference to the unsatisfactory rate of uptake in the UK, Ireland and France.

Here we can clearly see from empirical studies that network access is by far the best way to achieve high percentages of renewable energy rather than the other methods that have been undertaken in those countries.

Mr President, I believe that all of us are in agreement that the development of renewable energy sources is the way forward.

If we are serious about this, we must be prepared to make funds available for research and development in this area, both at national and European levels.

Parliament recently voted to maintain and increase funding for the SAVE programme.

In my own country of Ireland a total of EUR 125 million has been devoted to developing an environmentally sustainable energy sector.

I am pleased that the rapporteur identifies the links between the issue of renewable energy sources and wider policy considerations.

The creation of an internal market in electricity should provide consumers of electricity with real choice.

The introduction of an element of competition in any industry should lead to more favourable pricing for the consumer.

While it is desirable to create a level playing field it may also be necessary to provide subsidies for certain types of energy in order to promote other objectives.

Clearly the development of renewables is linked to environmental objectives as well as issues of employment, regional development and the promotion of local initiatives.

I would like to see the development of small local initiatives which would strengthen rural development by the provision of, say, 20 to 30 jobs per project.

Such projects should not only be open to the business sector and local groups such as small locally-based co-ops should be assisted in creating such local enterprises.

This report states that support for renewable energy projects must not be viewed as a straightforward subsidy under the state aid rules.

What is important is that Member States be allowed to continue subsidising renewable energy sources which are not yet economically viable.

Apart from the obvious environmental and other benefits, this can actually be justified on competition grounds.

It is clear that there are serious distortions in the energy market with many hidden subsidies to both coal and oil generated energy.

It would be virtually impossible to quantify these subsidies which have been embedded in the industry over decades of generator construction.

We still face a significant challenge in meeting our commitments on limiting greenhouse gas emissions from the energy sector under the Kyoto protocol while, at the same time, promoting growth within our economies.

I believe that, while each Member State must work towards the 12% target of renewables, the imposition of a single binding target would not be helpful because of the great differences in the structure of the energy market between Member States.

All I have said so far is on the positive side but, on the negative side, the report specifically calls for peat to be excluded.

Peat power plants work very well indeed in my country and make an important contribution to Ireland' s energy supply.

In addition to that, the report emphatically calls for the European imposition of an energy tax.

I am totally opposed to this approach and I reject this taxation.

Therefore, I regret to say that my final vote on this project will be seriously affected.

Mr President, the need to promote the development of sources of renewable energy becomes a crucial matter every time that issues such as the Kyoto protocol and meeting our commitments to reducing greenhouse gas emissions are raised or when we talk about sustainability in energy policy.

Also, on everyone' s mind is the fact that supporting renewable energies is one of the most important ways of achieving effective results, particularly with regard to controlling carbon dioxide emissions and to attaining the objective proposed in the White Paper, to reach a level of 12% renewable energy by 2010.

Since we are aware of this need, there is a set of relevant facts that we should consider.

Firstly, it should be said that renewable energies currently have the disadvantage of being less efficient in economic terms, which means that, in the first phase, support mechanisms are needed which will make them viable from a business point of view.

Secondly, any support mechanism that is considered must be realistic and consistent, but must, above all, fit into a stable and appropriate legal framework if it is to achieve the desired effect.

In order for any action related to the development of new projects for investment in these technologies to be launched, it will require a legal basis which will ensure that the laws on which it is based are transparent.

Thirdly, renewable energies are characterised by the different situations from which the various Member States are starting, which means that any solution will have to adapt to these differences.

Fourthly, we must not place too many limits on the concept of renewable energy, although it does seem reasonable to impose certain restrictions on support actions for plants whose size and performance require them.

I shall finish by saying that the report by Mr Turmes, on which this House is about to vote, addresses my main concerns sufficiently.

Its content provides the necessary balance for us to be able to rate it positively, but our final position will depend on the outcome with regard to certain key points.

I would not like to finish without congratulating the rapporteur on his willingness to enter into dialogue and for his vigorous and thorough work.

Mr President, I have an interest, though not a financial one, in this subject in that I am chairman of the Northern Energy Initiative, a company which operates in the north-east of England, and has within it a renewable energy agency whose objective is to promote the development of renewable energies.

The UK has a low proportion of electricity from renewable sources, I believe amongst the lowest.

Yet the studies in my home region have demonstrated considerable potential for renewable projects: wind, including offshore, small hydro, landfill gas, waste incineration, biofuels and photovoltaics.

It is important to have EU and national targets, but it is also important to have a European directive which will support efforts at local and regional level, where many of the decisions are actually taken.

In general terms, there is a need to build up an awareness amongst architects and potential customers of the technologies that are available.

Support for demonstration projects should be included in any directive.

Larger developments often fail to get planning permission, sometimes because of public opposition.

More proactive planning guidance, preferably linked to regional renewable targets, and feasibility studies would be helpful additions to the directive.

Access to the grid system at fair prices is crucial.

The disincentive of high capital costs of connection to the grid from remote renewable sites and the prevention of transmission penalties are other issues which the directive should tackle.

I hope that the Commission will take note of these points.

I would urge support for the amendment to assist the promotion of renewables in the remote islands of the Community.

I am sure that this was an oversight in the drafting of the text.

I have to say that the British Labour Members will vote against the exclusion of waste incineration from the definition of renewables, on the understanding that this refers to material which cannot be recycled.

Mr President, the chief aim of an internal electricity market must be fair play.

This aim is clearly visible in the Commission' s preparatory act.

In his report, Mr Turmes, does not in all respects advocate the same way of thinking, however.

The report does contain many good ideas.

The recorded aim of the Commission with regard to the promotion of renewables obviously has to be supported.

We really do have to invest in research into energy sources.

However, we must remember that a free energy market will have to be based in the future on viable, free competition, and not on favouring renewable energy sources by discriminating against the others.

All forms of electric power must have free access to the market.

The harmonisation of taxation and aid schemes is a different matter.

Electricity producers must be able to determine the prices at which they wish to sell.

If the Union starts messing about with the burgeoning electricity markets, for example, by imposing rules controlling the electrical supply, or with guarantees of minimum prices or quotas, we can say goodbye to the free market.

Renewables can be made more competitive by increasing consumer choice.

In this respect the certification of electricity is an idea to be supported.

If we wish to pay more for electricity produced from wind power than from other sources, for example, then we should be allowed to do so.

To no good purpose, the report tries to define renewable energy by raising the question of peat as a special area.

The position with regard to peat cannot be determined according to the same standards as biogases, for example.

For that reason, peat must occupy its own energy class in future, so that its taxation can be determined on a level that is reasonable.

Mr President, I would firstly like to congratulate the rapporteur on being open to dialogue on all areas connected to the report and to the amendments.

I think we must consider all matters related to renewable energies to be extremely important, bearing in mind the fact that we want to leave behind us a world which future generations will find inhabitable.

It is curious that we are slowly killing ourselves and yet the earth' s contamination is not causing the alarm bells to ring. What can we do about it?

I think that first we must seek out all renewable energies and take advantage of them, encourage them, promote them and provide the appropriate incentives to make them viable, and at the same time penalise energies that contaminate.

I know that this is all easy to say and difficult to do, but unless we act immediately, within a few generations, we will be stretched to the limit.

My opinion is that we should start by differentiating between compensation and subsidies.

It is common knowledge that most traditional sources of energy, apart from those using water, wind etc., cause a great deal of serious environmental damage, in many cases, such as CO2, acid rain, oil slicks etc. This damage is usually repaired by public administrations, by means of programmes for restoring and caring for the environment.

In the case of renewables which do not cause any harm to the surrounding environment, I believe it would be reasonable to compensate them while there is no tax on emissions of polluting particles such as CO2.

Therefore, as long as public administrations continue to take responsibility for repairing the damage caused by thermal or nuclear power stations, we will be subsidising these sources of energy at the expense of renewables.

I would finally like to mention the establishment of an appropriate legal framework for this kind of energy, which would foster its rapid development, bearing in mind that, in the long term, renewables must become predominant.

Mr President, Commissioner de Palacio, ladies and gentlemen, to summarise today' s debate, there are basically three issues at stake here.

First, the sustainability of energy sources.

Secondly, security of supply, which has a quite special effect as far as Europe is concerned, not least because of the unstable political situations in the countries which currently supply energy to Europe.

Thirdly, of course, the economy, because energy is a fundamental factor in our international competitiveness and we must therefore ensure that we have an economical supply of energy.

I personally come from Upper Austria and, at present, Upper Austria has broken the energy-saving and energy-renewing records.

Where I come from, renewable energy takes top priority, and Upper Austria has an energy savings agency which runs like clockwork.

The principle of subsidiarity applies here and I think that it was this energy savings agency which inaugurated the energy savings fair held a few days ago, thereby meeting the need for education and information for the public as a whole.

I also think that research and development in this area need greater support.

In the final analysis, we should endeavour in Europe to apply the best practice, i.e. to see where there are models - at this energy savings fair in Wels we presented a thick directory of best practice models - and, at the same time, to use benchmarking to show where we have taken the lead in Europe and where progress is being made elsewhere in the world.

I think that this management system is particularly significant for the future of energy supplies in Europe.

Mr President, firstly I would like to congratulate Mr Turmes on the report which he has prepared, as it will be of great use to the Commission' s work.

I would like to remind you that in April last year the Commission approved a working paper on electricity from renewable sources, whose main objective was to present a thorough overview of the support programmes of the different Member States in the field of renewable energies, as well as to highlight certain conclusions and possible options for the adoption of Community measures in this area.

On that occasion the Commission indicated in its working paper that it had not reached a final conclusion and that a final decision would be adopted on all the issues involved in the light of reactions to the paper itself.

In this respect, Parliament' s contribution is an extremely important element in this process.

This House has always been forthright in its support for active policies designed to promote renewable energies.

I would like to take this opportunity to reiterate my thanks to Mr Turmes for his work.

Furthermore, and as Mr Linkohr has pointed out, it must be said that it is Parliament that has, in part, forced the Commission to undertake more concrete action in the area of renewable energies and that Parliament has always been a leader and a driving force in this area.

We all agree that renewable energies have to play a key role in guaranteeing our supply of energy, as well as making us less dependent on imports and in fulfilling the commitments we gave in Kyoto.

However, they can also help the EU' s technological development and enable us to export clean technologies to other parts of the world.

I must point out that Mr Turmes' s report fully concurs with these views.

The Commission is already giving its support to the production of wind, solar and biomass energy, small hydroelectric stations and geothermal energy, that is all sources of renewable energy, with the exception of large hydraulic power stations, which we feel we should not support because they have sufficient options available to them. Furthermore, they have some extremely negative aspects from an environmental point of view, as constructing a dam always involves flooding a valley.

I must, however, say to Mr Turmes that, despite what I have just said, we cannot consider peat to be a renewable energy.

The ALTENER programme is enabling magnificent work to take place and Parliament has always been an ally of the Commission. It has always cooperated with the efforts of the Commission and, I repeat, has even been a driving force in making the Commission' s proposals more ambitious.

We are now faced with a considerable challenge, which is to establish the most appropriate mechanisms for supporting the development of green electricity in an internal market, an open single electricity market, which is what we are trying to achieve in the European Union.

I can assure you that all issues that have been highlighted here will be carefully considered in relation to the directive on which discussions will begin in the next few days.

Going into specific issues, almost all of the points made in Mr Turmes' s report deserve our support and fully concur with our own studies.

Some aspects are more open to debate, but they also deserve thorough study, even if they must be rejected, in some cases because they are not sufficiently based on fact or because the problems they present are greater than the solutions they propose.

I must repeat that the report stresses the importance of the objective of doubling, from 6% to 12%, the proportion of renewable energy sources in the gross domestic consumption of energy.

In the proposal for a directive, we hope to include some objectives chosen by countries, that is, individual objectives for each country in the European Union.

These would not be compulsory objectives, but ones which can produce results, at least from the political point of view, and I think that this would be a very important step.

I agree with Mr Turmes on the need to protect the different national systems in force at the time that this directive is adopted.

This is what we will do, which does not mean that, in five years time, there should not be a review of the different systems and that we should not commit ourselves to those which have proved to be the most effective and which have resulted in greater development of renewable energies in those countries.

In any event, as you know, on 2 December 1999, in the Energy Council, I gave a questionnaire to the Member States, so I could see what stage we had reached, what stage the issue had reached, and so I could present a directive that could obtain sufficient consensus to quickly conclude its passage through both Parliament and the Council.

The result of this questionnaire, which has been studied by the services, is a document, in my opinion, of extremely high quality, which I hope will enable us to get through the Parliamentary and Council procedures reasonably quickly.

Let us state quite clearly that the proposal simply and straightforwardly seeks to stimulate production in the EU of electricity from renewable energies.

I would like to point out that I have taken careful note of Mr Linkohr' s words on agricultural policy and the possibility of encouraging non-food production.

As a former agriculture minister, I am sensitive to these issues and this is one which, to a certain extent, is also covered in this proposal.

I would also like to point out that our objective in all of this is to have a safer and more reliable supply of energy, which treats the EU' s environment with greater respect.

To conclude, Mr President, other speakers have mentioned repayment.

Mr Vidal-Quadras and Mr Valdivielso both mentioned this a while ago.

Renewable energies today are not competitive in relation to traditional energies, particularly as traditional energies have certain external costs which, of course, are not internalised.

Support must be given to renewable energies.

My personal view - although there are other ideas on this subject - is that, as things stand, we cannot write off other energies, for reasons of competitiveness and growth.

We can, however, support renewable energies, precisely because they are obviously based on respect for the environment and on reducing emissions.

In this respect, we must be able to ensure that those who do commit themselves to renewables have a fair return on their investments.

We obviously have to create a stable framework that will enable investors to make investments which require a sufficient number of years to cover their repayment.

This is one of the issues under discussion in the Commission and which has proved to be more difficult in some cases, together with certain other aspects. But, ultimately, everyone in the Commission agrees on the need to encourage green energy.

Mr President, I would like to thank the rapporteur and all the speakers, and to assure them that this element of stability, which will enable decisions relating to medium-term investments to be taken, will also feature in the proposal for a directive that I hope to be able to present to you soon.

The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 a.m.

(The sitting was closed at 11.10 p.m.)

Adoption of the Minutes of the previous sitting

The Minutes of yesterday' s sitting have been distributed.

Madam President, I think anyone reading page 6 of the Minutes might get the wrong impression from the juxtaposition of my speech and Mr Vander Taelen' s.

I want to stress two points.

First, Mr Vander Taelen may disapprove of my position on the European Union, but it can in no way justify the wholly unfounded personal attacks against me by the Chairman of the Canadian parliamentary delegation.

Anyway, Mr Vander Taelen admitted he did not personally witness the incident.

Secondly, I simply cannot understand how Mr Vander Taelen could have got the impression I was against enlargement.

On the contrary, I have stated time and again in this House that enlargement is an historic necessity.

I have just pointed out that the institutions in their present form undoubtedly constitute an obstacle to enlargement, but that is an entirely different issue.

Of course I am in favour of the enlargement of the European Union to the East.

We will scrupulously check whether there are grounds for amending the Minutes so that everything is as it should be.

Madam President, although I was not the speaker, it was Mr Katiforis, I see that in the Minutes, he is reported as having said that the Turkish authorities had also drawn up a list of Greek people living in Turkey.

He simply said "of Greek citizens" , in other words people who are resident in Greece.

I say this because Mr Katiforis is not here and so that the Minutes can be corrected accordingly.

Madam President, this is not about the Minutes but about a point of order.

I was contacted several times yesterday and have already been contacted several times today, by people from the press who have got wind of the fact that the Court of Auditors sent you a report yesterday on the funding of the political groups.

I am aware that this is a very tricky business and that we must prevent any half-baked stories from getting into the papers.

The question on quite a few people' s lips is: what is to become of this report?

Will it be made public? I understand that the chairmen of the groups have been able to have a look at the report.

I would like to ask you what you are intending to do with it. Will you find a way of making it available to the press or to those who favour doing so, appending a few comments, yes or no?

I believe we must adopt an open and transparent strategy here, so that we can say in all candour how we dealt with the funding that was made available to the groups.

Madam President, I learned yesterday that Mr Akim Birdal, the former chairman of the Turkish Committee on Human Rights has been reimprisoned.

Mr Birdal had asked to be released on health grounds, after being attacked.

That request was refused and he is in prison because, some time ago, he dared to suggest seeking a political solution to the Kurdish question.

I think it would be very welcome if you, as President of the European Parliament, were to approach the Turkish Government, in whatever way you consider appropriate, and ask for this man of honour to be freed.

We raised this matter yesterday and I am completely in agreement about approaching the Turkish Government along those lines.

The next item is the statements by the Council and the Commission on the existence of an artificial intelligence system allowing the United States of America to intercept and monitor all telephone and electronic communications within the European Union, a system called 'Echelon' .

Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, following on from the letter sent by this House to the Council and from the hearing of the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs regarding data protection in the European Union, you have today invited the Council and Commission to comment on the possible existence of the Echelon system. This system is suspected of intercepting telecommunications beyond the bounds of any legal framework of justice and home affairs activities.

I must thank you for having invited the Council to speak on this issue. This gives us the opportunity not only to clarify our position but also to inform you about all the measures taken by the Council on the lawful interception of telecommunications.

The European Union must respect the fundamental rights which are guaranteed by the European Convention on Human Rights and which result from the common constitutional traditions of the Member States on general principles of Community law.

The Council will do everything to safeguard these principles, particularly with regard to the right of every person to respect for their private and family life, their home or their correspondence, in accordance with the European Convention on Human Rights which forms the cornerstone of our political work.

It is common knowledge that work is in progress, in which this House is fully involved, and whose aim is to produce a Charter of Fundamental Rights which must apply within the Union.

This is why the Council presidency wants to firmly state its position on the possible existence of a system for intercepting telecommunications in the European Union, beyond the bounds of any legal framework.

The Council cannot accept the creation or existence of such a system which does not respect the laws of the Member States and which violates the fundamental principles aimed at protecting human dignity. I must stress this very firmly.

Having said this, the presidency considers that everything must be done to create an area of freedom, security and justice at European level.

Our aim is to build a more open and secure Europe founded on an attachment to our common fundamental values.

In this respect, it will sometimes be necessary to allow telecommunications to be intercepted when strictly essential to protect these values and in the interests of justice.

This interception, which must be in proportion and have clearly defined limits, must pursue specific aims such as combating organised crime.

When exercising this right which is fully enshrined in the European Convention on Human Rights, the presidency considers that the case law of the European Court of Human Rights must also be respected to ensure that the right balance is achieved between interference in private life and the public interest.

In certain clearly specified and truly exceptional cases, the interception of telecommunications may be justified under these conditions.

We want to act on this point with total transparency so that the European Parliament is kept fully informed of the progress of work within the Council on the lawful interception of telecommunications.

There are also some other areas which we want to tackle. These were listed in the letter, which I have mentioned, as set out by the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, and they were also contained in the letter, which your President has just sent to the Council.

These areas are police cooperation, judicial cooperation in criminal matters, Europol, Schengen and the initial discussions currently in progress on data protection within the Third Pillar.

The Committee raised these matters and I have been asked to comment on them in the letter from your President.

In the area of police cooperation, the Council adopted a resolution on 17 January 1995 on the lawful interception of telecommunications.

This resolution, published in the Official Journal, contains a list of specifications for the Member States authorising them to lawfully intercept telecommunications with regard to network operators and service providers.

This list allows each Member State to adapt its own national legislation so as to identify and overcome the difficulties in introducing technical specifications for interception in modern telecommunications systems.

In November 1995, a code of conduct containing this same list of specifications indicated in the resolution was established between the Fifteen and Norway.

The governments of the United States of America, Canada and Australia informed the Council that they would not sign this code of conduct but that they would follow an identical policy.

In 1999, the Council submitted an initiative on the lawful interception of telecommunications with regard to new technologies for assessment.

Immediately after the start of this work, the Council consulted the European Parliament on this proposal on which this House issued an opinion in May 1999.

The Council is continuing the work on this issue but has not yet adopted a final position.

In its meeting on 28 May 1998, the Council adopted conclusions on encryption and law enforcement to guarantee the integrity and confidentiality of digital communications which present considerable advantages for electronic commerce and the private lives of individuals and which can also help to prevent fraud and other crimes.

However, we are aware of the concerns about the negative aspects, which the proliferation of encryption services for confidentiality purposes may have in the fight against certain forms of crime.

This is why it was decided to closely monitor the degree of use of encryption technologies, particularly by and for organised crime.

These measures must be proportional and carefully balanced with regard to other important interests, particularly bearing in mind the need to protect the fundamental rights specified in the European Convention on Human Rights and the operation of the internal market, with the aim of ensuring the development of electronic commerce.

In the area of judicial cooperation in criminal matters, particular attention should be paid to the draft convention on mutual legal assistance in criminal matters between the Member States.

Over four years of negotiations on this draft convention are nearly complete.

The Justice and Home Affairs Council, in its meeting on 27 March, examined the most important remaining questions, including those on the interception of telecommunications.

I am very pleased to announce that a full political agreement on measures for interception was achieved at this meeting. We therefore hope that the adoption of the act establishing the convention will take place during the Justice and Home Affairs Council in May.

Measures have also been specified on data protection in the Europol Convention.

It must be stressed that Europol does not have powers of investigation and does not carry out work of an operational nature.

Rather, Europol' s mission is to analyse the data supplied by the Member States or third parties.

It cannot gather this data directly. I will clarify this for you.

It is the responsibility of each Member State to send data to Europol.

Therefore, any supervision of data protection is carried out in the Member State of origin with full respect for the Council of Europe Convention of January 1981 and the Recommendation of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe of September 1987.

In this way the general rules on the protection of data sent to Europol by the Member States are respected.

The convention therefore states that the latter must answer the question of whether the data has been properly gathered in the Member States.

So it is the responsibility of each Member State to correct, delete or amend data sent to Europol where it becomes apparent that this data is incorrect or infringes the rules established in this respect.

It must be stressed that Europol cannot, on its own, determine if the data sent by a Member State has been properly gathered.

Each national supervisory authority has an essential role to play in this area.

I must also speak briefly about the data protection rules within the Schengen Information System.

This system provides for an authority responsible for protecting personal data.

This common supervisory authority is composed of the supervisory authorities of the various Member States and ensures respect for the system' s principles on data protection, particularly those on the content of the data obtained and the use of this data.

Full protection of the interests of individuals is therefore ensured in accordance with the instruments ratified by the Member States.

Finally, I must mention data protection within the Third Pillar.

The Member States and the Commission are examining this issue in order to determine to what extent data protection should be provided in a horizontal perspective for the whole of the Third Pillar.

Various aspects of this debate are being carefully considered, such as, for example, the questions of whether a common supervisory authority for all the instruments of the Third Pillar should be created or whether it would be sensible to create a common secretariat for these authorities.

Furthermore, the Portuguese presidency intends to submit in due course, for the Council' s consideration, initial ideas on the possibility of developing general principles on data protection, which would apply to all the instruments of the Third Pillar.

These ideas are still being developed.

However, I can tell you that the Portuguese presidency, with full respect for the Community mechanisms, will duly inform the European Parliament about future developments in this work.

This, briefly, is the Council' s position on the work in progress or already concluded in the area of the lawful interception of telecommunications.

To conclude, I must say that we fully understand the political concerns underlying this Parliament initiative.

The presidency wishes to stress that it is ready to closely monitor Parliament' s work in this area as it considers that there is every reason not to compromise when principles of freedom, democracy and respect for human rights and the fundamental freedoms of individuals are at stake.

Madam President, first of all, I am delighted that the Council and the Commission have delivered a clear opinion today regarding the Echelon problem.

In the past, a great many parliamentary questions have been simply ignored.

The present statement is therefore a step in the right direction, albeit only the first of what need to be quite a few such steps.

We must now calmly consider what measures are to be taken in order to protect the European economy effectively.

Less helpful in this regard are the hasty proposals tabled by the four smaller groups in this House.

When I read in the proposal put forward by the Technical Group of Independent Members about fears of a "Super Echelon" which will apparently use surveillance techniques to gain control of the whole of the information society, then this shows with how little understanding of the facts the present state of affairs is being approached.

What we have here is not Huxley' s "brave new world" taking shape, but merely industrial espionage.

With its proposal to establish a committee of inquiry, an alliance of Greens and of Members from the Left and Right of the political spectrum clearly want, however, to use Parliament as an arena for James Bond-style games.

Who, I wonder, would call for a committee of inquiry?

The American President or the head of the British secret service, who is not even known in Britain?

What is this committee supposed to find out?

The fact that Echelon exists and is also used for industrial espionage is something which we have known at least since the interview with former CIA Director Mr Woolsey on 7 March of this year.

No, the time for investigations and debate is past. Now, we must act.

In addition to frank words with our American and British friends, we need a European encryption system, independent of the United States, with which to protect our data.

We must put this subject on the agenda of the next session of the World Trade Conference.

We must develop a code of conduct which guarantees compensation in the event of espionage systems' being misused, and we must make it clearer to our businesses than we have done so far that they themselves are called upon to safeguard their own data through encryption.

In contrast to a committee of inquiry, which in this case would serve no purpose, this would be a constructive initiative.

Madam President, I have issued this statement on behalf of Mr von Boetticher who, because of a bereavement, had to travel back to Germany yesterday.

Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, we are in a difficult situation regarding the decision which we now have to make after hearing the Council and the Commission.

Just how difficult the situation is, you can see from two remarks made in the last three minutes.

Mrs Klamt says that we all know that the United States of America engages in industrial espionage.

The Commissioner has just explained to us that of course the United States does not engage in industrial espionage; they clarified this in writing only yesterday.

So what is to be done, then?

After everything we have been told at the hearing in the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs, the indication is, of course, that we should continue with the strategy which, as Social Democrats, we have believed to be correct.

In the Committee, there were accusations against the Council and the Commission to the effect that individual EU citizens were insufficiently protected against the interception and monitoring of communications, that the competitive disadvantages to which the Echelon system is exposing the European economy are not being combated sufficiently in the context of the Community law governing the EU institutions and that no adequate counter-strategies are being developed.

We then said that we wanted to hear what the Council and the Commission had to say before deciding how to proceed further.

I should like to say that what I have heard this morning from both institutions gives rise to more questions than answers.

The Social Democratic Group will therefore do what it already decided to do weeks ago in the light of present knowledge. Bearing in mind the statements by both institutions, we shall make decisions next week on the following issues.

(In fact, there are no two ways about it, we shall have to make these decisions.)

Do we want a committee of inquiry?

Do we want a non-permanent committee?

Do we want an own-initiative report? Do we want to take other measures in order to shed more light on the outstanding issues, to obtain more answers and, above all, to examine whether Community law has been broken?

Precisely how we go about this, we shall decide next week, but one thing I would state clearly here is that, if we continue to adopt what, as I see it, is a dilatory approach to the problem, as I heard outlined by our partner institutions this morning, we shall not do justice to the political problem, or to the political drama, behind the questions raised here.

I do not know whether we were well advised to say that we wanted a committee of inquiry because, if such a committee were to be set up, its legal basis would have to be impeccably clarified.

In this regard, too, there are still questions to be answered.

I was therefore of the opinion that it was too early for a committee of inquiry.

I do not, however, want to exclude the possibility of our reaching conclusions in the course of the debate which will lead our Social Democrats to say, here in Parliament, that, even if there is the merest hint of suspicion that Community law has been broken and that citizens' freedoms and the competitiveness of our industry and economy are not being adequately protected, then we shall act most decisively.

Madam President, I actually think the speeches from the Council and the Commission were most enlightening.

The United States now acknowledges the existence of the 'Echelon' system.

Tongues are being loosened in certain Union governments. The press is crammed full of details about this all-pervasive electronic monitoring network.

And yet, how embarrassed the Council and the Commission sounded!

What tangled comments they made to avoid answering our questions.

I did not hear the slightest explanation of why it was necessary to wait for Members of Parliament to discover this massive scandal nearly two years ago, and then recently for them to provide proof that their revelations were in fact true, before the Council would agree, in a very implicit and convoluted way, that there is indeed a problem.

Let me restate the problem: by virtue of privileged and very special links, a strategic ally and a Member State are covertly joining forces to monitor private communications and spy on companies in other Union countries.

With friends like that, who needs enemies?

You will understand, Mr President, Commissioner, that with the truth now established, we feel entitled to ask you further regarding a number of questions that are on everyone' s mind today.

First, what do you know about the type of information this system intercepts, the ultimate recipients the information is sent to, and the reliability of the protection that exists in Europe for people' s privacy and firms' strategic data?

Secondly, apart from the formal exchange of correspondence the Commissioner mentioned, what serious action has it undertaken with regard to the United States Government on this matter and with what outcome?

Thirdly, what can you tell us about the role played by the United Kingdom in this system, or at least the role it intends to play in the future?

Whether people like it or not, the 'Echelon' file is now open and it will remain open.

After the European Parliament, the matter has been taken up by other parliaments and indeed the United States Congress, which I have contacted, because what we are doing is not anti-American.

Our fellow citizens have been alerted.

So I want to warn Members who are still hesitant that trying to stop this movement now would be a rearguard action, and would probably be severely condemned by democratic opinion.

On the other hand - and I have listened carefully to what has been said, particularly by the spokespersons for the Group of the Party of European Socialists and the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party - expectations would be fulfilled if we were to make progress together on truth, transparency and ethics in international relations.

In tabling the call for a committee of inquiry, over a quarter of the Members of this Parliament have made that choice.

I think Parliament will increase its stature by taking up this case by a majority.

Madam President, so the country of the Statue of Liberty, Jefferson, Lincoln, and human rights is listening in on all world communications by cable, satellite, telephone, fax, e-mail or mobile phone!

That is obviously a shock, not in terms of our technical knowledge of encryption, but in terms of our political beliefs.

We have believed in the great market as if it were God, and competition and competitiveness, all under the governance of the WTO.

With Mr Monti, and Mr Van Miert before him, we have done everything possible to keep competition pure and perfect, even against the interests of our own businesses, our banks, our airlines, our insurance companies, Crédit Lyonnais, Rhone-Poulenc.

And now we find out that people are cheating and spying on this market, creating distortions of competition.

This Parliament, which wanted to use OLAF to spy on Members for the sake of protecting Europe' s financial interests, is discovering that we are being spied on by the United States against our financial interests, even as regards the WTO negotiations.

We thought Mr Haider' s Austria was endangering our freedom.

But it is through Mr Tony Blair' s Britain, Glyn Ford' s Britain, that fifteen thousand agents, stationed in Gibraltar, Cyprus, and even on British territory, are spying on us.

So, Madam President, are you still prepared to go to London?

Will you ever go to Sydney again?

Will you ever go to Ottawa or Wellington again?

And we thought there was solidarity in Europe.

Now we find that Britain' s solidarity extends across the Atlantic and across the Pacific Ocean.

We thought we were building Europe, making Europe stronger.

In opposition to the Serbs? Stronger in opposition to nations and nationalism?

But with 'Echelon' , we find that Boeing belongs to a specific nation, Rayton belongs to a specific nation, and they are having people spy on Airbus or Thomson because those companies do not belong to the same nation.

'Echelon' brings us face to face with nationalism, but it is the ethnic nationalism of the Anglo-Saxon ethnic group, which includes Australia, Great Britain, New Zealand, the United States and Canada.

It is an ethnic group with a religious base, the holy alliance of Adam Smith and Calvin.

So is the Catholic Europe of Gasperi, Schuman and Adenauer going to apologise?

Apologise to the people spied on, for all that evangelism?

'Echelon' is the French word for rung, and I am afraid this 'Echelon' is taking us down to the bottom rung and we will end up at dignity level zero.

Poor old European Commission! Poor old European Council of Ministers!

We are conditioned by the circumstances of our birth. Something born of a Harvard University lecture theatre under the presidency of the American, General Marshall, is bound to end up obeying its creator.

Mr President, Mr Gomes for the Council and Mr Liikanen for the Commission this morning have both made very clear statements.

As a UK Member of this Parliament I understand other Members' concerns.

This morning, and in recent days in particular, we have read and heard a lot of allegations.

Even today we have heard talk of James Bond, of American espionage and we have had the rantings of the madman to my left a few moments ago.

But today, and in the Citizens' Rights Committee, we have had few real facts because of the secrecy.

That is, after all, the nature of intelligence and military information work.

If it was not secret and we all knew about it, it would not serve the purpose for which it would be intended and necessary.

Members will therefore understand that it is the practice in the United Kingdom Government, like, I imagine, most or all other governments, not to comment on alleged interception whether the allegations are based on trivia or something perhaps more substantial.

As Mr Liikanen has said, everything done in the United Kingdom is in line with a proper legal framework.

Everything is subject to close parliamentary scrutiny in the House of Commons.

We have very tight controls, both independent controls and control that emanates from the Secretary of State with the full consent of the United Kingdom Government.

Finally and importantly, I want to reiterate that everything that has been conducted, or will be conducted, is in complete conformity with United Kingdom law, with United States law and, most importantly, is done with complete respect for, and in complete conformity with, the European Convention on Human Rights.

Mr President, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, Commissioner, having heard all the speeches made today, we are all convinced that there is a system controlled by the American secret services which can intercept practically all forms of voice and data communications around the world.

What we are not sure about is whether this system has been redirected, not at purely military and defence objectives, but at commercial, industrial and technological targets. We fear and suspect this, however.

The first is to the Council and the Commission.

What does the term 'fair trade' mean when major American companies can gain unlawful advantages thanks to privileged information provided by this system?

Secondly, what do civil liberties, a principle on everyone' s lips, mean to us when the privacy of our Heads of State, our elected representatives and our people can be violated other than for reasons of combating crime and without a court order, as required by our laws?

How do the Council and the Commission think the USA would react if it knew that Europe could intercept the communications of its president, elected representatives and people?

Finally, how can we defend ourselves against this threat?

The Commissioner has spoken of work on cryptography, which was also mentioned in Parliament' s last recommendation.

However, what specifically has been done to reinforce the cryptography system and to invest in European technology which is our best defence against this threat?

What comments might the Council and the Commission have on France' s recent decision to remove commercial closed source code systems from its public computer systems, thus allowing open source code systems to be used, which is intended, as indicated by the French Defence Minister, to guarantee that no nation and no defence systems are at the mercy of a single person or a single company?

Mr President, Echelon is a source of concern for the people of Europe, not only because it may have been used for unlawful purposes, but, above all, because of the risks inherent in its very nature, for it is an automatic, general, indiscriminate interception system, about the existence of which we can be in no doubt.

We need tighter controls to guarantee the fundamental rights of the people and to protect European companies, and we need political initiatives which ensure that the Member States cooperate more closely and keep each other informed of agreements concluded with third countries on this matter.

Legislation must be updated and harmonised and supervisory authorities simplified and consolidated and, of course, new technologies are needed to protect telecommunications from disproportionate and unjustified interference.

This is a complex assembly of measures which have only been timidly, belatedly and in part announced by the Council and the Commission.

Parliament must also support all the measures necessary to ascertain the truth, and be constantly, intensely vigilant even when all this has died down, for without transparent authorities and guaranteed individual rights, there can be no faith in democracy.

Mr President, because so many questions have unfortunately remained unanswered today, I should like to ask a number of further questions and request that the Council and the Commission answer these.

Is it true - and this is a matter for the Commission and the Council - that representatives of the Commission and the Council have been working, under the chairmanship of the Americans, on Echelon-compatible European telecommunications standards, including interception options, and this within the framework of ILETS, a so-called institute?

This then provided us with the notorious Infopol documents.

How great is the damage which has already been caused to the European economy?

Are there companies in addition to Thomson and the Airbus consortium which have sustained damage?

What will the Council and the Commission do, and how will they deal with those Member States of the European Union who are spying on their partners in the Union in order - as, in fact, has been admitted - to protect their economic well-being?

How will the Commission and the Council respond to the answer from the Americans, which was read out today and which clearly contradicts what, for example, ex-CIA director Mr Woolsey has stated?

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I have noted your concerns with great interest.

I should like to quickly make the following points.

Firstly, I did refer, more than once, specifically to the Echelon system. I unequivocally condemned this and stated that the Council cannot accept the creation or existence of a system for intercepting telecommunications which does not respect the laws of the Member States.

Mr Wiebenga said that I did not clearly and specifically condemn Echelon.

I did do so and I do so again.

It is clearly apparent from this debate that the key issue is not whether or not a system for intercepting telecommunications exists but what use is made of this system.

In this respect I must add the following comment in response to Mr van Velzen. The Council has no information allowing it to conclude that any company, including the companies mentioned, has benefited or been damaged as a result of telecommunications being intercepted by this system.

If we had any specific information on this, the Council would not hesitate to adopt a clear position.

I can only answer the Member' s second question in writing, as I do not have precise information on this.

I would also like to tell this House that the concerns voiced here are of course shared by the presidency.

Therefore, at the next Justice and Home Affairs Council on 29 to 30 May, the Portuguese presidency will ensure that the Council debates this issue so that we can adopt a position.

We will keep Parliament constantly informed of developments in this respect.

President, can I first thank Parliament for the discussion.

I think there is one point which has been raised by a few Parliamentarians which is fundamentally important, namely to guarantee that there will be strong European encryption products.

It is very important to increase the awareness of the European citizens and companies that electronic communications need to be encrypted to guarantee confidentiality.

Here, there have been programmes for eighteen months.

The European research programmes have been relatively successful and it is recognised also in the discussions in other countries that European competence in this area is confirmed.

Secondly, to the question of Mr van Velzen on the software and data privacy in telecommunications.

As Mr van Velzen knows, we are working now with the review of telecommunications legislation and this issue must be analysed in that context and I will reply to you very soon in writing where I will reply to the rest of the issues.

Mrs Berger asked whether some companies have been losing contracts because of espionage.

No companies have contacted the Commission on that issue.

As to the question about the United States and the UK: the reason why we asked for clarification recently was the interviews which were given by a former official of the intelligence agency of the United States.

For that reason we contacted the United States government and asked for clarification and what I said here was their reply to that very issue.

Finally, these are very important and sensitive areas and we must be very firm that confidentiality and privacy in telephone and telecommunications can be guaranteed.

The European Court of Human Rights took a decision some time ago when they said "tapping and other forms of interception of telephone conversations represent a serious interference with private life and correspondence and must accordingly be based on a law that is particularly precise.

It is essential to have clear, detailed rules on the subject especially as the technology available for users is continually becoming more sophisticated" .

I think this decision is very clear.

The Commission will, in all its actions, respect these principles and we will not fail to act under the obligations of the Treaty if any Community law is breached.

I have received four motions for resolutions pursuant to Article 37(2) of the Rules of Procedure.

The vote will take place during the next part-session.

Decision by the Patent Office on the cloning of human beings

The next item is the statement from the Commission on the decision by the European Patent Office on the cloning of human beings.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I come before you here today to make a statement on European Patent No EP 69 53 51 which was granted by the European Patent Office to the University of Edinburgh on 8 December 1999.

After the granting of this patent, a number of concerns have been raised, both here in Parliament and also by organisations such as Greenpeace, about the true scope of this patent.

On behalf of the Commission, I should like to say that the Commission shares these concerns.

It seems clear to everyone involved that this patent should not have been granted in the form it was.

The European Patent Office has issued a press statement to that effect.

I know that there have been some among you here today who believe that the European Patent Office has, at best, been economical with the truth or at worst has sought to seriously mislead the public.

You have a joint motion before you today which includes such charges.

May I point out that the European Patent Office is not a Community body; its existence and its actions are derived from an international agreement to which all the Member States of the European Union and four other countries are a party, but not the Community itself.

Therefore, I cannot give you authoritative information on the actions of the European Patent Office in this particular case.

However, given my experience of the European Patent Office, which I visited in Munich recently, I personally should be very surprised if this unfortunate occurrence was anything other than a mistake during the examination process.

Irrespective of the cause of the problem, it is clear, as I have mentioned just now, that the patent should not have been granted in its current form.

Therefore the question is: what does the Commission intend to do about it?

That is the reason why I am here today.

The motion before you calls on Parliament itself and the other institutions of the European Union formally to oppose this patent within the 9-month period during which an opposition is allowed under the rules governing the granting of European patents.

Some oppositions to this patent have already been filed.

However, if the European Patent Office follows its usual rules for oppositions then this is unlikely to bring any changes to this patent before December 2000 and perhaps even later than that.

Such a delay in correcting what is, in effect, an admitted error, is clearly undesirable.

I have therefore written to the European Patent Office in Munich requesting that it should explore every possibility to bring about a speedier resolution of this issue.

I am pleased to say that the European Patent Office has agreed, given the particular nature of this case, to form a so-called opposition body immediately, an opposition body which will, shortly after having been constituted, issue a first communication indicating a preliminary opinion.

Now, the European Patent Office said that such a preliminary opinion will be without prejudice to the final ruling of the opposition division in this case.

But the Office assures me that proceedings will speedily lead to conclusions, subject to respecting the rights of the parties to be heard.

I am sure that, like me, Members of this assembly, Mr President, will welcome this willingness on the part of the European Patent Office to respond to some of the concerns raised by this Parliament and as a direct result of the approach taken by the Commission.

I am happy to make available to you, President, copies of both my letter to the European Patent Office and its reply to the Commission.

Of course, I shall inform you, as soon as possible, about the conclusions which the legal service of the Commission will formulate having studied precisely the reply of the European Patent Office to the letter which I sent it recently

Let me therefore conclude by reiterating that the Commission, like everyone else, regrets that this patent has been granted in its present form.

We have taken action which - based upon the full cooperation of the European Patent Office - will, I believe, bring about a speedy resolution of this unfortunate occurrence.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, the granting of a patent on genetically modified human embryos and on a technique which might possibly lead to the cloning of human beings is a huge scandal.

This is a flagrant violation of human dignity.

The event shows how important it was for the European Parliament, in debating the directive on the patenting of biotechnological inventions, to have made it a cornerstone of the directive that there can be no question of patenting techniques for cloning human beings and for manipulating human genetic material, still less of patenting the human being in all phases of his development.

Many people said at the time that these clarifications were quite unnecessary and that a patent of this kind would never be granted anyway.

We now see how important these clarifications were.

The European Patent Office has incorporated the European Union' s directive into its own directives.

It is not, in fact, bound directly by the Council' s and Parliament' s directive but has incorporated word for word what we decided upon at the time into its implementing rules.

What has happened in this connection is therefore a flagrant breach of the European Patent Office' s own rules.

Nor can I feel any sympathy or understanding for those who say that, oh, there was nothing very untoward about the granting of this patent, that we should not be getting so worked up about it and that, what is more, the technique in question may potentially have a lot to offer.

Then, there was a press statement from Europabio, which was not very helpful in this regard and, following which, I wrote a letter to the chairman of Europabio pointing out that such an ambivalent position on the patent involved was not at all helpful in furthering people' s understanding of biotechnology.

It must also meet with vigorous protest in the European Parliament.

It is not, however, a question of the directive we adopted in 1998 being a bad one.

It is a question of its needing to be applied better.

There has been a breach of this directive, and we ought not, therefore, to bring the directive into question but instead to make sure that the directive is applied both in the European Patent Office and also through being transposed into national law.

We stated clearly at the time that we are in favour of biotechnology and approve of the opportunities it presents, but we want to see clear, ethically based limits.

There is also something else which requires clarification. The European Parliament has always taken a clear stand, not only against the patenting of techniques which violate human dignity, but also against such techniques themselves.

Parliament has always repudiated the cloning of human beings, the manipulation of human genetic material and the use of embryos in research. Take, for example, Mr Tannert' s report on the relevant research programme in these areas.

The Group of the European People' s Party has therefore tabled Amendment No 4 in order once again to make it clear that we are not going back on this.

We shall, in any case, vote in favour of this resolution because the European Parliament must send out a clear signal in this regard.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, European Patent No EP 69 53 51, granted by the European Parliament and concerning the genetic manipulation of human cells and human embryos has triggered understandable feelings of horror among the public.

As soon as the course of events became known, my group tabled an oral question on the matter in order to obtain clarification of the questions of principle which had been raised and of the inevitable consequences.

However, the question disappeared without trace in the course of this House' s business.

Instead of the required answers, we have today received an explanation from the Commission which cannot be the last word as far as the European Parliament is concerned.

Quite simply because this dreadful patent and the run-up to it, together with the disappearance of a parliamentary question, show how we ought not to deal with biotechnology, that is to say in a careless and slipshod manner.

That would lead to a disastrous situation in which the principles of the inviolability of the human being and of human dignity would be completely lost.

Clearly, everything must be done in order to completely do away with Patent No EP 69 53 51 and any similar gaffes.

Clearly we must move as quickly as possible to close the legal loophole constituted by the flawed European patent.

Clearly, we must quickly create a route to independent patent jurisdiction which is open to everyone. Or do we want further to abandon a powerful authority to a form of self-monitoring which still does not even begin to operate satisfactorily?

Obviously, the development of biotechnology and of all new techniques must be subject to increased public supervision.

In this way, the European Parliament is confronted with a special task requiring the preparation of an annual report on the work of the European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies.

It is just as clear to my group and to myself that the genetic inheritance of humanity must remain common property and should not be sold off on the floor of the stock exchange.

We only use biotechnology in a responsible way when we respect its ethical limits and make the genetic code accessible to researchers throughout the world.

Finally, it must be made unequivocally clear once and for all that our Directive on the Legal Protection of Biotechnological Inventions excludes not only the patentability of the human being, of parts of the human genetic make-up and of interference with the genome, but also forbids the cloning of human beings at all phases of their development.

Moreover, everyone must adhere to this.

Mr President, European Patent No EP 69 53 51 has been a great shock to us. It amounts to deliberately awarding a patent for the breeding of human beings.

The genetically modified human being would himself be degraded to the status of a product of genetic technology, and that would be a flagrant affront to human dignity.

We are therefore delighted that, in its motion for a resolution, Parliament has taken up the proposal tabled by the Greens to the effect that we, as a Parliament, should submit a complaint to the Patent Office in Munich and that Parliament should join us in our criticism of the structural problems of the European Patent Office, because if transparency and an ethical approach are to be allowed to come into their own, we require independent supervision of the European Patent Office.

This patent is no isolated case, however.

It is only the tip of the iceberg or a Pandora' s box which has been open for a long time.

The Patent Office has awarded a whole range of patents on human genetic make-up and thus breached the regulations of the European Patent Agreement.

Parts of the human genetic make-up have, quite intolerably, been declared to be, and commercialised as, the invention and the property of third parties.

We must vehemently oppose this commercialisation of human genes and these flagrant violations of human dignity.

This also means, however, that we need to investigate the patenting of parts of the human genetic make-up and of genes themselves, which is also made possible by the directive on patenting.

That is because we need a moratorium on the patenting of human genes and of parts of the human genetic make-up so that its social and ethical consequences, which are now everywhere to be seen, can be examined. For this patent must be a lesson and also a last warning to us to the effect that we really have to adopt a different approach in dealing with this issue.

I would also have expected more from the Commission today in terms of more criticism and also of more questions about the background to the directive on patenting which also virtually legitimises past practice on the part of the Patent Office.

Mr President, the public alarm at the granting of this patent is, I feel, totally justified.

In the first place, at this stage, it is in the general interest to avoid patents being issued on human chromosomes, in order not to close any doors to the endeavours of scientific research to find new treatment methods and to use knowledge gained about the human genome to improve health, which is an end that should be placed over and above the albeit legitimate protection of the economic interests of researchers.

Secondly, there is a deficiency in the law: it is not possible for the European Patent Office not to have any links with the Commission or be part of the structure of the European Union.

Thirdly and most importantly, we are considering an issue which is at the very root of our civilisation.

Christianity has taught us the value of the dignity of every human being; the tradition of the left enshrines the concept that the human person, man, is not a commodity and cannot be treated as such. Well, we are now clearly running the risk of turning human beings into commodities, at least in part, and this affects the very roots of our civilisation - in terms of Christianity and also of the enlightenment and Marxism.

We must be united, determined and resolute in our reaction, remembering that the embryo is a unique human being.

Whatever our attitude to abortion, even those of us who consider abortion to be lawful have always agreed on one point: the right of the mother prevails over the right of the embryo, but the right of the embryo does exist. It yields solely and exclusively before the right of the mother, not before the right of a multinational to make money.

Mr President, I would thank the Commission for its statement and would urge it to file an official objection to this patent.

The Council should give the Commission the mandate to do this.

In justification of this, I would point out that it must be the Commission' s job to enforce the directive on bio-patents.

It is debatable whether this directive, for which I was the rapporteur, is in fact a suitable tool for managing the problems involved.

It would have been helpful if whoever was giving vent to his indignation had taken the trouble to read the patent.

He would then have seen that the patent infringes the directive on bio-patents on two counts, firstly because the patent protection extends to include a procedure for modifying human genetic material and, secondly, because the patent protection extends to include the use of embryos for commercial and industrial purposes.

These are two clear infringements of the directive on bio-patents.

How one might now use this as an opportunity to again cast doubt upon the directive without having read the patent or the directive, I really cannot imagine.

Hence, my request to Parliament to the effect that we should not again cast doubt upon the directive, as Mrs Breyer thinks we have to.

This is, in fact, the first text in the world to offer a satisfactory solution to the problems involved in patent protection and bio-technological inventions and, what is more, the first text in the world to win universal approval.

It is now, therefore, a question not of again bringing the directive into question but of enforcing it.

Mr President, I must begin by explaining that I have no association at all with Edinburgh University, but I think that it is important to stress their bona fides.

It is, after all, one of my own country' s most distinguished universities.

When they sought and obtained this patent, which they did for entirely lawful purposes, they did so in good faith.

They have no interest in cloning humans: rather what they are interested in is being able to work on human tissue to help find remedies for, for example, Alzheimer' s Disease and leukaemia and what they are doing breaks no law in the United Kingdom.

As has been explained, the patent in question was examined prior to the coming into effect of the 1998 directive in September 1999, but it was issued after that date and, as has been said, a mistake was made in the form in which it was granted.

I have seen no evidence at all at this stage of anything more than error on the part of the Patent Office.

Of course, I would like to add that that is something which is of serious concern.

But until there is something more, I think it appropriate that the wilder claims and suggestions should be ignored.

My understanding is that the patent error can be corrected either by the patent owner applying to correct the document or by a third party filing an opposition which I understand has already been done.

I have been told by the university' s advisors that it will not resist so long as the disclaimer which may be added to the patent continues to allow them to carry out their lawful work on human tissue.

In other words, what we are talking about here is an amendment to cut out the offending elements of the patent, thereby rendering it lawful, and not its revocation in its entirety.

I believe that the work which is being carried out in Edinburgh is not permitted by national law in some other Member States.

But what this Parliament and the Community institutions and international bodies should not do is attempt to legislate for national parliaments in areas which are national competences, and in my view any attempt to do so should be resisted strongly as a matter of overriding constitutional principle.

Mr President, may I begin by thanking Members of this Parliament very much indeed for the questions that they have put and the comments that they have made.

Perhaps you will allow me to pass a few comments on what the various Members of this Parliament have said.

May I begin by saying in reply to Mr Rothley that indeed the Commission has reserved to itself the right to oppose the patent in a formal way.

As I have said earlier this morning, I wrote a letter on behalf of the Commission to the European Patent Office.

I have no objection whatsoever to making that letter public.

The penultimate paragraph reads as follows: "In this context, I have to inform that the College of Commissioners has already decided to take more formal action, notably to file an opposition by the Commission or the Community in case no pragmatic solution can be reached" .

In other words, whereas we prefer a negotiated settlement because it will be quicker than the nine months which is foreseen by the Patent Office rules, we have retained for ourselves the right formula to oppose the patents if no progress is made along this quicker route.

So, as far as that goes, Mr Rothley may rest assured that the Commission has reserved that right to itself.

I should then like to support Mr Liese who has emphasised that there is nothing wrong with the directive.

I think that the directive is a good one.

Indeed, Mr Rothley himself has said that the directive is the first of its kind in the world and that it has received universal acclaim.

Certainly if I look at paragraph five of the directive where it says that certain processes are not to be considered patentable, then it seems to me that the directive is perfectly clear.

Mr Blokland has said that the directive is unclear and inconsistent and certainly the Commission will be very interested in a substantiated view of that statement.

It was also mentioned by Frau Gebhardt that the cloning of human beings should be forbidden.

May I draw the attention of Mrs Gebhardt to the fact that the directive specifically forbids that.

It seems to me that that is all we need to do, provided, of course, that the directive is properly applied.

The last issue I should like to deal with is the matter of the Community patent.

Several speakers this morning have spoken about the European patents.

Now, a European patent is what the European Patent Office grants.

The proper term to use is a Community patent.

In other words it is one application made to the European Patent Office in Munich but that office would then grant a Community patent and that would apply at one go to the whole European Union.

I should like to say to Frau Gebhardt and Mr De Clercq who mentioned this that we are certainly working hard at realising the possibility of having a Community patent.

It is not an easy thing, principally because the European Patent Office is not a Community institution.

So what we want the European Patent Office to do is something on behalf of the European Commission while the Office itself is not a Community institution.

That presents us with certain legal problems and we are trying to solve them.

It is indeed true that the language problems are considerable.

The average cost of a patent is about EUR 30 000, much higher than in the United States, and that is because 40% of those costs are taken up by language problems - the translation costs - and we are trying to get to grips with that problem.

Lastly, it is the intention of the Commission to issue a document to substantiate the construction of a European patent before the summer and I look forward to entering into a dialogue with Parliament on the substance of that document.

Mr President, I just wanted some further clarification.

Mr Bolkestein, I am very sorry if you have not been listening very carefully or if the translation was not very precise, but I have not put forward a demand that cloning should be prohibited.

Having kept a critical eye on the way in which the legislation relating to the directive on biotechnological inventions was developing, I am perfectly aware of what this contains.

I would merely ask you to be aware of this.

What I in fact said is that I should like absolute clarification that these are in fact the contents.

That is a quite different statement from the one you attributed to me.

I have received seven motions for resolutions pursuant to Article 37(2) of the Rules of Procedure.

The vote will take place at 11 a.m.

(The sitting was suspended at 10.55 a.m. and resumed at 11.05 a.m.)

Mr President, I know that there are to be no votes on the opinions which have been submitted by the various committees.

The Committee on Women' s Rights and Equal Opportunities has tabled a special opinion.

I just want to point out that what is most important in this opinion is, of course, the view that proper resources should be set aside for mainstreaming.

A mistake has nonetheless crept into our opinion.

I do not want there to be a mistake here, even if we are not voting on it.

The last part of section 4 of our opinion, following the words "Community action programmes should cooperate" , is to be deleted.

The Committee voted to remove this section, but it has nonetheless been included by mistake.

I want this part to be removed and I want to give notice of the fact now, before we proceed to the vote.

Report (A5-0068/2000) by Mr Ferber, on behalf of the Committee on Budgets, on the budget guidelines for the 2001 budgetary procedure: Section I - European Parliament, Section II - Council, Section IV - Court of Justice, Section V - Court of Auditors, Section VI - Economic and Social Committee, Section VII - Committee of the Regions, Section VIII - Ombudsman

Motion for a resolution (B5-0289/2000) by Mrs Jackson and Mr Blokland, on behalf of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, on aeroplane hushkits

Joint motion for a resolution on Mediterranean policy

Concerning Amendments Nos 4 and 5:

Mr President, the oral amendment which I am about to read out replaces Amendment No 4 and Amendment No 5.

There was consensus among all the groups tabling the joint motion.

It supplements Paragraph 16 and reads: "Favours the convening of a Euro-Mediterranean conference on agriculture, with the participation of representatives of the institutions, members of the agri-foodstuffs industry and representatives of farmers' and consumers' organisations" .

Report (A5-0057/2000) by Mr Hernández Mollar, on behalf of the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs, on asylum-seekers and migrants: action plans for countries of origin or transit - High Level Working Group (C5-0159/1999 - C5-0160/1999 - C5-0161/1999 - C5-0162/1999 - C5-0163/1999 - C5-0164/1999 - C5-0165/1999 - C4-0133/1999 - 1999/2096(COS))

Report (A5-0052/2000) by Mrs Klamt, on behalf of the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs, on the communication from the Commission to the Council, the European Parliament, the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions on the implementation of measures to combat child sex tourism (COM(1999) 262 - C5-0096/1999 - 1999/2097(COS))

Report (A5-0061/2000) by Mr MacCormick, on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market, on the Commission Green Paper on liability for defective products (COM(1999) 396 - C5-0184/1999 - 1999/2158(COS))

Report (A5-0078/2000) by Mr Turmes, on behalf of the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy, on electricity from renewable energy sources and the internal electricity market (SEC(1999) 470 - C5-0342/1999 - 2000/2002(COS))

Joint motion for a resolution on the decision of the European Patent Office on the cloning of human beings

Mr President, excuse me if I am a bit hoarse, but I have a cold.

The Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance has requested a split vote on this amendment.

I think that the first part of the amendment is uncontroversial, but there is a linguistic problem in the second part.

I think it is a translation-related problem.

It was the intention of the European People' s Party not to open a new debate but merely to re-confirm what Parliament had already decided recently, for example in the context of the Fifth Framework Programme on Research or in that of the Tannert report on the specific Framework Programme on Research.

It is therefore important for us to adapt the German language version to the wording also chosen for the Fifth Framework Programme on Research.

In this case, the English text is the original, and the German should read 'verbrauchende Embryonenforschung' , which are the words also decided upon by Parliament for the Framework Programme on Research.

It is not, therefore, a question of tightening up Parliament' s position but of emphasising what we have already decided.

The German must therefore read 'verbrauchende Embryonenforschung' .

I just wanted to explain that my group will nevertheless be voting against this amendment, because I think that discussion of embryo research has no place here. We are therefore voting against the amendment, even with this correction.

EXPLANATIONS OF VOTE - Haug report (A5-0070/2000)

Mr President, I voted against the Haug report on the budget guidelines for the 2001 budgetary procedure for reasons which may seem futile to the other Members present, but which hold great importance for me, for I was elected to this Parliament to represent the Pensioners' Party and I intend to do everything possible, and the impossible as well, to draw attention to the requests, needs and requirements of the elderly.

There are approximately 120 million elderly people in Europe, most of whom receive a pension, although there are a few, less fortunate people who do not, but these guidelines make no provision whatsoever for a European Union policy for pensioners and the elderly.

This is why I oppose this procedure, and I hope that I will be able to improve conditions for pensioners and the elderly during the next few years.

Mr President, I have naturally voted for the Haug report on the budgetary guidelines, but I would particularly like to stress the welcome reinstatement of natural disasters, confirmed by this morning' s vote.

As I have said here several times, I do not think the European Union can want to make its presence felt and to be more visible to its people than it has been up to now, whilst, at the same time, turning its back on their difficulties and misfortunes when these occur.

So it is with great pleasure that I have voted for paragraphs 21 and 34.

My hope is that they will be implemented rapidly, particularly for the forestry sector, which is experiencing structural difficulties and has experienced a drastic reduction in supply.

I think that the Union' s natural role would be to dedicate itself to this, and I hope we can build on this report to make Parliament and the Commission aware of the need for intervention.

- (SV) We have voted against a number of points in Mrs Haug' s report on the guidelines for the 2001 budgetary procedure.

The biggest challenge confronting the European Union over the next few years is enlargement to include the countries in Eastern and Central Europe.

Enlargement will be an expensive business in many ways.

It is therefore important that the EU should set aside large sums in this connection, and not only accession aid.

In spite of this, enlargement is not mentioned in Mrs Haug' s report.

Instead, "the social and cultural dimension of Europe" is chosen as the most important point to be taken up in the guidelines for the 2001 budget.

We think that the EU should devote its energies to those problems which the Member States cannot solve themselves, that is to say the cross-border issues.

Cultural policy and social policy are very important political areas but ought not, on the whole, to be subjects of common legislation.

Aid for the reconstruction of Kosovo is taken up in Mrs Haug' s report as another priority area, which is something we support wholeheartedly.

However, we think that the resources needed for Kosovo should be found from the aid given to tobacco cultivation and to other production in the context of the common agricultural policy.

As liberals, we believe that agricultural policy should be adapted to the market and made less bureaucratic.

If Parliament is serious about enlargement eastwards, efforts must be made to cut back considerably on the costs of agriculture.

All direct aid given to agricultural production ought to gradually be abolished.

The EU plays an important role when it comes to employment, especially through the single market.

We would nonetheless emphasise that unemployment cannot be reduced only by means of political decisions at European level.

We are convinced that measures in the Member States, such as reduced social costs, flexible labour law and a good business climate, are what lead to increased employment and dynamic development throughout the Union.

(ES) I would like to congratulate Mrs Haug on her excellent work and say that I agree with her when she highlights job creation as a priority for the Union.

The Committee on Fisheries does not want more money.

We simply wish to be named in the guidelines, because what is not named does not exist, and fishing exists, and is even a common policy.

Fishing is crucial to maintaining employment and the economy in the peripheral European regions which depend on it.

This industry also generates numerous land-based jobs, in the processing industry and in the dockyards.

The cheapest jobs are those which do not have to be created because they have not already disappeared.

It is better to support activities that already create employment than to have to invest huge amounts, later on, in the creation of new industries.

We in the Committee on Fisheries believe that the international fisheries agreements deserve explicit budgetary support, so that the Community fleet may continue its activities and the economies of the fishing regions do not reach crisis point.

In the process of reaching an agreement we will therefore see to it that the Union' s support for fishing is consolidated and increased.

During the current budgetary procedure we will also highlight our concern that fishing resources be conserved and working and safety conditions in that industry improved.

The Haug report reveals that there is a serious risk that what happened before will be repeated in the 2001 budgetary procedure.

Strict compliance with the Stability Pact requires an approach involving budgetary restriction. This affects the commitment to the European Union' s traditional priorities and, in particular, to basic challenges such as combating unemployment, promoting economic and social cohesion, adequately preparing for enlargement and establishing the policy for cooperation that is so essential.

It is imperative that new priorities are given new financial resources.

In the current situation, the financing of Kosovo' s reconstruction and the Stability Pact for the Balkans requires a comprehensive review of the financial perspective.

Under no circumstances can the approach contained in the report of a cut, albeit fair, in all the budgetary categories be accepted in order to respond to the current requirements.

We do not agree with this approach and therefore cannot approve the report.

Mr President, I abstained from the vote on Mr Ferber' s report on the other sections of the 2001 budget because, although it was excellent, it does not focus sufficiently on reducing the costs of the bureaucratic machinery of the European Union, and of the European Parliament, in particular, in addition to that of the Commission.

There is too much staff-related expenditure.

The European Parliament' s bureaucracy is a steamroller which takes up too great a part of our all too modest economic means, and I have an albeit vague suspicion that this is partly responsible for the sluggishness of the European Union in financial matters as well.

Haug and Ferber reports (A5-0070 and 0068/2000)

- I voted against the motion for a resolution because the reference in Article 1 to 're-certified aircraft with low by-pass ratios' would effectively put an end to a project to re-engine aircraft in an unemployment blackspot of West Wales which could potentially create 400 jobs.

This is because the engines which the company concerned plans to use have a by-pass ratio of less than three and so would be excluded from EU airspace under the Regulation as it stands.

Article 2(2) excludes from the scope of the Regulation only aircraft which have been completely re-engined 'with engines having a by-pass ratio of three or more' .

This is in spite of the fact that the engines in question would easily meet all noise and emissions standards.

Aircraft noise is not determined by engine by-pass ratio alone, and I believe that aircraft noise should be measured by the actual noise made during take-off, fly-past and landing as is the case under the Chicago Convention.

What you call a European Union 'Mediterranean policy' merely consists of creating the political conditions to allow the large industrial conglomerates of Europe to take advantage of the low wages, natural resources and government contracts of the Southern and Eastern Mediterranean, and secure new outlets for their products.

That 'cooperation' is the cooperation of the wolf with the lamb, and the poor majority of the population only get the dubious advantage of being exploited for the benefit not just of local potentates, but of European businesses too.

For two centuries France' s Mediterranean policy consisted of the colonisation of Morocco, Tunisia and Algeria. Italy' s was the occupation of Libya, and Britain' s the shameless looting of Egypt.

Voices have been rightly raised in this very House against the dictatorship that holds sway in Tunisia and the one that continues to rule in Morocco, even if it is more moderate.

So why do we forget the material, military and diplomatic support France has given those regimes?

Why do we forget France' s responsibility for the war it waged in Algeria and for the tragic situation that still exists in that country today?

Our solidarity is with the working classes of the Mediterranean region and that means we are opposed to the cooperation between owners and rulers promoted by this resolution.

Since the launch of the Euro-Mediterranean partnership on 27 and 28 November 1995 in Barcelona, the political context has changed.

The partnership has failed to meet the expectations raised by the countries participating in the conference.

We are anxious to preserve the Mediterranean Basin as an area of trade and dialogue, and we want the Barcelona Process relaunched without ill-considered intervention by the European Union.

In fact, the latter must take action to achieve a cultural, social and human partnership.

There are still many social challenges to be faced.

The implementation of an economic partnership is especially vital for agriculture.

The European Union must provide compensation for the crucial difficulties in this sector, notably as regards fruit and vegetables, and wine-growing.

The European Union must consider the island regions of the Mediterranean, particularly in terms of fisheries and agriculture.

We are hoping for synergy in the coordination of the interregional and transnational cooperation programmes, and for coordination between the Interreg and MEDA programmes.

Finally, would it not be appropriate to arrange a Euro-Mediterranean conference on agriculture and fisheries involving the representatives of local and regional communities as well as professional organisations?

Our reluctance to participate in the joint motion for a resolution and the vote is based on our rejection of a situation where the European Union would replace the Member States, come what may, in Mediterranean policy.

In fact, Member States are directly affected by this policy.

The European Union has a duty to be extremely vigilant about imports of agricultural products which threaten to imperil the whole of European production.

Mr President, I voted against the Hernández Mollar report on asylum seekers and migrants, not because I am opposed to an action plan for receiving and supporting those who are less fortunate than ourselves and who are forced to emigrate and request asylum from countries near or far - for I am strongly in favour of such a measure - but because this report does not place sufficient emphasis on the procedures for distinguishing between genuine and false asylum seekers, for the latter are, sadly, nothing but disruptive elements who damage those who have a genuine, practical need for asylum and assistance, and who must therefore receive it.

I abstained on the final vote on this report on the basis of my speech on Wednesday evening.

I am not in any way against the intentions or sentiments of the report but solely in respect of the action plan on Sri Lanka.

I believe that it is inadequate and that there is far too little attention paid to the need to seek a political solution in Sri Lanka.

It is all too apparent that we cannot rely on the Sri Lankan government to give independent access to politicians or journalists to the war zones, nor for impartial evidence on what is really happening regarding human rights abuses and allegations of torture and similar practices by, or with the tacit approval of, the Sri Lankan government.

The war in Sri Lanka, President, is one that neither side can win and unless and until there are peace negotiations there will always be applications for asylum seekers in the west, almost all of whom will be Tamils.

The European Parliament I believe has a role to play in arguing that the European Union must bring pressure to bear on the Sri Lankan government to seek peace.

Europe can be the peace intermediary to bring such a peaceful solution to the island of Sri Lanka and peace for the Tamil and Sinhalese communities and others in Sri Lanka.

On the pretext of contributing to building a European immigration and asylum policy, this resolution' s standpoint has nothing to do with freedom for the nationals of poor countries to travel and possibly settle in Europe, but is all about bolstering the slave trade which involves regulating the flow of immigrants as a function of demand from the manufacturing companies of Europe.

When it comes to the right of asylum, statements of principle are one thing, the reality of the situation is quite another.

In France, for example, only 2,000 of 7,000 asylum applications have been accepted.

The rejected asylum seekers become stateless people, victims of the open season on migrants, which is no less disgraceful for being regulated.

And what price the subtle distinctions in the report between 'immigration' and 'asylum proper' , when social reality means that a surreal economic organisation condemns millions of people to torture or death by hunger as surely as in dictators' dungeons?

The only reason we are not voting against this text is that we refuse to be associated with the extreme right and their despicable ranting.

But our institutions are organically incapable of eliminating the causes which force tens of millions of men, women and children into exile across the world, fleeing oppression or destitution, because that would require society to share the wealth it produces equally, instead of leaving that to the discretion of a few thousand financial groups and their shareholders.

Mr President, I voted for the Klamt report, not only because I am in favour of any measure which contributes to eliminating child sex tourism, but also because I want to provide encouragement for more to be done.

I would argue that the report still lacks something, namely greater focus on procedures for punishing the citizens of the European Union States, who, sadly, are the main perpetrators of this abomination.

We must not forget that there are many Europeans who feed this scourge of the new millennium

The text we are debating today certainly affects us more than most since it is about protecting children against sex tourism.

The European Commission has drawn up a report of the measures which have been taken in this field.

In view of the results, it is clear that the European Union and its Member States must increase their efforts to combat sex tourism and the exploitation of children.

The Member States must pass extra-territorial legislation allowing them to carry out investigations, prosecute and punish any individual guilty of crimes committed abroad and linked to child sex abuse.

We must go even further and establish measures such as a coherent child protection policy by creating a new general legal base in the context of the next revision of the Treaty, with adequate Community funding.

I also think it is essential to incorporate the rights of the child into the Charter of Fundamental Human Rights.

In conjunction with this, we must take action at grass-roots level by encouraging travel agencies, tour operators, transport and advertising companies to set up self-regulation systems designed to combat child sex tourism, and by creating free helplines for children in distress in every Member State.

Exemplary penalties must be imposed on the people guilty of such monstrous behaviour.

The fact is, when people are in a foreign country, in an unfamiliar region, they can act in complete anonymity and convince themselves that child abuse is less reprehensible in a different social and cultural context, and that the moral principles in force in their own country do not apply.

We must not be blind to the fact that the Internet facilitates these 'practices' .

This is why Parliament calls on the Commission to assess the link between child pornography on the Internet and the growth in sex tourism, and to propose practical measures against the phenomenon!

It is also essential to recognise that prostitution in general in the developing countries is very often due to poverty, affecting children, women and men.

We must also fight on those grounds because there will always be unscrupulous people around to exploit human poverty.

I want to end by reaffirming that children, this world' s future, are one of the most vulnerable groups in the population, with specific needs that have to be protected.

We must never forget that every individual' s childhood and the particular circumstances of their family and social circle in large measure determines their adult life.

Consequently, all the European Union and Member State institutions must be inspired in their action by the protection of children' s rights as recognised in the United Nations Convention of 20 November 1989.

Mrs Klamt has presented a good report today.

I am delighted Mr Marchiani' s amendments reaffirming the criminal nature of child sex tourism have been incorporated but, at the same time, I am disappointed at the rejection of other amendments tabled by my colleague which were intended to strengthen the principles set out in the text, without altering its general meaning.

Obviously, this form of 'tourism' is a crime.

How else could we, as parents, especially mothers, and elected representatives, doubly responsible for the continuity of our societies, regard these acts, all the more heinous because they are committed against the weakest of all?

But should we be astonished at this phenomenon when, at the same time, the development of prostitution, more generally, does not cause offence?

How can we criminalise the perverts who go to the ends of the earth to violate children without, at the same time, condemning the pimps and clients who exploit girls from the East attracted to our countries by lies, and even by force?

This is an area where double standards must apply least of all.

Belgian society is currently being rocked by paedophile trials, and similar proceedings often go on in our own countries.

The poverty of some parts of the world is certainly used by irresponsible adults to try to explain the unjustifiable sexual exploitation of children. Nevertheless, the permissiveness of our societies, the libertarian views some people express, even in this House, are undoubtedly the essential root of this evil, with geographical remoteness just an illusory and gratuitous excuse for the depraved.

We cannot rejoice at so-called taboos collapsing, and then lament crimes which are merely the consequence of the disappearance of rules that are natural to all social life.

We must condemn these practices. Our respective states must take the necessary measures to prosecute and sentence those found guilty.

But back home, in our own countries and towns, we must combat the sexual exploitation of children, which is only the most despicable form of sexual exploitation of any human being.

The dignity of the individual, of the weakest in particular and of all in general, must be our guideline, in this area as in any other.

- I wholeheartedly support Ewa Klamt' s report on the fight against child exploitation.

The report focuses specifically on combating child sex tourism but, as we all know, the issue is much broader than this.

Clearly, with new technology and globalisation, child pornography on the Internet, in particular, is an ever-growing international problem.

Technology is proceeding faster than individual governments can legislate.

Europe can act by strengthening child protection legislation and ensuring adequate child protection, particularly in some of the applicant countries, such as Romania and Hungary.

At present, it seems that animals have more rights than children in Europe.

I believe we must be vigilant and ensure strong, effective measures are put in place to protect the rights of children in e-Europe.

Progress is, of course, being made.

More and more European money is being given to combat child sex tourism and to increase public awareness about child protection, with a EUR 1 million separate budget line, and the STOP and DAPHNE programmes.

But whilst I welcome the positive noises coming from Brussels, it is not enough.

Mr President, I am not calling for a nanny-state approach, but simply that, in a civilised society, we recognise the right of children to their childhood.

That is too precious to become the plaything of wealthy, western tourists.

Mr President, I voted for the MacCormick report on liability for defective products because 'it is meet and right so to do' .

However, allow me to say that it does not go far enough for me or the Pensioners' Party.

The European Union must do more to enforce liability for damages suffered by citizens, particularly the weaker members of society, caused by the defective products of public administration.

How often do European pensioners receive their pensions on time?

How often do widows and elderly people receive the correct allowance?

The States are guilty of such offences and should be held liable.

Since we punish private individuals and make them pay damages, why should we not exact just as much payment, and I would advocate greater penalties, when the damages are caused by public authorities?

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, environmental protection is a prestigious field of politics, and rightly so.

However, it is precisely the subject of renewable energy sources that must be freed from the burden of ideology and wishful thinking, as well as from the material misuse of energy sources themselves.

The present report on the subject of renewable energy sources does precisely the opposite, and that is why I have rejected it.

What, for example, is to be made of the much-touted benefits of wind power, something I consider to be an economic and ecological mistake?

No appreciable percentage of an ultramodern industrial state' s energy needs can be met from wind power.

We are still talking about mere thousandths of the overall requirement.

Last year in Germany, two billion kilowatt hours were generated through wind power.

That is just 0.8% of the total requirement of 2,500 billion kilowatts, and even that has cost the taxpayer DM 3 billion in grants.

Clearly, then, the future does not lie down this particular road, and we should therefore turn back from this economic and ecological blind alley and find ourselves a new direction.

Mr President, I read the Turmes report on electricity very carefully and I voted for it.

How could anybody fail to support any initiative which stresses the importance of electricity, of which we are all aware?

However, I have taken the floor to explain my reasons for voting in this way because I wish to say that, once again, there is something missing.

The Turmes report lacks a recommendation to provide the most vulnerable citizens of our Union, who have the lowest economic means, not with electricity at a reduced price, but with free electricity.

Nowadays, it is impossible to live without electricity.

Electricity is like the water we drink and the air we breathe.

Do we pay for the air we breathe?

Then we should not have to pay for electricity either if we do not have the means to do so.

- (SV) Regarding paragraphs 11-16 concerning supports to renewable energy sources, we would provide the following clarification.

We want to promote the development of renewable energy sources but believe that this should not be done by means of direct subsidies but, instead, through the use of various financial instruments of control, for example higher tax on fossil fuels, environmental charges and stricter application of the polluter-pays principle.

In addition, support ought to be given to research and development projects for the promotion of renewable energy sources.

Mr President, we agreed with many points in the motion for a resolution, for example with the proposal that the European Parliament should submit a complaint to the Patent Office, but also with the criticism of the structures of the European Patent Office.

However, we were very divided when it came to the vote.

I, for example, voted for the resolution because, for me, it sent out important signals concerning human dignity.

Many in the group - quite rightly, too, I think - abstained from voting because most of the amendments of the Group of the European People' s Party were adopted.

I think it was the wish of the Group of the European People' s Party to attempt to transform this motion for a resolution into an advert for the patenting directive.

They did not succeed, but they have nonetheless weakened the resolution.

However, I am confident that the European Parliament will stop deceiving itself before long, by which I mean deceiving itself that the directive on patenting prohibits the patenting of human genes or parts of the human genetic make-up. That is unfortunately not the case.

There is absolutely no point in burying one' s head in the sand and always maintaining the opposite of what is in fact the case, on the principle that the more you insist on something, the closer it comes to becoming a reality.

Contrary to what Parliament believes, this patent is no isolated case.

For years, the European Parliament has not patented human genes where they originate, in the body. However, the patenting of human genes and parts of the human genetic make-up still goes on.

This is an affront to human dignity and also signifies a commercialisation of the human body.

I was delighted to see that both the European and the German federations of medical practitioners are so clear-sighted about the fact and have also warned that research might be impeded by the patenting of genes.

It is also nonsense and self-deluding to maintain that the directive on patenting would prohibit this.

I think this very case has shown that we need to revise the directive on patenting and that, above all, we need a moratorium on the patenting of human genes and parts of the human genetic make-up, for I believe that, with the granting of the present patent, the ethical and social consequences have become more than clear.

Mr President, I very much regret, also on behalf of my group, that a minority has succeeded in introducing extraneous ideological factors into the resolution concerning necessary changes to the way in which patent law keeps pace with biotechnology.

This neither helps clarify patent law in the European Union nor makes for better and urgently needed protection against the rampant commercialisation of the building blocks of life.

In its current form, the adopted text further reduces the minimum level of protection provided under the 1998 directive on bio-patents.

In this way, there is a growing danger that the genetic inheritance of mankind will be taken from the community as a whole and made into a profitable commodity for the few.

In order to counter this danger, my group and I have voted in such a way as to reject any elements which have nothing to do with patent protection for biotechnological inventions.

In the end, we have voted as a unit against the resolution.

That does not prevent me and my group from campaigning, in the future too, for a situation in which ethical limits upon medical research and therapy are all complied with.

It is human dignity which provides the decisive standard.

- We have had a lengthy debate in this house on the patenting of biotechnology.

I myself, together with other Green deputies, warned of the consequences at the time.

Specifically, I warned that to make patents on human genes or part of human genes would jeopardise the freedom of research and impede the progress of medicine.

Genetic information can only be discovered, it cannot be invented.

Commercialisation of the knowledge of the human genome, which has been accumulated by research in many parts of the world, would jeopardise the medical application of this important scientific knowledge about the human body and its functions.

The human genome and its sequences should not be patentable.

The granting of this patent by the European Patent Office is deeply shocking and must be revoked.

- My vote in this matter is in support of the need to ensure that the European Patent Office improves its procedures to prevent any patent being used in human cloning.

The University of Edinburgh' s application for this patent has nothing to do with cloning (cloning was considered impossible when the patent was filed!)

It is established and legitimate practice in both academic and biopharmaceutical research to genetically manipulate human cells in tissue culture.

This has been done for many years and is a major method of learning how genes and cells function.

It bears no relation to genetic manipulation of people or embryos.

It is misleading to suggest that the object of this patent is to genetically manipulate humans.

The University of Edinburgh have indicated their willingness to cooperate with any suitable modification of the patent.

It think it should be made clear that the potential application of this patent in human cells is to guide the production of particular cells that could be useful in transplantation therapy for conditions such as Parkinson' s disease, strokes, diabetes and heart failure.

This is what the Edinburgh research is about.

- (SV) On 8 December 1999, the European Patent Office approved 'by mistake' Patent No EP 69 53 51 concerning the genetic manipulation of human cells and embryos.

As a Swedish Social Democratic Member of the European Parliament, I have supported that resolution which now very firmly repudiates the European Patent Office' s decision, a decision which is contrary to people' s moral concepts and to EU and national legislation concerning patent law which applies within the European Union.

By means of this explanation of vote, I want to express my anger and very deep disappointment at the fact that the European Patent Office can deal with a question about life itself in such a totally and indefensibly careless and negligent way.

At the same time, I presume that the European Patent Office as an authority, and its representatives personally, are drawing the necessary conclusions from what has happened.

This totally unacceptable decision on a patent concerning the genetic manipulation of human cells and embryos must consequently be rescinded and revoked as soon as possible, and this in order to protect life, the greatest and most sacred gift we have.

- I would like to first congratulate those who have drafted and voted on Directive 98/44/EC which is a step forward in the protection of the human being.

Unfortunately, companies have already been developing and patenting cloning techniques.

While they state that they support the ban on 'reproductive cloning' , they have already patented and commercialised human closed cells in order to treat age-related and degenerative diseases.

A patent for these techniques has been granted in the UK since August of 1995.

While I understand the argument that bona fide cloning experimentation may contribute to scientific advances which would alleviate human suffering, I must point out that there exists a loophole for the totally unacceptable usage of the human embryo at the stage of stem cells, cultures 'out of their natural environment' .

Indeed, this experimentation, under the guise of 'therapeutic cloning' is already patented, and the object of ongoing research.

In light of this reality, I would ask the Commission to issue a particular reference to the patenting of the human embryo at the stage of stem cells.

Scientific research is now doing more than explore and analyse the world, it is changing it.

The Patent office has acknowledged a 'linguistic' mistake which does not seem to be entirely corroborated by Article 11 of the description of the intervention.

A mistake like that becomes symbolic, a sort of Freudian slip, and it has impelled us today to hold this fundamental debate on cloning, certainly, but above all on whether the living organism should be patented.

Soon we will be cloning our pets. Just recently there was the statement by Bill Clinton and Tony Blair on free access to the genetic heritage of human beings, plants, animals and genes have been patented, and Craig Venter claims to own 97% of the human genome.

GM corn, manipulation of the living organism, transplanting animal organs into human beings - we are entering unknown territory and there are great fears we must confront.

Why should we put our trust in science alone in this new context?

The issues and debates we face are increasingly complex and politicians will soon have to be multilingual and multicultural scientific experts as well, if they want to understand and not accept the word of experts as gospel.

As elected representatives and citizens, we are outpaced by issues where the scientific component is too strong.

Science and the experts are suffering the consequences of serious crises (for instance, mad cow disease) and indeed the implications of crises to come, because they cannot tell us what the results of their interventions will be: dissemination of GMOs in the environment, manipulation of the living organism, genetic manipulation.

Science itself seems outpaced by the onward rush of sorcerer' s apprentices with no longer any taboos, moral boundaries or ethics.

Their research laboratories, which long ago became ivory towers, are increasingly surrounded by the business offices which are proliferating in this new biological El Dorado between knowledge and profit.

There is plenty of money at stake.

Will the political authorities have the power to regulate this new market and ensure that the ethical dimension is respected in genetics?

Or will we soon find ourselves in the kind of world depicted in that excellent film 'Gattaca' ?

It is not enough for the Patent Office to acknowledge a mistake and make its excuses.

There are so many uncertainties at the legal and moral level, about the future acceptability of patents applied for, which are currently in the thousands.

The debate about the moral boundaries of biotechnology and how to control them has begun.

Categories of 'forbidden knowledge' must certainly be created but without making the mistake of those who condemned Copernicus, Harvey (the heart is not the repository of the soul, but a large organ), or Jenner (the smallpox vaccine).

I declare adjourned the session of the European Parliament.

(The sitting was closed at 12.40 p.m.)

I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday 30 March 2000.

Madam President, for the past six months to a year, the Committee on Development and Cooperation has been calling on the Commission to do something about the drought in Ethiopia.

Nothing has been done although there was an instant reaction from the Commission when the fact that 12 million people are under threat of famine in Ethiopia came to public attention.

I suggest that this week, as a matter of urgency, Commissioner Nielson be called to this House to explain the delay by the European Union in responding to a drought that has been continuing for the past three years.

We seem to be able to get weapons there for the Eritreans and Ethiopians to continue the war of aggression against each other over nonsensical issues and, at the same time, while the European Union and the Western World export weapons to Ethiopia and to Eritrea, the famine continues and the lives of millions and millions of people are threatened.

I have been in this House since 1984, and rarely have I seen such neglect - such wilful neglect - by the European Union in dealing with a famine of this kind that we knew was on our doorstep.

It is a great shame that every time an issue like this is raised with Commissioner Nielson, or raised with the Commission, he passes it off as if it did not matter - as if he did not believe this was happening.

Commissioner Nielson must come to this House and explain his use of PR men and spin doctors in this disgraceful display of neglect.

Despite statements to the contrary, they can most certainly get two billion dollars' worth of weapons into the conflict in Ethiopia and Eritrea.

The whole issue is a reflection on the inability of this House to act.

Mr Andrews, there is of course no need to start a debate on the subject.

I should just like to point out that in a few moments the House will be voting on whether to add another item to the 'Human Rights' section and one of the proposals made by two groups is specifically to do with the problem of the famine in Ethiopia.

Madam President, as many of us know, last Friday saw the inauguration in Vienna of the Monitoring Centre for Racism, Xenophobia and Antisemitism.

I would like to thank you for your forceful intervention.

At this very important juncture, you said that racism, xenophobia and antisemitism are totally incompatible with the defence of human rights and the dignity of the human person.

You stated this very clearly and powerfully and thus sent a message of confidence to the people of Austria and to all the other peoples of Europe.

Many MEPs, representing almost all the Parliamentary groups and many of the Member States, were present, as of course were many Austrian MEPs and the President of the Committee on Citizens' Rights, Graham Watson.

They all asked me - and I am very willing to act as their messenger - to thank you for your speech, which made us proud to be Members of this House.

Thank you, Mr Imbeni, for your extremely kind words.

I would like to tell all the Members of Parliament who attended this moving and very important ceremony how well I believe we all represented the European Parliament, and I know that none of the participants failed to notice our attendance in large numbers.

I believe it was very important for this House.

Thank you, Mr Imbeni, for your comments.

Madam President, if I have been informed correctly, the Council has postponed its statement on Iraq and it will not now be made this week.

Would it be possible for you to ask the Council to make a statement on Ethiopia in place of the statement on Iraq?

This point would then be filled, depending, of course, on whether the Council is able to oblige.

Mr Hänsch, we shall deal with this point when we come to the draft agenda in a few moments, and we shall make a decision at that time as to how to handle the situation.

Madam President, I should like to draw your attention to an internal matter.

Some members of staff of the European Parliament both here and in Brussels, when they try to enforce European Parliament rules - in other words, no smoking in no-smoking areas or any of the other European Parliament rules - are sworn at and abused by some Members of Parliament.

In other parliaments ushers are treated with the respect that they deserve.

I would hope that happened in the European Parliament.

If the situation does not improve, do you know if there are any disciplinary procedures we could take against those Members who treat the staff in such a disrespectful manner?

Disciplinary procedures? I do not think so, but I do promise to consider very carefully the comments you have made regarding both the no-smoking areas and attitudes towards the ushers.

Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, reading the international press is an interesting activity should one wish to know how certain MEPs keep themselves occupied here.

Most of the time, the press reports are read with a certain element of interest, fascination or surprise, bearing in mind that the European Parliament is a House which comprises many chambers. One can form one' s own opinion and keep quiet.

However, there was one incident last week about which we cannot keep quiet any longer.

During an outing as part of his election campaign, a prominent Member of this House, Mr Berlusconi, thought it necessary to make extremely hurtful jokes - they were not even remarks - about people dying of the terrible disease of AIDS.

You will have to forgive me if I tell you what Mr Berlusconi said, but I think it is difficult to judge if you do not know the content.

Mr Berlusconi made the following joke: do you know why an AIDS sufferer needs to take a bath filled with sand?

The answer is in order to get used to lying in the soil.

These words were spoken by a Member of this House.

I refuse to believe that anyone here would keep calm if this joke was aimed at Jews or blacks.

I think that a reaction from yourself, Madam President, would be wholly appropriate.

I would, at the same time, ask the chairman and leader of the Group of the European People' s Party (Christian Democrats) and European Democrats for his opinion on this matter. I can only say that these remarks have shocked me deeply.

In solidarity with all the millions of people who suffer from this terrible disease, I can only express my shame on behalf of the honourable Member, Silvio Berlusconi.

The Member you have quoted is not here to answer you or to defend himself...

Madam President, we have read in the newspapers that five million euros' worth of Parliament property has been purloined and that Parliament' s finances have been poorly managed.

In addition, a report by the Court of Auditors of the European Communities is due shortly on the use of resources by Parliament' s political groups, and it is not a flattering picture.

These are big issues, and Parliament must address them seriously.

I wish to speak about some small matters which I would not normally raise in the parliamentary plenary session, but it is astonishing that the bureaucratic machinery of the House is unable to rectify such small matters.

I have already, on many occasions, bemoaned the fact here in plenary that Parliament' s television system fails to produce a picture for Finnish television.

Finland is the only country whose television picture cannot be picked up in Parliament.

I would have hoped that such a small matter as this would be sorted out.

The Dutch often complained about the lack of Dutch television during parliamentary part sessions.

They now get two channels, and I hope that we Finns will now get at least one.

And then, might we not still hope for hot water in the pipes, which has not been available during this new Parliament' s term of office?

I have already complained about this on various occasions in parliamentary sittings.

What is the problem with you bureaucrats, that you cannot sort these things out in this House?

Meanwhile you allow five million euros to be stolen!

It is not just a little detail.

You are probably aware of the considerable effort that went into arranging for our Dutch Members to have a television channel in their own language, and the problem with regard to Finland has not yet been resolved.

Mrs Banotti, who is dealing with the matter, will be able to give you the latest details.

Madam President, at least three times I went searching for our Finnish colleague to assure him, as I was assured in the last plenary part-session, that he would be handed a card that would enable him to not just hear, but to see Finnish television in Parliament.

I am really sorry that he has not been handed that card.

I will attend to it this week.

In the College of Quaestors we have also discussed - because we too are concerned - robberies that are taking place within Parliament.

I can assure you that the Quaestors are working on it.

Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, considerable changes have been made to the proposed agenda.

Reports have been shifted around and time slots have even been changed.

Tomorrow we will start at 8.30 a.m. for the first time.

One would have hoped that, due to a heavy agenda, the reports would be spread evenly over these five full days here at Strasbourg, but that is not the case: on Friday, two reports have been dropped and only three oral questions are down on the agenda.

We are now faced with a dilemma.

As elected members of our national parliaments, we represent our electorate and this must be reflected in all votes. However, the agenda for Fridays, for this Friday and for previous Fridays, is often so light that many MEPs genuinely believe that they can spend their time more productively in their own countries.

I therefore wonder how we are to fulfil our obligations in the best way?

I have talked extensively to MEPs from various groups on this matter and we concluded that Parliament must make a choice: either we give the agenda on Fridays sufficient weight so that more Members attend the votes or we do away with it altogether.

This is not an anti-Strasbourg campaign but a plea for more Members to be present during the votes and also for an increase in Parliament' s prestige.

You received an e-mail last week about our intention to apply for the quorum on Friday. The Conference of Presidents has also received a letter on this matter.

However, the agenda is not heavier as a result. If anything, as I have already stated, this coming Friday' s agenda is lighter.

Our plans, therefore, remain unchanged, and this means that if, on Friday, the necessary 209 Members are not present, then the vote will not take place.

This is something about which we wanted to give you plenty of notice, so as to enable you, by being either present or absent, and not just by what you affirm, to make it known what you want on Fridays: to make the agenda more substantial or abolish it.

Ladies and gentlemen, I would ask you, please, not to use points of order to start a debate on this matter which would keep us here all night.

In return, I promise that I shall raise the matter at the Conference of Presidents.

The Group leaders have heard your points.

There clearly is a problem and it is one that we shall examine at the Conference of Presidents when the next agenda is determined and, of course, more generally after that.

Madam President, I would like to very briefly respond to Mr Seppänen very briefly; not regarding the matter of Finnish television, but the first point which he raised.

I am aware, of course, that about 10 days ago a certain article from the European Voice was recycled again and again across Europe.

As rapporteur for the discharge of our own institution' s budget, I would have appreciated it if Mr Seppänen had taken the trouble to cast an eye over my report, which expressly and critically dealt with the issue of the inventory and which was available in all languages to all my colleagues here in the House from 10 February.

I would also appreciate it if we could use this as an opportunity to take a little more interest in our own documents, our own recommendations for decisions, which are equally critical, not least of ourselves, rather than just giving knee-jerk reactions to certain press agencies.

- (PT) Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, I would like to draw the attention of the President, and of the Bureau in general, to a point of order raised in today' s sitting, which I consider to be extremely important.

In the Dimitrakopoulos-Leinen report, which is due to be debated on Wednesday, there is a paragraph, which I shall read in the original French:

"Les affaires du Parlement européen ne peuvent pas faire l'objet d'un recours juridictionnel." [No actions may be brought in connection with the interna corporis affairs of the European Parliament.]

I consider this to be extremely serious. It is a gross violation of fundamental rights, it is a violation of a fundamental principle of the rule of law and betrays a totalitarian ideology.

In my opinion, the Bureau should rule that a report which has these characteristics is inadmissible.

I would therefore like to draw the President' s attention to this matter, quite frankly, and say that, if it is retained in Wednesday' s agenda, I reserve the right to table a motion under Rule 143 of the Rules of Procedure.

Thank you, Mr Ribeiro, we shall look into your statement very carefully.

Madam President, I would like to bring to your attention an incident last week where two football fans were tragically murdered on their way to watch their team play in the UEFA Cup.

Football is a sport which transcends the world.

It is known as a beautiful game.

In about three months Belgium and Holland will play host to Euro 2000.

There is every likelihood that incidents such as those that happened last week will be repeated again in Belgium and Holland.

Can I ask you, through your good offices, to contact all the Member States who are involved, to try and keep such problems to a minimum?

We have often voted on recommendations on sports-related violence and what you tell us is rather worrying.

Madam President, Mr Hänsch made an important observation a moment ago and, since his point forms part of the agenda as a whole, I would like to add my thoughts as well.

First of all, I would like to say that the Group of the European People' s Party (Christian Democrats) and European Democrats supports the proposal, now that the Council' s declaration on Iraq is not taking place, to replace Iraq with Ethiopia.

This is a very sensible suggestion in my view.

We would also like to see Iraq treated as an Urgency because, eventually, Parliament will need to pass its verdict. Just because the Council is not ready, that does not mean that we in Parliament cannot bring the matter up for discussion.

On a final note: we would appreciate it very much, partly in the light of the alarming television pictures we have seen lately, if Zimbabwe too were to be included under the human rights heading.

We have a comprehensive package which will probably enable us to cover all the points which are important to this Parliament.

Mr van Velzen, you will have the opportunity to make your comments in just a moment, as we are about to move on to the agenda.

The next item is the examination of the final version of the draft agenda as drawn up by the Conference of Presidents pursuant to Rule 110 of the Rules of Procedure.

Sittings in Strasbourg from 10 to 14 April 2000:

The Council has informed us that it did not wish to make a statement on Iraq at the present time.

We of course regret this, but the fact remains.

We have no means to force the Council to make a statement.

This being the case, I had a request from the Group of the Party of European Socialists to bring forward the Council and Commission statements on the Turkish situation, which are currently scheduled for Wednesday 12 April.

Their proposal was to enter these items on the agenda instead of the statement on Iraq.

Let me turn now to Mr Hänsch.

You wish to amend this request, and to have a statement on the Ethiopian famine instead of the statement on Iraq - and, if I have understood correctly, this latter request is supported by Mr van Velzen, on behalf of the PPE Group - and to leave the debate on Turkey as originally scheduled.

Madam President, we would prefer Turkey to be given priority, although if we move it from Wednesday to Tuesday, then there is still room to discuss Ethiopia on Wednesday, if the Council agrees.

Madam President, I do not think that proposal is such a good one because, if I am properly informed, the Council will not be attending on Wednesday. I would prefer it if we could hold the debate on Ethiopia when the Council is present.

Madam President, I would suggest that this will give us the opportunity to adopt a short resolution on Ethiopia.

Regarding the topical and urgent subjects of major importance, I have a number of proposed amendments.

First of all, a request from the Liberal Group to replace the first item, 'Non-proliferation treaty' , with a new item entitled 'Iraq' .

Madam President, it would be a great help to many of us if we could vote on item IV first, for I believe there is a large majority in favour of our proposal under item IV.

We shall then be able to withdraw our proposal under item I.

In other words, Mr Haarder, you would like us to move directly to the proposal to replace item IV 'World forum on education' with an item on 'Iraq' , which you tabled in case your first proposal was not adopted.

If I have understood - please correct me if I am wrong - you are going to withdraw your request to replace the item on the 'Non-proliferation Treaty' , and it is item IV that we shall be replacing, if the House agrees, of course.

Unless you want us to proceed directly to the vote on replacing item IV?

Madam President, I should be glad if we could vote on item IV before I decide about that.

Madam President, if I have understood correctly, the Liberal Group has moved that the point concerning the non-proliferation treaty be replaced by Iraq.

For goodness sake, let' s vote on it!

If you want to cancel that and put Iraq in place of the world forum on training, then you must move that and we will then vote on it under item IV when it' s the world forum' s turn.

Madam President, since we now have Ethiopia, which we wanted to add, elsewhere on the agenda, I would like to ask the mover of the motion whether he would agree to adding Zimbabwe as a fifth point.

It is okay to have five points.

If we take Zimbabwe as an additional point, we could vote for it.

The originators of the proposal seem to be happy to agree to that.

There is therefore no need to vote on this proposal since it has been withdrawn.

I then received five proposals to add a fifth sub-item to the 'Human Rights' section.

Madam President, I would like to be clear that if we have agreed that Zimbabwe would be the fifth point then there is no point in voting in any other points because we already have five points on the agenda.

Mr Elles, first of all, I am going to suggest that we enter Zimbabwe as the fifth sub-item in the 'Human Rights' section, since I believe that is in line with what we have just agreed.

It is up to the House to decide.

I think we are all in agreement.

I shall, however, at least notify you of the other proposals, if only out of consideration for the Members and the groups which tabled them.

So, I have the proposal regarding Zimbabwe.

Next, I have a request from the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance for a sub-item on 'Human rights violations in Australia: arbitrary judgements against aborigines' .

The proposal for an item on the Ethiopian famine has been withdrawn.

Then there were the proposals for the item on Zimbabwe which I have already brought forward as the first item, and the proposal from the liberal group to add a sub-item on 'Pinochet' .

Who is in favour of entering Zimbabwe as the fifth sub-item in the Human Rights section?

(Parliament gave its assent) Relating to Friday:

Regarding the oral questions on forestry, the Group of the Party of European Socialists has requested that the debate should conclude with the submission of motions for resolutions which may be tabled but not voted on.

Is there anyone who wishes to speak in favour of or against this proposal?

Madam President, I would like to speak in favour of adopting a resolution in connection with the oral question to the Commission on the consequences of last December' s storms.

The citizens would not understand it if we simply held a debate without then saying what proposed solutions and options the European Union can offer.

I therefore ask that a resolution be taken in connection with the oral question.

Do you mean after the oral question on the storms?

I do not think that would be a problem.

Sittings in Brussels on 3 and 4 May: no amendments.

(The order of business was adopted thus amended)

The next item is the report (A5-0090/2000) by Mr Kirkhope, on behalf of the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs, on the initiative of the Republic of Austria with a view to adopting a Council Decision to combat child pornography on the Internet [10317/1999 - C5-0318/1999 - 1999/0822(CNS)].

Madam President, in 1996 I had the great honour of representing the UK Government at the World Congress, which was held in Stockholm, Sweden, under United Nations auspices, on the subject of the sexual exploitation of children.

At that time we took a number of initiatives which we believed would help children, the most vulnerable section of our society.

Mostly they were concerned with issues such as sex tourism and general abuse in countries all over the world.

They did not, in general, relate to matters concerned with the Internet - this new technology, which has come in at an enormous pace in the last few years; a new technology which has the ability to do good things but also the ability to do evil things.

There are very few regulations which are concerned with what the Internet is used for.

Whilst a lot of countries are keen to see their citizens benefit from the good things it can offer and whilst e-commerce itself is becoming a major feature of life, we have not yet seen any proper regulations to protect those who are abused, and particularly those who are abused by the use of images of themselves in a pornographic manner.

That is the reason for my report - to protect children, to try and help children to avoid being abused in this particular manner.

My report, for the first time, puts forward a definition.

We have been short of a definition until now.

Although there was an initial Austrian initiative, which this report supports, it did not contain a definition.

In our report we have entered a definition which we hope will be acceptable internationally.

We can only deal with this matter if we deal with it in an international fashion.

We are only dealing with it at European level now, but hopefully the world will react, whether it be through the auspices of the United Nations once more or, indeed, through the common sense of other countries.

If we are lucky, we will see a world approach to outlaw these very bad practices.

We have required within our report that European nation states should have action plans for dealing with the abuses which take place.

We are concerned with the production, sale, distribution and deliberate possession of pornographic images showing children.

We want to stamp out this appalling abuse.

In our report we wish to make sure that police authorities throughout Europe take action to deal with these matters.

We want to encourage and, indeed, in some circumstances, require nation states to look at their present laws, to make sure that they are able to investigate these abuses and bring people who abuse children in this way before the appropriate courts.

We are faced with a difficult task, not only in regard to the definition which we have decided to offer, but also because so many countries have different attitudes as to what, for instance, is a child.

We have tried to reach a compromise in our deliberations.

I believe that we have managed to do so.

I wish to offer my thanks, as rapporteur, to all those who have been concerned, not only on my own committee - the Committee on Citizen's Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs - but also on the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market and on the Committee on Culture, Youth, Education, the Media and Sport as well.

We have had nothing but positive contributions.

In my own committee this report was adopted with 27 votes in favour and one abstention.

That I regard as very helpful and a good sign for the future.

Because of all the support for this initiative, both within the committees and from public reaction, I am very hopeful that once it has been considered by Parliament it will be taken up and put into effect and will assist in protecting that vulnerable section of society that needs protection in this fast-moving and growing area of new technology.

Madam President, child pornography is a loathsome form of crime.

Measures at transnational level are required, especially due to the denationalised nature of the Internet.

I would like to congratulate the rapporteur, Mr Kirkhope, for his most excellent report.

In this regard, it is perhaps particularly pleasing that it is from Great Britain that Mr Kirkhope comes.

It is good that he has defined child pornography, and I believe we have arrived at a satisfactory compromise.

It is particularly good that Mr Kirkhope has also stated that everything that has the appearance of being child pornography shall also be included under this definition.

Contact points or special units shall be set up in the Member States according to the draft.

This will hopefully lead to better investigations.

There is a need for more expertise in this area if it is to be possible to carry out professional investigations.

Europol will be involved, as will the candidate countries.

It is a good thing that crime in third countries will be punished in accordance with national legislation.

The definition of "children" - that is, the age up until which a person is to be considered a child - has been formulated in order to show that we want to create the most effective level of protection where child pornography is concerned.

Our line of argument allows for flexibility in defining the age-limit that strikes the hardest blow to child pornography.

It is a question of creating the most effective protection for children so that they are able to hold on to the childhood that they are entitled to.

All children should have the right to a childhood!

That ought to be a basic human right.

For many years the European Parliament, the Member States and a whole range of organisations, by virtue of various legal bases, agreements and resolutions, have been tackling the issues of child protection, children' s rights, sexual abuse, sexual exploitation, sex tourism, trade in children and women and child pornography on the Internet.

The initiative of the Republic of Austria with a view to adopting a Council Decision to combat child pornography on the Internet will place an obligation on the Member States, and obligation is the crucial word here, to take measures to combat child pornography on the Internet.

This obligation must have legal implications.

The importance of the Internet is obvious to us all.

It has come to be indispensable as a modern communication tool.

We need it for exchanging information, for learning and for all sorts of operations.

However, increased use of the Internet also means increased access to violence and pornography, not least child pornography.

Children themselves have access to violence on the Internet, which must be objectionable to us all.

Parents are powerless in the face of this phenomenon because they cannot keep up with this technological progress.

We are extremely concerned, especially in the new MEDIA 2000 programme which is being drawn up, as to how we should deal with this problem in the future.

Consequently, an urgent need has arisen to combat child pornography on the Internet effectively.

This requires efficient software to determine the country of origin, to trace the images and to catch the perpetrators and those producing the images.

This in turn requires extremely advanced technology.

We need specialists who can develop access codes, which will also necessitate certain restrictions being placed on media freedom.

We need to network all the relevant organisations, the welfare organisations and NGOs, to facilitate rapid action and effective procedures.

However, we must not forget one thing: the main reason why children are forced into this is poverty.

We must combat poverty and intolerance and take this as our starting point.

This is the key to prevention.

It means that we must understand the children, but also that we must protect the victims, offer them assistance in reintegrating and help them to rediscover a normal life.

We must not, therefore, simply act in a preventative fashion; we must offer long-term help to those children affected.

- (PT) Madam President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, the need has grown over the last ten years for a policy for children, based on the 1989 United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child, which has been ratified by all Member States.

The attention that has been paid to this issue has increased considerably in all Member States.

Nevertheless, at European Union level, even though children represent around one fifth of the Union' s population, specific attention is very rarely paid to their needs in economic policies and in other areas.

Thousands of children all over the world suffer serious and systematic violations of their fundamental rights, from domestic cruelty, which goes undetected and unpunished, and the economic exploitation of their labour, which robs them of their childhood and education, to their use in war; from being forced to play the horrific role of child-soldier to their use in prostitution or pornography.

According to the estimates of the Economic and Social Committee, there are more than five million children working in Europe. Most of these children work in areas such as pornography, drug trafficking, child pornography and sexual tourism.

These children are in particular need of society' s protection.

The evolution of the Internet, its incredibly rapid development and its importance today raise the question of its use for these reprehensible purposes.

In the last part-session, here in Strasbourg, we discussed what needs to be done about the Internet. The European Union' s desire is to make more rapid progress in terms of e-commerce and to make a firmer commitment to the new technologies and to education.

Today we have been discussing what we need to prevent and combat, and that is the circulation and distribution of child pornography, which has been increasing at an alarming rate.

And although it may be true that we have to encourage web-site administrators and service providers to define their standards of conduct and to regulate themselves, and encourage Internet users to inform the authorities whenever they discover child pornography, it is nevertheless true that Union and national law bear some responsibility.

Mr Kirkhope' s excellent report makes it very clear how much we still have to do and where we need to improve, in terms of establishing specialist units, strengthening cooperation and exchanges between States, in terms of Europol' s activities and the efficiency of Member States' actions, including, where necessary, the revision of their own legislation and the procedures in force in these areas so that we can guarantee the effective imposition of criminal sanctions.

As far as the responsibility of the Union itself is concerned, I am delighted at the fact that the Charter of Fundamental Rights that is being drawn up considers the specific rights of children, and takes account of the areas in which the Union can provide considerable impetus, specifically in these matters.

Madam President, in my opinion perversion is undoubtedly on the increase if, in addition to a child being sexually exploited, the event is recorded, in whatever fashion, and then reused for financial gain.

These events are occurring every day, every hour and perhaps every minute.

The perpetrators are using the most up-to-date technology to distribute their material and in the Internet they have found a medium which is more suited than any other to acting anonymously.

Paedophiles are limited only by their own technical capability or the equipment which they can afford.

When seen against its virtually unlimited potential, society and the state have thus far had very little at their disposal to counter illegal activity on the Internet, in particular since cyberspace has no states or geographical and political borders and its alluring feature is its worldwide accessibility.

The Internet itself cannot commit crimes.

What is criminal is the behaviour of some 3 to 5% of Internet users who misuse the Net for illegal purposes.

95 to 97% of the Internet is legal.

The Internet is therefore a reflection of society as a whole.

Just as in the real world, crime is very much a part of the virtual world.

All the same, the Internet is not beyond the law.

The problem of crime on the Internet cannot be resolved by any state in isolation.

For this we need uniform worldwide crimes and definitions so that law enforcement authorities can work together in global terms and not in opposition.

In the area of child pornography in particular, where the rights of children are continually being trampled underfoot, there is an urgent need for global regulation.

The EU has already taken several measures towards this, which I will not go into any further here.

I would like to congratulate Mr Kirkhope on his report.

Nevertheless, to effectively combat child pornography, it is necessary, in my opinion, for Europol to be immediately informed of cases of child pornography and for the exchange of information with the competent authorities to be carried out quickly and directly, as stated in Amendment No 20 from Gerhard Schmid.

All the proposed measures are suitable and necessary to effectively combat child pornography.

However, we must not forget that, in addition to the technological and police measures, we must also combat poverty, ignorance and prejudice in order to improve society' s image of children and children' s image of themselves and to offer help to the victims; thus far, victim support has played too insignificant a role.

We need a social climate in which the victims of vile crimes are not left to fend for themselves whilst the perpetrators are shielded through failure to act and fear of embarrassing revelations.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I would like to thank Mr Kirkhope for his excellent report.

There is no doubt in anybody' s mind: the physical and emotional integrity of children and the protection of victims of sexual crimes are of fundamental importance and must lie at the heart of the Union's concerns.

Despite earlier initiatives by the Commission and Parliament, the misuse of the Internet and its harmful and illegal content have only increased, and it is time and again apparent how difficult it is to combat child pornography.

What exactly needs to be done in order to combat child pornography effectively, especially on the Internet?

First of all, we need to set up an easily accessible and recognisable contact point.

In fact, the Netherlands was the first country to set up such a contact point back in 1996, on the initiative of the Internet providers.

Secondly, for the purposes of enforcement, police forces and the judiciary need more expertise regarding the Internet and ancillary digital technology. This is simply lacking.

Officials need to be trained well, otherwise they will be unable to combat child pornography effectively.

Lastly, the penalties must be harmonised in Europe and must be increased. If not, the Internet will remain a threat and it will never be the challenge which it could be.

Mr President, Commissioner Vitorino, ladies and gentlemen, firstly, I would like to congratulate Mr Kirkhope. In fact, his name fills us with hope.

Mr Kirkhope' s document has lifted the lid on a great deal - a great deal of child suffering and human suffering.

We are delighted that there is now a definition at long last.

Secondly, that this phenomenon must be increasingly brought into the open and binding measures must be drafted. This includes setting up contact points, such as those in Belgium and the Netherlands, and also in the other EU Member States and candidate countries.

After all, there is quite obviously a correlation between child pornography on the Internet and trafficking in children. This correlation is evident in the countries of origin, the transit countries and the host countries in the European Union.

This is also borne out by the studies carried out by police forces in this field with regard to under-age asylum seekers. They disappear on their own, or even accompanied, from asylum centres and reappear within the world of prostitution.

This correlation is also evident in the case of possibly kidnapped and missing children. Recently, mothers recognised their own children on a porn website which could be viewed at police stations in France.

We also know that details of people' s identity are used or misused by people with connections in the world of child porn websites. In order to conceal their own identity, they use the bank details of others.

In order to stamp out child pornography, we need a multi-disciplinary approach. The police and criminal investigation services must be able to do their jobs well.

This means that the politicians need to ensure that the police can do its job effectively.

The police within the European Union work differently from the police in some candidate countries, as other MEPs have already pointed out.

Politicians too should believe that child pornography exists on the Internet.

The NGOs are doing a great job.

To finish off, I would like to point out that some pimps use the Internet to distribute photographs of young people engaged in prostitution.

Mr President, Mr Kirkhope' s report has the virtue of drawing the Council' s attention to a dreadful criminal activity.

While I support the action stipulated by the report, and I too would like to congratulate the rapporteur, I still think the proposed measures do not match up to the scale of the problem before us.

The Internet thus has formative and demultiplying effects on the trade and traffic in child pornography.

This trafficking is on a scale hitherto unknown in terms of its extent and the geographical areas covered.

It is an urgent state of affairs, and specific action must be proposed in order to deal with the networks that exist.

In all the States of the Union, individual paedophile acts are suppressed, but ignorance and inefficiency still reign in the suppression of networks.

What we have to deal with here are ephemeral, evolving sites, which adapt constantly and which are complicated to monitor.

This state of affairs makes it essential to draw up a survey of paedophile networks within the countries of the European Union.

The existence of these networks confirms the need for a common judicial area.

Once again, the rapporteur urges the Union to approach the Member States, and ask them to make an effort to harmonise their national legislation in this area.

I share his opinion but, given the cross-border nature of the problem, the response must be at Union level.

The common judicial area does exist with Europol, Schengen and Eurodac.

Let it be noted that it is used primarily, and indeed exclusively, to control the flow of migration and to suppress illegal immigration.

But even if action was undertaken in each Member State to create specialised units working in liaison, as the report advocates, that would not solve the problem of the networks because their work would still be restricted by national borders.

There is no problem identifying the parties involved in trafficking child pornography, who are often repeat offenders.

What is needed is prevention, in order to counter their activities and to dismantle their networks.

The European Union must provide itself with a suitable structure, a European instrument to enforce information exchange and action.

This instrument must be such as to make it possible to address States directly in order to urge them to pass on information, but also to issue orders so that the networks can be dismantled.

The Union should be in a position to apply penalties to any State which does not fulfil its criminal law obligations in the matter of combating paedophilia.

The Dutch police have drawn up a file of several hundred children from a CD-ROM containing 10 000 images or sequences of child pornography available on the Internet.

Interpol has acknowledged having a file of 800 photos.

Why are these valuable documents not used?

Who are these children and what is being done to locate them?

If there are records of offenders, it must be possible to keep records of victims.

It is our duty, ethically, as human beings, to do everything we can to find them.

For all these reasons I think the European Union must make combating this form of crime a priority.

Mr Kirkhope' s report is filled with good intentions, but further proposals must be made in order to deal with the present situation.

I think the Commission and the Council should take action which is up to the task of dealing with the high stakes of this crime that affects thousands of innocents.

Mr President, in the wake of Mrs Klamt' s report on sex tourism, Mr Kirkhope' s excellent report takes us back to a debate on one of the sordid moral deviancies in this modern society of ours.

The action proposed by the Austrian Government is heading in the right direction, which is that of strengthening the prosecution of anyone deliberately producing, selling, disseminating or owning materials relating to the sexual exploitation of children.

What, however, are we to think of the limited personnel and financial resources allocated at the present time to the police departments responsible for monitoring Internet networks, which are, by definition, worldwide ones?

To govern, however, means to make plans.

And we have to investigate the deep-seated reasons for this scourge in order to attempt to find an effective cure for the problem.

Admittedly, there is at root the unspeakable vice of certain parties, whose possible distress could never be any justification for these crimes, and the lure of easy profits for the producers and distributors of documents of this type.

We must bring our attention to bear, however, on the economic poverty of the parents who are led to exploit their own children in order to survive, or the poverty of abandoned and defenceless children who have lost their points of reference, and think this is their only way out of the situation.

Our society, and often this House, claims that the future of humanity is freedom without responsibility and rights without duties.

We are now paying the price for this permissiveness which some parties have been championing as the way of progress for over thirty years, but what progress do we see, except progress in the loneliness of our peers, the broken families and the children left to fend for themselves who, almost naturally, turn to drug addiction, sexual promiscuity, sects and alcoholism.

Respect for human dignity, as the Council decision rightly claims, first involves the uncompromising affirmation of the destructive nature of these abuses and also involves appropriate policies which, in Europe and in third countries, enable families to accommodate, educate and protect their children, and enable children to regain their essential points of reference, which are goodness, truth and beauty.

The legitimately and ultimately repressive message of this report will only be heard and be useful if, at the same time, we clearly reassert the basis of a life-enhancing culture, a culture which respects life, applicable to all people in all places, and if, at Member State and Union level, we provide the practical resources necessary to achieve this.

Mr President, many comments have been made on Mr Kirkhope' s report, which makes many interesting points, and I would like to do more than add a few banal observations to these comments, but I shall nonetheless begin by saying, first of all, that child pornography is the product of essentially two phenomena.

The first phenomenon is the boom in pornography in general, and the second is, obviously, the exploitation of children for sexual purposes.

I mention the boom in pornography in general because I do not think it is possible to isolate child pornography completely from the rest.

The consumer experiences a phenomenon of habituation, if I can call it that, in the face of the incitements to pornography displayed on television, in hotel chains (and that includes here in Strasbourg or Brussels) or in all the magazines in view on shop shelves, and necessarily is driven ultimately to seek ever stronger stimuli, like a drug addict.

This is what happens, and that is why those people who, in France in 1987, for example, thought it right, in the name of freedom, to strenuously oppose the common-sense measure of removing pornographic magazines from display in newsagents' shops, and keeping them under the counter, as it were, have to bear some responsibility for the measures which they are condemning today.

Just now I heard Mrs Ainardi, a left-wing Member of Parliament, complaining, for example, that a number of files have been compiled but are not used in any way for investigation or prosecution purposes, as they should be.

I should simply like to remind my fellow Member that one of the very first measures on jurisdictional, judicial and police matters taken by the left-wing government in France was to order the destruction of the file on sexual perverts.

We should not, therefore, be astonished that our society is in the position that it is in, and that child sex abuse is commonplace.

Is this, though, not also the inevitable continuation of a number of measures which have already been taken?

For example, in the area of trivialising homosexuality.

I am well aware that not all child pornography necessarily...

(Mixed reactions) ... you see, you are proving the truth of what I am trying to say.

Some of our fellow Members who are here condemning child pornography are also demanding, for example, that homosexual couples (indeed why should we limit it to couples?) should be able to adopt children.

This is the total reversal of the idea of adoption, whereby adoption is no longer in the interests of the child adopted but only in the interests of the adopting adult.

This is necessarily the first step on the road which leads ultimately to the deviancies of child pornography.

I know, I am well aware of Mr Schulz' s customary protests.

They are not going to stop me asking whether this horrendous decline in moral standards is not also a continuation of the morality of the termination of unborn children?

Why, when one is prepared to accept state-controlled hospitals organising terminations of unborn children, should one find it absolutely scandalous in moral terms to abuse children, once born, for the sexual pleasure of adults?

That, ladies and gentlemen, is what I wanted to say.

Such practices have met with leniency, as we all know, within the Member States up to and including at the highest levels of their political classes.

We therefore do not want a situation where you cannot see the wood for the trees.

International cooperation is needed in this area, admittedly, as is Europol action, and why do we not extend Interpol' s mandate? If child pornography must be fought, however, then it must be fought as such, whatever the means of transmission!

Whether by personal networks, by telephone, by Minitel, no one considers bringing back censorship or opening mail on the grounds that child pornography may also be sent by post.

The Internet, Minitel, the post are nothing more than the medium.

It is the originators we must combat.

It is not the Internet itself which is to blame, but the child pornographers, and they must be punished severely.

Everyone knows perfectly well that that is not the case today.

Mr President, the pioneers of the Internet saw the electronic highway as the ultimate means of communication and the road towards a new social order.

It was important for it to be subjected to as few rules as possible.

It has since become apparent that the Internet is merely a reflection of our society. In addition to a wealth of information and expertise, it also reflects the criminal underbelly of society, including child pornography.

The nature of the Internet is such that it has become easier to disseminate child pornography anonymously, rapidly and across national borders. This is a good reason to take action against this as a Union.

Our children should be protected against this disrespectful exploitation, which reduces them to mere toys and leaves them damaged for the rest of their lives.

I therefore welcome the Council' s current proposal and Mr Kirkhope' s report with open arms.

I do wonder, however, whether too much is not being asked of the Council through Parliament' s adding new elements to the description of the criminal offence of "child pornography" .

Harmonising criminal law at European level is quite different from creating European criminal law.

Another difficult point is the age limit up to which pornography is considered child pornography. I myself am in favour of an age limit of 18, rather than 16, years.

But the current compromise, in which both ages are mentioned without opting for one or the other, is confusing. I do not think that we can seriously expect the Council to adopt this text, but that does not detract from my appreciation of the work which the rapporteur and the Commission have put in.

Mr President, as someone who is deeply dismayed by the on-going out-of-hand condemnation of Austria by fourteen Member States, I am particularly pleased that the initiative for the report in question has come from Austria.

This matter has preoccupied us for a long time, too long in my opinion.

Its importance is demonstrated by the constantly increasing incidence of such delinquency.

Nevertheless, irrespective of the importance of efficient law enforcement in this area, we must not depart from the principle of criminal-law liability and postulate strict liability.

The report is therefore on the right track.

In my opinion, the most urgent need is to create, as soon as possible, in all Member States and in the candidate countries, the legal and technological capability to search the contents of the Internet for child pornography.

Finally, I would like to reiterate the view which I have held for some years that an obligation must also be placed on providers and, by way of conclusion, may I again stress that it would perhaps be useful to formulate a uniform definition of "children" within the Union.

Children are taking on various ages in this Union.

Mr President, Commissioner, it has already been mentioned on several occasions that the proposal for a joint initiative by all the EU Member States goes back to the initiative of the Austrian Federal Chancellor, Dr Wolfgang Schüssel, who, as Foreign Minister in 1998, presented it to Europe within the framework of the Austrian Council Presidency, as well as to the United Nations in New York, in order to bring about a resumption of the draft joint action to combat pornography on the Internet.

The motivation for this initiative was clearly that all those who wish to make policy for the future must, on the one hand, have the courage to carry out necessary reforms and, on the other, must positively and effectively avail themselves of the opportunities afforded by technological and global development and human resources, all the while taking responsibility for pointing out risks and undesirable developments and for drawing the necessary boundaries.

Anyone who does not take action against children and minors being abused and lead astray is jeopardising the future.

The aim of the Austrian initiative was, as previous speakers have pointed out, to draw attention to the fact that the Internet, given its special nature, offers new and, in the light of its scope, not always positive, opportunities, indeed incredible opportunities for the distribution of child pornography.

Pornographic material can be distributed via the Internet in unlimited amounts and by the most direct route.

There is the danger that children themselves may surf the Internet and come across pornographic images of their peers, thereby sustaining psychological damage.

Combating child pornography and the misuse of the Internet is, therefore, both a worldwide and a specifically European responsibility and we call upon all Member States to take action in light of this report.

We welcome the debate on the age limit.

However, I share the view of the Committee on Culture, Youth, Education, the Media and Sport that we should have fixed the age limit at 18 and I hope that the initiatives will lead to the highest possible age limit being set in all Member States.

We welcome the fact that there will be a uniform definition and I support all measures to also place providers under obligation since today' s discussion can only be the start of a debate and of initiatives and is far from the end.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, in a debate in which so many things have already been said I need not repeat myself, but I cannot fail to respond to two comments by Mr Gollnisch who, unfortunately, as usual, has now left the Chamber.

Mr Gollnisch is a fascist delegate in this House who takes advantage of every opportunity, not least in this Chamber, to slander others.

It is the left-wingers or the gays who are responsible for child pornography.

He beautifully tars everyone with the same brush.

The left-wing French Government is responsible for the abolition of the criminal register of sex offenders and is therefore responsible, in the logic of this arch-fascist, for child pornography.

This is the type of poison which he spouts here.

Then he slips away because the sole reason why this pack of hounds sits in this Parliament is to permanently set upon others and then slink back into its holes to evade the responsibility of debate.

At any rate, these fine people do not participate in parliamentary work and it is time that this was made known because they are only ever speaking for the benefit of the visitors.

Then it all sounds so wonderful.

The reality is that these fine people do not partake in 99% of the work.

They spout their poison and then push off.

I share the opinion of Mr Hager that we should also place an obligation on providers.

I think this is a worthy point which Mr Kirkhope should take into consideration in his report.

I also expressly support the view that we should not move away from criminal-law liability.

It cannot be right to release from criminal-law liability one of the primary areas where human dignity is violated, particularly taking into account the special need to protect minors.

I believe this must be made clear, even if it has sometimes been disputed by the groups on the left.

On this point, Mr Hager is correct.

One final comment: the permanent availability of sexual material in the exclusively anonymous private sphere, which is conditioned by the structure of the Internet, and the attendant fact that sexual abuse is removed from public and, hence, social controls, is one of the central challenges with which we are faced as a result of this new aspect of human lifestyle.

We cannot resolve it simply through Interpol and more stringent criminal law.

The Internet, as evidenced by child pornography, presents totally new challenges to our subjective, individual sense of responsibility.

We should discuss this in at least as much detail as the tightening of criminal law.

Mr President, child sex abuse is a criminal offence, whether it is committed by homosexuals or heterosexuals.

The distribution of child pornography on the net is also a criminal offence, and so is making child pornography.

Victims of paedophile activity are often facing lifelong trauma with some of them turning into child abusers themselves.

The distribution of child pornography is facilitated by the Internet. Not only is the scale of distribution magnified, but there is a risk of the offence being trivialised.

Various MEPs have already spoken a good deal in the wake of this commendable report, commenting for example on how good and necessary it is that there should be contact points, that the police should have the relevant expertise and that there should be clear penalties. These are all points underlined by Mrs Plooij.

But anyone who is at all familiar with this sordid subject matter knows that the contact points are inundated with information and that - in stark contrast with this - the number of people who analyse this information is very limited.

I feel sorry for them, not only because of what they are witnesses to, but also because of the volume of material in respect of which they must feel powerless.

We pretend that we are all agreed on this, but this is not so in practice. In actual fact, there is a great deal of resistance.

Tourist areas, also within our own European Union, do not want to admit that poverty forces poor children into prostitution.

The Internet has the aura of progress. And when it comes to harmonising our legislation at European level, reference is made to all kinds of grand legal principles.

I think that whoever wills the end must also will the means.

Mr President, It is good that we are having this debate on child pornography on the Internet.

Apart from a few rather coarse, ignorant contributions from my opponent, what has been said has been very sensible.

I would like to point out that, in actual fact, many paedophiles assault children that are close to them.

It is not divorce, alcoholism or anything else that encourages this behaviour.

It is fairly well known that being sexually aroused by children is not exactly normal behaviour, and for that we should be grateful.

The Internet makes exchanging pictures easier, and it is this we should be discussing.

I agree totally with Mrs Maes that we have excellent police authorities working with these issues.

However, in relation to how the problem has increased, there are not enough of them to be able to examine the whole situation.

It is, therefore, a shame that we are immediately about to call in Europol.

We have had discussions with representatives from Europol with respect to trafficking in women and children, and they say that they have two reports.

However, these reports are not official, so only Europol is aware of Europol's own activities.

The police that I have been in contact with in my own country, Sweden, who are working on these issues via Interpol, need, of course, more support, just like their colleagues in other countries.

For this is not only an issue within the EU.

There is also much to do when it comes to Thailand, the Philippines and other places around the world, something the police authorities are working on.

It is not exclusively in Western Europe that this issue is being dealt with.

There is one aspect of this matter that has not come up very often in the responses to this report, but which I would, nevertheless, like to raise in the debate, namely the rehabilitation of the victims.

The problem with the Internet is that the pictures are so clear.

Older children are at risk of being continuously pursued on the net and of being recognised for ever and a day.

We must consider how we in the Member States are to take care of the children that have been victims of this crime and whose photographs are on the net.

In Sweden we have also had experience of people finding their way into the school system or child care because they are paedophiles.

It is a shame that we have not discussed the enormous cutbacks and extensive privatisation in these areas.

Of course, we must perhaps also ensure, as a preventative measure, that no-one works alone with children, either in the private or the public school systems or within the child care profession and in other positions.

I truly welcome this debate. However, I would like us to remember that paedophilia is not a common, widespread activity, a fact for which, as I have already said, we must be grateful.

Mr President, likewise dismayed by the persistent out-of-hand condemnation of Austria by the 14 Member States, I consider it particularly important and I am pleased that we are showing unity in this matter.

I only have the following points to add or raise with regard to this excellent report; firstly, the appropriate training of specialists to be able to also prosecute the perpetrators; secondly, the need for the capability to carry out legal proceedings at international level; and thirdly, the need to be able to punish crimes committed in third countries under domestic law.

Finally, I would like to express my satisfaction that the Member States of the EU are so resolutely and actively supporting this Austrian proposal and not just taking refuge in soundbites and clichés.

Mr President, Commissioner, as long as there is a demand for child pornography, it will be produced.

As long as there is a trade in pornography, the Internet will be used to carry it out, because the Internet offers an extra benefit, namely it masks the consumer and keeps the supplier, for the most part, in the shadows.

However, as long as this demand exists, there will also be abused children scarred for life.

I therefore welcome this initiative, which was finally put forward so comprehensively by the Austrian Presidency.

Above all, I welcome the proposals for expanding the initiative which the rapporteur, Mr Kirkhope, has made.

He has made a major contribution to the instrument, which the Member States can now take up, being more efficient than ever before.

I would like to pick up on five points which seem to me to be particularly important in the fight against child pornography.

My first point is that not only should the sale and distribution of child pornography be punishable, and indeed should incur punishments that will act as a deterrent, but that the possession of child pornography itself should also be punishable.

My second point is the age limit.

It cannot be set high enough.

I therefore appeal that the target which the Committee has set itself, i.e. of establishing the age of 18 as standard at European level, be implemented as soon as possible.

16 is just the first step.

My third point is that we need experts in the fight against child pornography on the Internet.

And it is even more important that these experts join forces, that they are coordinated, and here again Europol presents itself as the appropriate institution.

My fourth point is that the register of persons who have been convicted of the distribution of child pornography or of the sexual abuse of children will hopefully be implemented across Europe as quickly as possible and that access will be available to all Member States and Europol.

My fifth point is that we should proceed according to the personality principle in order to punish criminal acts as efficiently as possible.

In conclusion, I would like to appeal first of all to the individual responsibility of all those who use child pornography for their own gain.

They are responsible for its being produced and for the harm it causes children.

I would also like to appeal to the Member States, in the interests of the most vulnerable members of society, to implement as quickly and efficiently as possible the measures proposed by the rapporteur in his excellent report and by the Austrian initiative.

Mr President, thank you for the well-reasoned proposal of the rapporteur!

In this context I would like to propose, in order once again to show the consequence of the proposals, a few follow-up measures, because it is not only e-mails which can be sent anonymously, but letters also.

This is why all public post-boxes should be closed and it should only be possible to send letters at the post-office following official verification of ID.

The second point concerns telephones, because telephone calls can also be made anonymously.

All telephones should also be gotten rid of, except for a few telephone boxes which should, of course, be monitored by the police.

Then all fax machines should be gotten rid of as quickly as possible - nothing else springs to mind!

Mr President, the Commission would like to join several of the speakers in thanking the rapporteur for his excellent report on the draft Council decision.

As has already been stressed, the aim is to intensify actions to prevent and combat the sexual abuse of children, with particular reference to the production, possession and distribution of child pornography through the Internet.

The Austrian initiative to reintroduce the draft joint action to combat child pornography on the Internet, on which Parliament has already delivered a favourable opinion, is welcomed by the Commission.

One essential and positive aspect of the text is the encouragement of international cooperation, which is already well developed in other areas of the fight against criminal activities, such as drugs and illegal immigration.

As the Internet ignores national boundaries, those tracking down Internet crime must also be able to cross them.

International cooperation therefore has to be encouraged as much as possible.

The Commission has been closely involved in international activities and initiatives addressing this issue, such as the International Conference on combating child pornography on the Internet, which was held from 29 September to 1 October 1999 in Vienna.

It was jointly organised by the Austrian and United States Governments and the Commission under the STOP Programme.

The conference adopted conclusions and recommendations that are being actively followed up.

The Commission therefore welcomes the fact that the draft decision underlines the need to engage law enforcement authorities and industry, especially Internet service providers, in a constructive dialogue aimed at improving mutual understanding and sharing respective experiences.

There is a clear need to identify appropriate fora where law enforcement and industry's concerns can be addressed and to encourage the development and implementation of codes of conduct and best practice.

We should bear in mind that the key role must be played by self-regulation and by the individual responsibility of those who use the Internet.

The Commission has long been concerned about child pornography on the Net.

In order to fight against it, it proposed a multiannual Community action plan on promoting safer use of the Internet by combating illegal and harmful content on global networks.

The Council and Parliament adopted it on 25 January 1999.

The action plan provides support for concrete action in four areas: a European network of hotlines, self-regulation by industry, filtering, and rating and awareness.

In addition, the Commission, and the Union as such, is involved in the work of the G8, creating a 24-hour points of contact network.

It is also involved in the current negotiations on a draft convention on cyber crime in the framework of the Council of Europe that will address the specific problem of paedo-pornography on the Internet.

The Commission fully supports the position expressed in the draft report that the subject of child pornography on the Internet should involve the approximation of the laws and regulations of the Member States.

We are convinced that agreements on common definitions, common charges and common sanctions need to be established for certain forms of crime.

We have included in the scoreboard on the creation of an area of freedom, security and justice a specific action aimed at criminalising the sexual exploitation of children, with particular reference to child pornography on the Internet, as called for by the Heads of States and Government at the Tampere European Summit.

A proposal for a framework decision on common definitions, common charges and common sanctions will be put forward after the summer.

The Commission will participate fully in the discussions that will take place in the Council with a view to adopting this draft decision in order to see whether further action should and would be needed.

We welcome Parliament's proposal on a legal basis: as a framework decision it should be based on Article 34(2)b of the Treaty.

The Commission will also consider, together with the Member States, how to support the implementation of the decision through other projects funded under the STOP programme.

These could be aimed at promoting further training and exchanges between those responsible in the Member States for fighting against this phenomenon, such as the police authorities, but also the judiciary, and at close cooperation between those authorities, Europol and the future Eurojus network.

Finally, the Commission wishes to indicate to Parliament that it can fully support all the amendments tabled by Mr Kirkhope and the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs, as they provide some very useful clarifications on the definitions and description of the activities to be criminalised, on the age limit, on the offence of possession and on the need for the law enforcement authorities, the police and the judiciary to adopt the necessary technological instruments to scan the net and to make the fight against paedo-pornography not just a rhetorical issue but a concrete action of the Union as such and of each and every Member State.

The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon.

The next item is the debate on the report (A5-0091/2000) by Mrs Frahm, on behalf of the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs, on the proposal for a Council decision creating a European Refugee Fund [COM(1999) 686 - C5-0120/2000 - 1999/0274(CNS)].

Mr President, because of its wealth, Western Europe is naturally a magnet for everyone seeking protection and fleeing persecution.

Our share in the task arising from a growing influx of refugees must, of course, correspond in scope and importance to our prosperity and to our global and historical role.

But encounters between people from different cultures are not always simple, and they should therefore be helped along, just as refugees should be given support to begin new lives in their new locations.

The Member States each tackle these matters in very different ways, and rightly so, because they each start from perspectives within their different cultures and traditions.

However, all refugees have some basic needs in common, and special groups need professional help and support so that they can again start to live lives appropriate to human beings.

What is more, they need advice and guidance from the authorities in their new countries and in connection with their actual seeking of asylum.

All refugees begin with a dream of returning home.

For some, this becomes a reality but, for others, the period in exile proves to be so long that returning home is unrealistic.

They acquire children and friends and a new life for themselves. The children put down roots in the new country, and these become stronger than their parents' roots in the old country.

Therefore, a number of them choose in the end perhaps to apply for citizenship in the new country. A number of surveys show, however, that, even for those who achieve their dream of returning home, it is very important that the period in exile should have been meaningful, that they should have had the opportunity to grow as people and that their qualifications should have been used so that they do not cease to develop as people and are not hindered from developing professionally in their own fields by stagnation, passivity, uncertainty and lack of qualifications.

Integration and repatriation are not, therefore, opposed to each other, and integration is not only for people who wish to move country for good.

It is also of significant help to those who subsequently return home.

It may, in fact, prove to be a prerequisite of successful repatriation.

I do not, therefore, understand why some people want to distinguish between displaced persons and refugees.

Responsibilities in Europe are unfairly distributed in relation both to the Member States' size and prosperity.

The European Refugee Fund is a first and very modest attempt to distribute resources in proportion to the tasks which individual Member States promise to undertake.

It is not a question of the ratio between the number of refugees and the number of existing citizens. It is a question of the actual task which is to be undertaken.

It is not about relative numbers, but actual numbers.

I think that some of the amendments from the Group of the European People' s Party and the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party must be based upon a misunderstanding in this area.

I hope the discussion may make it a little clearer what the thinking here is.

But because the task is a considerable one and because it has been unfairly distributed, it is naturally sad that the fund in question should be so small.

We are talking about EUR 26 million to cover the fixed expenses of the current work, distributed among 15 Member States.

Not much is, in fact, being given to those Member States which really have taken a considerable degree of responsibility upon themselves.

By German or Italian reckoning, the amount must seem tiny.

In addition, there is, of course, some uncertainty about the fund' s financial future.

I am very anxious to know whether the Commission has some good news for us and whether it has given the necessary consideration to the issue in question so that the Fund will have a future and not just become a nonsense over the next few years.

All in all, however, the European Refugee Fund is, in fact, to be regarded as a start.

And if it has a good beginning and if we are able to follow up the issue, then it will only be natural for us to increase the amount concerned so that the Fund really can live up to its name as the European Refugee Fund.

Mr President, I would like to warmly congratulate the rapporteur on her report and would also like to thank her for the cooperation I have received in my capacity as draftsperson of the opinion.

I was very excited when I read the Commission' s proposal.

The Commission is obviously on the right track.

It is important that the financial responsibility for refugees be distributed among Member States. This is far better than shifting people around and, in this way, it is possible to end the vicious circle of Member States passing the buck, something which they have become familiar with through the international Treaties.

However, the Committee on Budgets is raising two objections.

Firstly, no consideration is given to the Financial Regulation. Indeed, the programme is multiannual, whilst the financial calculations have only been made for one year.

The second objection is more extensive.

The financial scheme of setting aside 26 million for structural measures whilst keeping ten million in reserve for contingency measures could never lead to the goal which the Commission has in mind, namely an actual spreading of the financial responsibility.

The Member States will, however, need to set up all kinds of structures and procedures in order to share out the money.

In this way, solidarity among Member States and solidarity with those seeking protection threatens to be encumbered by a disproportionately high administrative burden.

The Committee on Budgets therefore suggests that the present proposal with the amounts quoted could be considered as an experiment, a very commendable experiment at that. But a real European Refugee Fund will cost a great deal more than that.

It will need to be investigated exactly how much more this would cost, and the Committee on Budgets has decided unanimously that we expect the outcome of this investigation before 31 March 2001.

The Commission is on the right track. We should not, therefore, get distracted by restrictions upon the financial perspective as long as the net result is to be positive.

Mr President, firstly, I too should like to thank Mrs Frahm for her work and willingness to support a number of amendments, both from the committee and from myself.

This has all too often been a very rushed process which has not allowed those of us involved to collaborate as we would have wished to find the best solutions to certain problems.

I would particularly cite the example of the allocation of the funding which does not even meet the Commission's intention to give particular consideration to the Cohesion Fund countries.

So the proposed review process becomes essential.

Asylum-seekers are not a burden but a responsibility.

The European Union Member States are the chosen destination of comparatively few, compared with the world's poor countries such as those in Africa.

A proposed amendment from our committee requires that all measures under this fund should be based on an approach designed to prevent any outbreak of xenophobia, racism, discrimination or inequality.

That is particularly important, especially given recent criticism by the UNHCR of certain parties in my own Member State for their encouragement of such negative views or their failure to challenge them - criticism which is fully justified in my view.

A change to the funding proposed by our committee aims to give a minimum to each state, which could be used to promote public awareness.

My committee feels that the money, inadequate at the moment, should be used to improve the facilities and services offered, which is why we also want to see an overall strategy for the development of services, with a view to refugees and displaced persons being able to play a fully active role in society as equals.

Not to take such an approach would be short-sighted, as others have already pointed out.

The committee also proposed that there should be greater partnership at Member State level in determining and evaluating how the money should be used, including the involvement of refugee organisations themselves.

We also want it to be a duty for the committee assisting the Commission to consult with other organisations.

How we deal with the dispossessed is an issue for society as a whole, not just for governments.

Mr President, my Group is highly delighted with the proposal to set up a European Refugee Fund and also with the way in which Mrs Frahm has tackled this problem in her role as rapporteur.

The asylum policy urgently needs a European approach.

We do not wish to see a downward spiral where Member States compete in making their own country look unattractive, the way the Netherlands did, for example, when it appeared on CNN with leaking tents in which refugees could be received.

As Europeans, we do not want that sort of policy. We most certainly do not want one country to shift its responsibility to another.

Setting up this fund is therefore a step in the right direction. It provisionally brings the desired solidarity within the European Union symbolically into focus.

It is only right that the countries which do a great deal per capita of the population should be the first to receive financial support. This is also the thrust of the amendment tabled by my Group.

Subsequently, the aid figures will need to correlate with the absolute numbers.

I suggest including these two values in an algebraic formula, a task which I pass on to the officials with pleasure.

Needless to say, the values will depend on the influx of asylum seekers in each country, the number of people granted refugee status, obviously in accordance with the Geneva Convention, and the number of displaced persons received.

The tasks supported by the fund are covered in the proposal and by the rapporteur.

We are extremely pleased with the broad support for our concept of tailor-made solutions. As Mrs Frahm mentioned a moment ago, the tailor-made aspect refers to the difference between those who have attained refugee status as individuals and those who are benefiting from temporary protection as displaced persons who have been driven out on a massive scale.

Individual refugees gain from a dynamic approach to their integration in all kinds of areas within the European Union, such as permanent jobs, housing, the settling of whole families etc.

Displaced persons, on the other hand, have been driven out en masse and against their will and want to return to their home country.

For them, it is important to optimise their chance of repatriation with dignity. In order to achieve this, they need to maintain their own social networks and they need activities which will strengthen their prospects in their country of origin upon their return and, of course, they need to be able to maintain their self-respect.

In this respect, Amendment No 19 deals with refugees, while Amendment No 21 focuses on displaced persons. We should really spell this out a little more clearly.

In my opinion - and this is my personal opinion - integration should also include the recognition of the religions of the new minorities. This is why my Amendment No 20, which I supported on my own in committee, has mysteriously found its way back into the report, thus affording Members who wish to prove their broad-mindedness in this respect the final opportunity, in one way or another, to include this amendment in the report.

I have been informed that the European Commission is carrying out a comparative study into the asylum policy of the Member States. I am very curious to see whether this report will be published before long.

It could, in itself, contribute towards the common policy based on best practices.

It is also vital that this report is made available as soon as possible. This week, for example, in the Dutch Lower Chamber - and undoubtedly elsewhere - an asylum policy is again being discussed which is drafted in such a way as to be completely out of tune with everything that is happening in the EU Member States.

This seems very bad policy on the part of the Netherlands.

However, perhaps this is also happening elsewhere. In my opinion, the Commission should keep its finger on the pulse, in a tactful manner, of course, but a finger on the pulse nonetheless.

It makes sense that the fund should mainly focus on improving the procedures, but at least as interesting is the Community' s approach to the phenomenon of displaced persons. After all, this is a category which- more than anything - is typified by the need for security, without choosing a particular EU Member State as such.

We are also in favour of EU aid being earmarked for a common follow-up scheme which monitors the experiences of repatriates and which also offers a certain level of guarantee.

It goes without saying that we, as Christian Democrats, welcome the efforts of private organisations and those of refugees and displaced persons themselves with open arms.

On behalf of my Group, I wish this new type of Structural Fund, because this is what it comes down to, every success. I also want to congratulate the rapporteur, Mrs Frahm, on the handling of this important topic and I hope that she will accept my efforts in the field of tailor-made solutions for what they mean as regards, on the one hand, refugees and, on the other, displaced persons.

Mr President, my Group welcomes this proposal.

It is important that this instrument should remain in force for the entire five-year period and that the core elements of a common asylum system should be codified within this period.

The Fund should help to balance up the differences between Member States in the acceptance and integration of persons in need of protection.

A precondition for this is that the various factors must be given due consideration in allocating the money.

It is necessary that the legal basis for the Fund should be adopted as soon as possible so as to ensure continuous EU financing of refugee projects.

I welcome the fact that, under Article 5, the money for routine projects is to be separated from emergency aid measures.

Mass refugee situations require special measures and separate budgetary allocations.

Only in this way can routine long-term measures also be maintained.

The effective distribution of responsibilities which the Fund is striving for can only be achieved in the long term if the existing problems of widely divergent capacities are tackled.

This requires additional support for the Member States with a less well established asylum system.

I therefore consider that a fixed sum for the Member States which are experiencing difficulties in establishing their asylum system is advisable.

The description in Article 3 of the tasks and measures which are worthy of promotion could lead to a priori support for measures to improve the acceptance conditions for asylum seekers, but this should not mean that measures necessary for fairer and more effective asylum procedures are neglected.

I am of the opinion that the Fund should finance measures to inform the public concerning the policy and practice of the Member States with regard to refugees, asylum seekers and other temporarily protected persons.

The positive results of such activities in the past speak in favour of the continuation of such financial support, which should be made available to every eligible applicant.

I congratulate Mrs Frahm on her excellent report and gladly support the request of Mrs Frahm and Mrs Buitenweg for the addition of this sum to the Refugee Fund.

Mr President, in Denmark, Pernille Frahm and her party have led the way in the struggle against what they call "more Union" .

They campaigned against Denmark' s joining the single currency, which we are to vote on in September, and they have been on the "no" side in four out of the five previous Danish referenda.

That is why I am so pleased to read Pernille Frahm' s report in which she does not merely approve, but also requests, "more Union" in the form of mutual aid in connection with the burden which the influx of refugees imposes upon us.

To cap it all, she wants more money transferred from the national Refugee Councils to their EU equivalent.

If a large number of Albanian refugees arrives in Italy or a large number of Baltic refugees in Scandinavia, it is more sensible to spread the cost over the whole Union than compulsorily to distribute the refugees throughout the Union.

The Refugee Fund makes it possible to help more refugees in the vicinity of their own countries where they can maintain links with their families and native cultures and continue to put pressure upon the tyrants who drove them from their homes.

It is, therefore, also a good thing that the EU should be able to come up with aid in support of large influxes of refugees.

We saw the need during the war in Kosovo.

Just imagine if a great many more Kosovars could have been helped in neighbouring Macedonia and Albania.

They would have much preferred this than to have been sent thousands of kilometres away to distant countries.

If there are any who stand united on this issue, they are Pernille Frahm' s and my own party.

If we could make Pernille Frahm rapporteur for European cooperation, too, then I am sure that we could agree about that issue as well.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, it is with great relief that we welcomed the proposed Council decision on the creation of a European Refugee Fund.

After Kosovo, Chechnya, Afghanistan, to cite but a few of the tragedies which bathe our planet in blood, creating such a body is an increasingly urgent matter.

The report shows the extent to which parliamentary activity can be beneficial to Europe.

We shall here mention only three points.

Firstly, if there is one point on which the report is not satisfactory, it is financial resources.

Very few resources are allocated to the Fund, considering the scale of its activities - improving reception conditions, integrating persons benefiting from international protection, encouraging voluntary return by facilitating reintegration in the country of origin.

These are huge tasks requiring amounts far greater than those initially planned.

We must provide ourselves with the resources to realise our shared ambitions, and make Europe a land of solidarity and hospitality, which respects human dignity and the values which are the reasons for thousands of people to seek asylum, particularly freedom of democratic expression and peace.

Secondly, improving reception conditions should also include providing access to health care for all, the provision of education for children, and also training.

Already made rootless by virtue of their exile, families must be able to benefit from education for their children and training programmes for young people in order to regain some stability, to promote their social and economic integration, and to encourage their possible return to their own country.

Thirdly, many of us are calling for NGOs and the associations working on a day-to-day basis with refugees to be consulted, both in defining the necessary programmes and in their implementation.

It would be a serious mistake to exclude the very women and men who often, with their invaluable experience, make good the omissions of the State, from the process.

Finally, in conclusion, I should like once again to stress the ever more insistent need for Member States to arrive quickly at common legislation in matters of asylum.

It is only this advance which will make it possible to allow this European Fund to make a proper impact.

Mr President, allow me first of all to emphasise that, in the referendum on the Edinburgh Agreement in 1993, the Danish people declined to participate in EU cooperation on legal issues, and Denmark is not, therefore, bound by any legal obligations to allow the EU to decide which refugees are to be received by Denmark.

And one cannot in all decency receive money from the EU if one will not also allow the EU to decide which refugees are to be allocated to which countries.

I think it is the individual countries' responsibility to finance their refugee policies themselves and, for that reason alone, I have to vote against this report.

On Danish television, representatives of the High Commission for Refugees in Geneva have expressed the view that only one in ten asylum seekers are genuine applicants.

If, as in Denmark, the majority of applicants are given asylum or residence permits, then legitimate refugees are left in the lurch.

Denmark offers the world' s highest level of financial aid to refugees and therefore attracts many who are merely economic refugees. And that is not what the Convention on Refugees is about.

I nonetheless agree with Mrs Frahm about one thing, namely that EUR 26 million is far, far too low a level.

In Denmark alone, the level of aid is EUR 2 billion per year so that the present little fund is of absolutely no effect.

We therefore think we need to manage the whole issue of apportioning and prioritising our efforts concerning refugees in a far more rational way.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, there are many reasons why, in principle, I welcome what the Commission has submitted: firstly, because the Commission is sending a signal to the Member States that they are not alone in the problems of migration, refugees and displaced persons; secondly, because it at least regulates in part the distribution of the burden; and, thirdly, because the Commission is proposing a differentiated package of responsibilities for two different groups, namely recognised refugees and displaced persons, i.e. persons temporarily seeking protection.

I welcome the proposal because it clearly defines the target groups, because the acceptance conditions will be improved and the integration of refugees supported, and because the re-integration of temporary refugees will be promoted.

However, I do not share the view that Mrs Frahm' s report can be accepted almost without criticism because I consider that measures which go beyond these defined responsibilities are inappropriate.

Firstly, the money is not available and, secondly, there are other totally different groups which have a claim to it if you are talking here about groups which are particularly in need of protection, and we are unquestionably talking about persons within the meaning of the Geneva Convention.

I also do not support your proposals for measures which are incompatible with the particular groups.

When it comes to refugees, the measures should be different to those for displaced persons.

You cannot, in the case of displaced persons whose main concern is to return to their homeland, require that the host country integrate them into the labour market.

However, we must seek to make an amendment when it comes to the allocation of funds, taking the number of refugees or displaced persons per capita of the population of a Member State as the basis.

One final point which I would like to mention, and I do not understand why Mrs Frahm does not want this, is that we must also have the option to make money available for refugee reception centres.

You reject this and I simply cannot see why, because this is the first point of contact where we can provide specific help, accelerate processes and promote refugee integration.

However, in all the proposed measures, we must not fail to recognise that one objective has not been addressed here, namely taking into account the distribution of the refugee burden.

Please do so in implementing the measures which are necessary and positive.

Mr President, firstly, I too would like to congratulate the rapporteur, Mrs Frahm, because I believe she has produced a really good piece of work.

Furthermore, her report expresses this Parliament' s pleasure.

For us, the establishment of this Fund is good news.

Since 1997, we have been trying to carry out coherent work in this respect, and we have had some successes.

However, in order to be fully successful, we need a legal basis to ensure the continuity of the work on improving the reception, the integration, or, where they wish it, the satisfactory return of the asylum seekers and refugees present in the European Union.

Those are three different areas of work.

We have to safeguard all three, and I agree that we must maintain a reserve fund in order to deal with the arrival of displaced persons without endangering the development of better infrastructures and practices within the Union.

With regard to the distribution of resources, we have to take account of the need to show solidarity with countries which are highly committed to the question of refugees, but we also have to bear in mind - as the report says - the need for countries which have less of a tradition of accepting refugees - such as my own - to improve their infrastructures and services so that they may reach the same level as the other countries and take on - because I believe this should be the objective - higher levels of responsibility together with the other countries of the European Union.

The Member States have a major role to play in this respect and must make considerable efforts.

However, I would like to point out that we should also make use of our experience of managing other funds, especially the Structural Funds, in order to involve local and regional administrations and the organisations representing civil society in this management, in addition to the Member States.

This would create added value, because contact with the NGOs and the local administrations could contribute to the fight against racism, to involving society and informing the citizens of the reception countries of the importance of asylum and refugees.

Furthermore, using the practices already developed for the management of those funds could promote interaction between them.

We must develop policies which are coherent with both funds.

Lastly, I would like to add my voice to those which have called for a greater financial contribution to the European Refugee Fund.

Mr President, firstly I would also like to thank the rapporteur, Mrs Frahm, for this excellent and extensive report.

However, as she herself did, I would like to point out a few problems which, in our opinion, are still important and which need to be remedied.

The allocation criteria, which are based on the average number of asylum applicants and recognised refugees and the nature of the projects, are perhaps not adequate to achieve a fair distribution of the burden.

In practice, the countries which take in the greatest number of refugees will probably receive the most funds.

Insofar as it goes that is okay, but it should not mean that the other EU States go short and, ultimately, that the refugees in these states, who are not particularly numerous, should be the ones to miss out on the benefits.

We must also deal with the actual money to be allocated, which must be in proportion to the stated objectives.

Financing must be ensured up to 2004.

So far, the balance sheet has not made any clear statement for the period after 2001.

If we can resolve this issue, then we should do so.

Only in this way can the European Refugee Fund be used sensibly and efficiently.

Mr President, it seems legitimate that the states of Europe should demonstrate solidarity in the event of a sudden, massive, exceptional influx of refugees driven by some external disaster, but what the Commission is proposing today is a different kettle of fish.

The proposal is to establish a permanent European Fund distributing appropriations to assist Member States in managing their countries' usual flow of refugees, genuine or not.

Are Member States themselves no longer capable of managing the refugees they receive in normal circumstances?

How would their situation be improved by giving money to Brussels, only to have Brussels immediately give it back to them?

Will some countries be net contributors and others, net recipients, and if so, which?

The answers to these questions cannot be found anywhere in the reports passed on to us.

We cannot even find a statistical table of the numbers of refugees currently residing in the various countries of Europe.

Once again we are being asked to take an important decision while being kept in the dark.

It is all the more worrying that the planned system is liable in itself to exacerbate abuses since reducing the immediate costs for each State may lead to a reduction in its vigilance, ultimately increasing the overall cost for everyone.

This is a pernicious effect which insurers are familiar with.

This risk is, in turn, all the greater since the proposed text is extremely vague when it comes to defining the type of person that qualifies as a refugee.

There is, of course, the standard definition of refugee given in the 1951 Geneva Convention, but obviously all sorts of categories of displaced person can be added to the list, including persons accepted into the country in accordance not with international commitments but only with national legislation, decisions or practice.

In such conditions, the risk of things spiralling out of control and of financial abuse is very great indeed, Mr President, and the report itself even implies as much when it states that the planned appropriations, even though they still amount to EUR 36 million, are much less than the potential demand.

The Union for a Europe of Nations Group considers that there is just one solution if we want to halt this risk: for each Member State to retain financial responsibility for the reception of refugees, and for European solidarity to be kept only for exceptional tragic circumstances.

- (PT) Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, many of us have repeatedly called for the European Refugee Fund to be established.

The persuasive examples of what happened in Kosovo - and on a smaller scale, in East Timor - proved necessary, in order to support the evidence that this fund was needed.

The entry into force of the Treaty of Amsterdam has facilitated this new approach to European policy on asylum and migration, which, as Mr Oostlander has already pointed out, requires a degree of solidarity between Member States, and there should therefore be mechanisms designed to contribute to finding a balance between the work undertaken by Member States who receive these refugees and their being able to bear the short- and long-term consequences of welcoming these people.

We feel it is right that the fund should have an emergency component, which would apply to cases of a massive influx of people in a situation where they need international protection, but which, at the same time, guarantees that structural policy measures will be financed. In other words, there must be a component which will enable us, under a multiannual programme, to provide effective support for measures designed, firstly, to improve conditions of reception, secondly to promote integration, thirdly to facilitate voluntary repatriation and fourthly to facilitate reintegration.

The experience of Kosovo has proved that most displaced people, including those who have been granted refugee status, were willing to return to their country of origin as soon as the necessary conditions were met.

I would therefore like to emphasise something that Mr Pirker has already mentioned, and that is the difference between migration and temporary refugees.

What must in one case be met with policies of support for integration must, in others, in the interests of the refugees themselves, be met with policies of support for a return to the country or region which they were forced to flee.

The two situations are quite different and require different responses.

To confuse them would be to give way to populist rhetoric.

I would also like to stress the need to speed up the establishment of legal instruments which will facilitate the mobilisation of funds that have already been earmarked for this purpose.

Specific rules will also have to be laid down covering the criteria and organisational provisions for the allocation of these funds and for activating the respective monitoring mechanisms.

Mr President, on behalf of the Commission, I would like to begin by thanking Mrs Frahm, rapporteur for the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs, for her excellent work, the quality of her report, and the support it gives the Commission' s proposal.

You know better than I do that the proposed Council decision on this Fund was adopted by the Commission on 14 December 1999.

It is in line with an approach, my own personal approach, which I put forward during my hearing before the European Parliament' s Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs.

The Fund is a single instrument combining support for Member State actions on the reception, integration and voluntary repatriation of refugees and displaced persons, which were previously dealt with in joint actions and pilot projects on the basis of appropriations allocated annually to the Community budget on the initiative of the European Parliament.

This Fund is not intended to substitute for Member States' efforts in the field of refugee reception and integration, but it does represent an initial step, highlighting a key political aspect of European strategy: strategy on asylum must be based on shared responsibility at European level.

I think that adopting this Fund contribute to showing that, in this area, the European Union as such can provide added value for the efforts of each individual Member State.

We are setting up a European Refugee Fund for an initial period of five years.

The total appropriation for 2000 is EUR 36 million, which includes EUR 10 million for emergency aid.

I quite understand the rapporteur' s comments to the effect that this amount is inadequate given the needs and ambitions of the Fund itself.

The Commission has already pointed out to the Parliament' s Committee on Budgets that it intends to propose, in its preliminary draft budget for 2001, the financial means to maintain the Fund for the next five years.

In other words, the Commission will propose increasing the EUR 36 million for the year 2000 to EUR 45 million for the following years, thus taking the overall allocation for the five years to EUR 216 million.

This is, I feel, an initial step in the right direction.

The European Refugee Fund is an instrument for solidarity between Member States, intended, as has already been stressed by several speakers, to contribute to balancing the efforts mentioned in Article 63(2b) of the Treaty.

To this end, a proportional distribution of the resources among the Member States is envisaged: firstly in proportion to the number of asylum requests they receive (two thirds of the resources) and secondly in proportion to the number of refugees they accept into their country (one third of the resources).

I can understand why proposals were put forward to consider the number of refugees in relation to the overall population in each Member State.

I must admit that the Commission itself attempted to consider this criterion, but we found it extremely hard to come up with a mathematical formula which did justice to the principle of sharing costs and efforts while including this criterion.

I am perfectly willing to look into any practical solutions but it is not enough to simply state the principle. A practical solution must be found, and I have to tell you that that is no easy matter.

The European Refugee Fund will be able to cofinance Member State actions up to 50%, a level which can be increased to 75% for Member States benefiting from the Cohesion Fund.

The proposed decision also provides for the possibility of financing emergency measures in the event of a massive influx of refugees from a reserve of EUR 10 million.

In this respect, it provides an initial response to the request made by the European Council in Tampere.

Together with my fellow Commissioner, Michaele Schreyer, I have already initiated discussions on the ways of utilising, in the event of an emergency, the maximum possible resources suited to the needs of the situation.

In this area, however, what worries me more than the figures - because, unfortunately or fortunately, the necessary funds cannot be provided to respond to emergencies such as Kosovo - and what we are looking for is some financial and also administrative mechanism sufficiently perfected to fulfil needs efficiently in an emergency situation.

The selection and administration of Fund projects, as regards structural aspects, are delegated to the Member States within the framework of cofinancing requests.

Implementation, monitoring, follow-up and assessment arrangements are based on the existing conditions for Structural Funds.

As regards amendments, the Commission has taken note of all the proposed amendments and can accept, conditional upon some formal reworking, in some cases, the principles behind a number of them which aim to make the objectives of the European Refugee Fund clearer in the introduction, or to make some terms more precise.

One particular case is the mention, in the introduction, of the importance of NGO activities, and there are some useful clarifications, such as transparency in the project selection process, or the need to promote the long-term continuity of projects.

The principle of minimal Fund participation enables each Member State to provide effective support, regardless of the extent of flows of refugees.

The Commission cannot, however, go along with other sets of amendments, particularly those on budgetary methods. These will, in any case, become irrelevant if the budgetary authority ratifies the Commission' s proposals to set the allocation for the Fund at EUR 216 million for the five years.

It cannot align itself with the amendments on the Member States' strategy and on setting up a partnership with the various operators affected by asylum policy.

This is an initial experiment with a decentralised asylum-related programme.

The competent national administrations are by no means familiar with these procedures.

In this decision it is important to avoid anything which might add to their workload and slow the process down, without allowing for the fact that the amounts involved are not vast and that if this decision for the year 2000 is adopted this year, that will not leave much time to prepare cofinancing requests.

The Commission proposes to take on board some of the ideas put forward in the amendments in terms of defining the practical arrangements for the implementation of this instrument and for the dialogue to be entered into with the relevant national bodies.

Finally, with regard to the amendments for cooperation with candidate countries, I think we must be quite clear on this.

The Fund is intended to contribute to balancing Member State efforts.

These modest enough resources should not be watered down further by the inclusion of secondary objectives.

Cooperation of this type with the candidate countries would duplicate the action of other programmes, especially the PHARE programme for transposing the legislative acquis and bringing the competent authorities in the countries of Central and Eastern Europe into line.

In conclusion, Mr President, the Commission is delighted to see the European Parliament support this initiative.

I believe that we are now beginning to see the start of a journey dedicated to the values of asylum, a journey which will show that we can all meet the challenge of European solidarity in asylum matters.

Thank you very much, Mr Vitorino.

The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon.

Electronic money institutions and credit institutions

The next item is the debate on the recommendation for second reading (A5-0080/2000) on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs on:

the common position adopted by the Council with a view to adopting a European Parliament and Council directive on the taking up, the pursuit and the prudential supervision of electronic money institutions

the common position adopted by the Council with a view to adopting a European Parliament and Council directive amending Directive 77/780/EEC on the coordination of laws, regulations and administrative provisions relating to the taking up and pursuit of business of credit institutions [C5-0307/1999 - 1998/0253(COD)].

Mr President, the two directives on supervision of the business of electronic money institutions are of the utmost importance to the development of e-commerce in the European Union.

The aim has been to ensure the financial integrity of electronic money institutions and to help to cultivate an environment which fosters the development of this new means of payment.

Since many of the amendments proposed by the Parliament at first reading have been taken into account, I personally find that the view of the Parliament has been incorporated into the common position to a sufficient extent.

The common position reflects a compromise that has been reached after long negotiations in the Council.

I am very aware of the fact that any amendments to the Council common position are likely to carry a real risk that the directive will be lost in conciliation, since the directive was, and continues to be, a very delicate compromise.

As rapporteur I have tried to avoid pushing the directive to the conciliation procedure.

I made a compromise proposal which, unfortunately, was not accepted in my political group.

I do not think we could reach a conclusion that would serve the interests of all the parties concerned better than this common position does.

So the question for us as Members of the European Parliament is whether the proposed amendments are absolutely necessary compared to the potential risk that we do not get the supervisory framework at all.

That would mean that the situation would remain uncertain from the consumers' point of view.

I also want to remind colleagues that the amendments now proposed are new and therefore not based on the position Parliament took at first reading.

They are all the amendments proposed by the ECB which were unanimously rejected by the Council.

I am also afraid that by emphasising the position of the European Central Bank in terms of monetary stability control we will cause difficult problems for the Member States which do not belong to the euro-zone.

We have to keep in mind that the ECB has no right of veto when it comes to European Community legislation.

The monetary stability control of the ECB is based on the founding treaties of the EC and it should not be expanded through the provisions of EC directives.

Amendments Nos 1 and 2 add the words "at par value" to the report.

These additional words are not absolutely necessary as Article 3 sets out the terms for redeemability.

In that article it is implicit that redeemability will happen at par value unless there are any reasonable charges which would be deducted from the par value.

In this latter case the additional words would add nothing and be misleading to the consumer.

Adding the words "at par value" to Article 3(1) may mislead the consumer since it is always possible to deduct the charges that are strictly necessary to carry out that operation.

According to the common position Member States may allow their competent authorities to waive the application of some or all of the provisions of the proposed directive.

The waiver is possible in cases where the total amount of e-money issued is limited and where the e-money issued is accepted as a means of payments by only a limited number of undertakings.

For example, the waiver could be used for university campus payment cards or for local transport systems.

All these cases are also subject to a maximum storage amount of no more than EUR 150.

In addition, the waived schemes will not benefit from the Single Market passport provisions.

The business of these limited national schemes cannot, from a financial stability viewpoint, be compared with the business of large e-money schemes or credit institutions.

These limited schemes are not likely to have any spillover effects which could endanger financial market stability.

Furthermore, these national limited schemes will not be unsupervised since the text requires any waiver to be subject to a separate decision by the supervisory authorities.

Waived institutions would therefore always be registered and monitored by the supervisory authorities.

Amendments Nos 3, 4 and 5 reduce the scope of the waiver.

It was clear in the Council that the price for having a directive was that a waiver would need to be included as an option.

The Council was able to agree its common position only because it felt that a directive, which included a waiver but tightened regulation and permitted competition in a single market, was better than no directive at all.

The Commission took a similar view.

The sooner the directive is adopted and implemented, the sooner the improved regulation will take effect.

If this still raises concerns in practice then the Article 11 review clause is available in reserve.

Mr President, at present there is no requirement for supervision of national e-money schemes.

Therefore I do not believe that the European Parliament should adopt any amendments or there is a risk that the whole directive may be lost.

Mr President, Commissioner, concerning this directive I would basically like to say that it pursues the objectives firstly of responding to the rapid growth in electronic means of payment, secondly of creating a common legal basis for these and, thirdly, of providing a guarantee of liquidity ensuring security and protection for consumers. We therefore welcome the directive.

We also welcome the fact that the non-banking sector will be subjected in this regard to a degree of banking supervision and that a minimum reserve requirement will be stipulated.

We also welcome the fact that there are no exemptions to the change-back obligation.

The rapporteur has already indicated in her speech that, in spite of this basic affirmation of the direction and necessity of this directive, there were several motions for amendment and also several areas of discussion which went even further.

Although the rapporteur belongs to my Group and I greatly value her commitment, I can nevertheless refute one thing for those delegates who have voiced objections and raised questions, namely the assertion that all the motions for amendment emanate from the European Central Bank.

The European Central Bank cannot put forward amendments here, and it is a slight on all delegates who have submitted amendments to say that they have raised these issues and put forward these amendments (which, incidentally, were all adopted unanimously in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs) on behalf of third parties, and not on the basis of their own judgement and responsibility, simply because the report has been adopted unanimously together with the amendments.

What are we talking about here?

These objections and questions, which do not run counter to the basic affirmation, concern four areas, basically relating to the question of whether the exemption provisions in Article 8 are too extensive and need to be more limited.

They indeed need to be more limited, and the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs has taken up this issue, because the issue is in the area of what consequences these comprehensive exemption provisions will have for monitoring currency holdings.

What effects will these comprehensive exemption provisions have on currency stability?

Under certain circumstances, could the extensive nature of these exemption provisions not lead to circumventions, thus making the exception the rule?

This matter of monitoring currency holdings and stability and the matter of whether the exception would not thus become the rule have lead to the motions for amendment.

Should the recommendation be adopted here without any amendments, I would ask that the Commission and the Council make use of what is in the directive and submit to Parliament a brief report on the consequences of the directives with any amendments which might be necessary.

Mr President, electronic money does not yet have the same importance in the European Union as e-commerce, e-business, e-Europe.

We must ensure, of course, that we in Europe also increase our competitiveness in this area vis-à-vis the United States.

The introduction of the Euro will undoubtedly have a positive effect and will mean that the time has also come for us to establish uniform regulations to safeguard electronic commerce.

I think that electronic money will gain in importance, not just in commerce but also for consumers, particularly as the safety precautions on the Internet are regarded as inadequate and many are therefore hesitant to choose this option.

It has to be said that electronic money in the European Union today enjoys rarity value rather than common usage.

In this regard I must also point out that within the European Union these electronic payment systems also fail to work because interoperability is not guaranteed.

I think that we should do something about this if we want to promote this means of payment in future.

We must also do it in the interests of consumers, because costs will be saved.

However, the issuing of electronic money is not just about the simplification or safeguarding of payment processes, but in practice also concerns financial stability and the functioning of the payment systems.

For this reason we need uniform regulations and we must realise that there will be particular fears if electronic money is issued not just against cash holdings or similar bank account holdings, but if e-money is given on credit.

I think that this is the particular cause of the fear of instability instead of the stability which we want to ensure in the European Union.

I therefore think that Article 8, which provides for an extension of the conditions for exemption, creates excessive discretionary powers.

This could result in many electronic money institutions not being affected by the regulations applicable to credit institutions.

This cannot and should not be the case and we all know that national issues of e-money can no longer be guaranteed today, if we look at the wording of Article 8c in particular.

The Council' s amendments, which extend the scope of money, cannot be in the interest of the consumer. We need electronic money which is valid in a given environment.

For this reason, it must cover the entire European area and not just a national area.

I also think that institutions issuing e-money should be treated as equal.

It is, of course, also important to consider the role of the European Central Bank - controlling the amount of money in circulation, for example.

However, I am thinking primarily of consumers.

Even if e-money can be used without limit on the Internet and for mobile telephones, this does not mean that it might not be counterproductive.

For this reason I cannot support the new wording of Article 8c.

I think that we must do everything possible to increase consumer confidence in the electronic money age and not to build consumer foundations which have no stability.

Mr President, it is very regrettable that this common position, which has been put together with such care by the Council and which paid due respect to the Parliament's views at first reading, is now in the process of unravelling.

I think we are going to lose a rather useful piece of legislation which would have put in place a necessary supervisory framework for one of the growth areas in financial services, namely the storage of cash on plastic cards and other forms of e-money.

The concerns which have been expressed by the European Central Bank, which have largely, but perhaps not fully, been taken on board, are coming out in a way which is likely to damage the potential for this business to develop.

The concerns, particularly about the waiver, are misguided precisely because it would be very limited: it would be limited to only EUR 150 on any particular card.

Every issuer would be supervised by national authorities and we know that the potential for money-supply growth caused by this sort of issuance would be extremely slight given the sort of schemes which are already operating in a number of Member States: for example, on university campuses a student may be able to use this piece of plastic to buy something in a bar, or in a canteen, or in the university bookshop.

The reality is that other Community central banks - notably the Swedish Riksbank, the Bank of England - do not have these concerns about money creation.

If we look at the reality of the ECB's concerns over the last few years, we can see that there has not been a stable relationship between the money supply and the growth of nominal income.

There has been a substantial variation in the velocity of circulation because of new developments within the financial services industry and this is merely another one of those.

Therefore, in the years before the ECB took charge of euro-zone monetary policy, the Bundesbank itself was not able to respect the growth of its money supply targets.

What we have here is an attempt, when we see that a particular theory of monetary control is not working and does not accord with reality, to squeeze that reality back into the theory, to the detriment of the innovatory capacity of the Member States and of their financial systems.

There are a lot of safeguards that the Commission has put in here that the Council has carefully discussed and I very much hope that we will fully support the Council common position on this matter.

Mr President, as from January 1999, the euro has been the new currency for most of the European Union.

Since then there have been no more exchange rate risks and, in theory, the cost to consumers of transferring money across borders and of changing cash from one euro-zone currency to another should have reduced sharply.

There are obligations on financial institutions within the Union to substantially reduce the cost to consumers of transferring money from one euro-zone to the other.

We may recall that the European Consumers' Association, which represents the consumers of the European Union, carried out an extensive survey of charges for cross-border payments only last year.

The conclusion of that survey clearly demonstrated that costs for consumers of transferring money from one country to another in Europe are still too high.

With the forecast growth in electronic shopping over the next few years, heavy bank fees for money changes will be a serious disincentive for consumers to shop over the Internet.

It is important that consumers are reassured in relation to electronic payments by establishing a legal framework.

This survey also showed that consumers are still charged a lot more for making cross-border transfers than they are for making national transfers.

This does not make sense. Euro currency has removed exchange rate risks and costs should have reduced substantially.

I welcome the directive on cross-border credit transfers which is now in force within the Union.

In conclusion, I strongly believe that the new directive on cross-border transfers is good news for the consumers of the Union. It is also good news for financial institutions.

Mr President, like some of the previous speakers this evening, I am very pleased the Council came forward with this proposal.

I do not think that it will be helped by the amendments being proposed inside this Parliament today and indeed in our committee.

Whatever they say about having had to vote for the report as a whole at the end in the committee, it does not persuade me that some committee members did not also have concerns about the effects of some of those amendments.

Some of the opportunities of this nascent market, which we are now seeing emerge in the European Union, will be affected by some of the suggestions being made.

Whereas money supply, of course, is of very direct interest to any central bank, there is in this case no direct inference that it will have the effect that everyone suggests it will have, i.e. that e-money will be anything other than a means of exchange, a redeemable voucher if you like or a mechanism expected to be involved in trade.

Because of the very limits that Mr Huhne talked about, this is, of course, very closely controlled by the Council's proposed waiver and particularly by some of the sensible compromises suggested earlier.

I personally, and the EPLP Group, could wholeheartedly support something like the compromise Amendment No 5 which Mrs Kauppi put forward in committee; but I am afraid if Amendments Nos 3 and 4 were adopted here in Parliament this week, we would see this legislation fall.

Be in no doubt about that, this legislation would fall.

I would worry very seriously about the motives of the people who would like to see this legislation fall, because any vacuum which would be created would be a vacuum the European Central Bank would find itself eased into.

As an institution which has kept outside any form of regulation that is decided here or anywhere else, I find that a worrying idea.

Let me ask all comrades and colleagues around this room today to consider the effects of the amendments that could be passed this week, the damage they could cause, the lack of confidence that would surely emerge and the damage it would do to this nascent market.

Mr President, may I begin by expressing the heartfelt thanks of the Commission for the work that has been done by Mrs Kauppi.

We are most appreciative of that work and of her report because it concerns a matter which is of importance, not so much to governments, but in particular to the private citizens of the European Union, as Mrs Randzio-Plath said a little while ago.

May I also express the appreciation of the European Commission for the continuing support from this Parliament for the e-money initiative and, indeed, for all the Commission's e-commerce initiatives.

The Commission has noticed the high level of cooperation between Parliament, Council and Commission in reaching an early agreement on the e-money proposals.

As evidence thereof perhaps I may cite the high number of amendments put forward by Parliament, amendments which were then accepted by the Council and by the Commission.

We certainly have taken due cognisance of the wishes expressed by this Parliament, and we have done our best to integrate them in the proposals that are now in front of you, as noted by Mr Huhne.

May I, however, express the Commission's disappointment that Mrs Kauppi's initial report could not be accepted.

That report recognised the high level of cooperation between Council, Commission and Parliament as well as the delicate nature of the common position.

In relation now to the specific amendments, I should like to say the following.

The first two that deal with redeemability at par value introduce unnecessary legal uncertainty into the text.

The provision on redeemability, which was proposed by this Parliament at the first reading - a first reading which took place almost a year ago - and was accepted by the Council, is clear.

It means that e-money must be redeemed for cash on request minus any deductions for legitimate costs in carrying out the transactions.

It seems to me that is a perfectly reasonable position.

The recognition of allowing the deduction of reasonable costs conflicts with an obligation to redeem at par value.

On this basis, and for this reason, I cannot regrettably accept the first two amendments.

Amendments Nos 3 and 4 propose substantially to limit the circumstances in which Member States may waive the application of some or all of the provisions of the directive to certain limited electronic money schemes; here I am concerned because of a misunderstanding on the waiver provisions.

These provisions are optional, they are limited in their application to specific identifiable schemes and they are on a case by case basis.

May I add that schemes which benefit from any waiver will not benefit from the European passport.

They will continue to be credit institutions and therefore fall within the monetary control of the European Central Bank in the euro-zone.

Therefore, the justification for their deletion on the basis of monetary policy concerns is unfounded.

They continue to report to the competent authorities on a periodic basis.

While on this point, I should like to say that I am a little intrigued by questions put and remarks made by Members of this Parliament on monetary stability and monetary supply.

As stated by Mr Skinner, under the e-money procedure the customer first pays in his money and then gets the equivalent amount of electronic money.

In other words, in the whole process not an iota of money is created.

Therefore considerations of monetary supply or monetary stability - as one Member put it, e-money as a vector of credit - simply do not apply.

E-money does not mean that money is created.

It means that money is paid into an institution and received in another form, but it is the same amount of money.

Therefore I should like to lay these apprehensions to rest.

There is no possibility that monetary instability will arise from the phenomenon of e-money.

Returning to the waiver provisions, if the directive should fail because of deletion of the waiver provisions - and Parliament originally proposed they should be extended - there is a very real possibility that it will prove very difficult, if not impossible, to harmonise e-money rules in the future.

We want them to be harmonised, not least because the citizens of the European Union want that.

If these two directives fail it will be detrimental to European consumers, businesses and the whole e-commerce initiative.

If there are legitimate concerns or if issues which have not yet been identified arise in the next few years, they can always be taken into account in the review of the application of the directives.

The Commission is committed to a review, which will take place three years after the coming into force of the directives.

Regrettably, therefore, I cannot accept Amendments Nos 3 or 4.

As far as the Commission is concerned we would like them to be rejected by Parliament, in the same way as Amendments Nos 1 and 2 will hopefully be rejected.

Turning to Amendment No 5, which amends the text so as to prohibit Member States from waiving the redeemability requirement but does not limit in any other way the provisions of Article 8 allowing Member States to waive the provisions of the directive in respect of certain limited schemes, the Commission's view of this amendment is somewhat less unfriendly than it is regarding Amendments Nos 1 to 4.

Still, we would support the view expressed by Mrs Kauppi, who said that it would be best for all concerned, if all five amendments were rejected.

In the light of these considerations, I ask Parliament most earnestly to reconsider its amendments for fear that the directives will be lost and deformed in the conciliation process.

The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon.

The next item is the recommendation for second reading (A5-0084/2000) on behalf of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to adopting a European Parliament and Council directive 95/53/EC fixing the principles governing the organisation of official inspections in the field of animal nutrition 10804/1/1999 - C5-0273/1999 - 1998/0301(COD) (Rapporteur: Mr Staes)

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, Commissioner, practice has shown that scandals and crises can have a cleansing effect and can help improve legislation. This is most certainly the case for all legislation related to food safety, either directly or indirectly.

There are ample examples to prove this.

It is now more than 20 years, for example, since the discovery of the presence of female sex hormones in jars of baby food led directly to the hormone directives being issued in 1981 and 1985 and revised in 1988.

Another example is the clenbuterol scandal which led to the slaughter of more than 15 000 calves in North Rhine-Westphalia in 1988 and which brought about a change in the original legislation of the hormone directives in 1996.

In Flanders, where I come from, we now have what I would term, without hesitation, the strictest national hormone legislation in Europe following a whole series of attacks on meat inspectors and the murder of the devoted veterinary surgeon, Karel Van Noppen.

Scandals can have a cleansing effect.

This is also evident today as we scrutinise the amendment to Directive 95/53 at second reading. Once again, this amendment has been prompted by a minor scandal, namely the importing of citrus pulp from Brazil contaminated with dioxin.

Citrus pulp is used as a feed for dairy cows and this is how dioxin ended up in milk for public consumption.

The authorities in Baden-Württemberg discovered this, got the ball rolling and established that between December 1997 and February 1998, a total of nearly 106 000 tonnes of contaminated pulp entered the European Union.

The scandal taught us that the Commission did not have the means to act forcefully in emergencies.

As a result, the Commission presented, at the request of the Member States, a proposal to amend the present directive on 4 November 1998.

As early as 16 December of that same year, Parliament assented to this proposal without tabling one single amendment.

After the Treaty of Amsterdam came into effect, the Commission immediately changed the legal basis of 100 A to 152. On 15 November last, the Council laid down the present common position.

The Council made a few editorial changes, which were not a problem for us at the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy. What does cause a problem for us, however, is the way in which the Council has robbed the Commission of the ability to act immediately in case of an emergency.

I will have to put my technical hat on for a moment and mention the tangle of comitology legislation because, since the Commission proposal has been submitted, comitology legislation has been changed and, from now on, Council Decision 1999/468 applies.

This legislation offers us various procedures for transferring the powers of the Council to the Commission. Today, we should focus on Articles 5 and 6 of the Council Decision.

Article 5 provides for a regulatory procedure, Article 6 for a safeguard procedure.

The original Commission proposal, as it was approved by our Parliament at first reading, was clearly written in the spirit of the existing safeguard procedure.

The Council would now like to do away with it in its common position and replace it by the regulatory procedure. It should, however, be clear to all MEPs that the Commission cannot act independently according to this latter procedure and must always seek permission from the Council.

After the citrus pulp scandal, the Member States themselves requested that the Commission should act.

I am of the opinion that we should give the Commission the opportunity to act swiftly.

The four amendments which have been tabled aim to ensure that Article 6 of comitology legislation, i.e. the safeguard procedure, can be applied. The Commission will then be able to act immediately in cases of emergency and can then, for example, suspend the importing of products which would harm public and animal health.

The Council will then have 30 days to change, supplement or even reverse this decision. If the Council fails to act during these 30 days, the measures enacted by the Commission will then lapse.

I believe that this is good working practice - so far, the Council has never abused this kind of power - and it therefore deserves our support, against the wishes of the Council.

We should all bear in mind that this dossier is only an intermediate step.

On the day my report was approved in the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, the European Commission submitted a new proposal to amend Directive 95/53/EC. It immediately drew lessons from the dioxin crisis.

If Parliament and the Council adopt the same line as the Commission, a whole chapter will be devoted to further developing the safeguard clause and animal feed will come under a rapid system.

In fact, these matters are included in the White Paper and have helped the Commission keep its initial promises on the White Paper with regard to food safety.

Mr President, I am in favour of adopting the four amendments tomorrow and thus giving the Commission our full support.

We should join forces with the Commission against the Council and move towards a conciliation procedure.

Mr President, Commissioner, in recent years the numerous problems and crises in the area of animal nutrition have sadly brought home to us the importance of official animal nutrition inspections.

The rapporteur, Mr Staes, has mentioned some here.

We know that animal feedingstuffs are the first link in the food chain which ends with humans, and animal feedingstuffs must therefore be safe.

BSE and dioxin are only the best known watchwords in this area, which repeatedly make many in the European Union flinch and ask questions to which we, as those with political responsibility, must provide answers.

Such questions as: what advantage is there in the internal market if it can lead to unchecked dangers?

Who is protecting us and who is providing the safeguards?

Europe has a responsibility and a duty in this regard: we are obliged to manage the internal market, which we have created and which we all want, so that risks, not least to the life and well-being of our citizens and consumers, are kept to a minimum, with the aim of eventually eliminating them altogether.

The proposed amendment of Directive 95/53/EC fixing the principles governing the organisation of official inspections in the field of animal nutrition is intended to create a legal basis for a harmonised procedure for checking documents and inspecting goods from third countries.

With the consent of these countries, it will also be possible to carry out on-the-spot inspections.

This is justified because anyone who wants to trade with us must meet our conditions and supply safe goods.

In respect of the Commission proposal, which Parliament approved at first reading without amendments, the Council has now made amendments to its common position which we do not wish to support.

The Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy is now submitting four amendments in plenary to Mr Staes' s report.

This report has been adopted unanimously in committee and will therefore be supported by all groups.

The original Commission proposal has thus been readopted by us.

We consider that it is absolutely imperative that in urgent cases we can act rapidly.

Unfortunately, experience shows that safety is not created by good rules alone, but that it also requires an inspection system with the necessary powers of access which can act rapidly and, if need be, impose effective sanctions.

The Commission must be given the necessary powers here as guardian of the treaties.

This is why, in the Environment Committee, the European People' s Party supported the amendment of Article 9a of the directive for official animal nutrition inspections, which grants the European Commission the right of initiative in cases of acute danger, empowering them to independently initiate measures in line with the severity of the grievance and within the framework of proportionality.

The Council is then obliged, within 30 days, to process these measures, to validate them and to legitimise or, if necessary, reject them.

I do not think we need a new committee; we already have the permanent animal nutrition committee.

In Germany we have a saying which runs: "when I don' t know what to do next, I appoint a committee".

Too many committees cause delays and, ultimately, confusion.

We must use the existing facilities and use them efficiently.

Europe and the internal market can only exist if they are also accepted by the citizens and the consumers.

For this they need confidence, and confidence only comes through openness and transparency.

The scandals which we have all discussed show that transparency and openness are becoming more and more important.

The Member States, the Council and the European Commission must look upon one another as natural partners which support one another and work together constructively to protect citizens and consumers in a manner which engenders confidence.

Finally, I must sincerely thank the rapporteur for his excellent work and balanced report.

Mr President, the rapporteur said in his introduction that crises have a cleansing effect.

I listened to him and hope that what he said is right.

He is evidently more optimistic than I am.

I do not really think that crises have a purifying effect.

If crises were to have a purifying effect, then Agriculture Ministers would have rather more understanding than they evidently do.

Once again we are sitting and standing in this Parliament at a time when we are, for the most part, agreed among ourselves and with the Commission, whilst the person with whom we do not agree, namely the Council representative, is absent.

It would be nice if he could be made aware of this, but that is probably unlikely.

The rapporteur, and also Mrs Klaß, who has just spoken, have pointed out that Parliament allowed the Commission proposal to pass through first reading unamended.

This means that the institutions who are not always in agreement were, on this occasion, agreed.

And what has the Council learnt from this?

It was the Council (and I say this again in all clarity, drawing in part on my own experiences of recent years) which basically got us into the BSE scandal.

It was not this Parliament, and only to a very minor extent the Commission. It was the Council of Ministers who tried repeatedly to keep things under wraps.

So what has it learnt from the BSE crisis?

Has it learnt that it is better to be transparent?

Has it learnt that it is better to permit safeguard options and safeguard clauses?

Has it learnt that rapid action is needed?

It has learnt none of these things!

It has submitted to us a common position in which the option to have a safeguard clause will actually be taken away from the Commission.

It will not have the option to get involved quickly and unbureaucratically on the basis of safeguard clauses.

It will also not have the option to make unannounced on-the-spot inspections.

It will not be in a position to act quickly.

And it will also not need to inform the European Parliament, nor will it need to publish any inspection reports lest, heaven forbid, the public finds out something which worries it.

It is better to leave things in the hands of the Agriculture Ministers.

I can see the Council representative writing busily and I hope that this will also be passed on to the Presidency and the other members of the Council of Agriculture Ministers.

I am sorry if I am not being very amiable at the moment, and particularly with my cold I would much rather be mellow, but the fact is I am not.

I consider this common position to be scandalous!

It is we who have worked for untainted animal feedingstuffs in recent years, we who established that we got BSE because animal feedingstuffs were mixed in a way in which they should never have been mixed, we who established that there just happens to be dioxin in the peel of oranges and other fruits and that we have it in our animal feed, we who established that sewage sludge has no place in animal feedingstuffs, we who established that hormones should not accelerate growth and do not belong in animal feedingstuffs, we who established that there is no place for antibiotics, nor cough medicines for calves - we have established all these things; my goodness, I am making more agricultural policy, and I come from the constituency of Berlin, which is a purely urban constituency, than my voters can imagine, because it is consumer protection policy - and if we know all of this, then what is the Council learning from it?

Yet again we are providing an example here right across all the groups, the rapporteur, Mrs Klaß, who has just spoken for her group, and me for my group, of how the institutions work closely together.

We support, Mr Byrne, the fact that you will have the opportunities which you need in the Commission in Brussels, for example via the Food and Veterinary Office in Dublin, that will enable you to carry out rapid inspections and take safeguard measures, so that we are actually able to say to consumers that we genuinely care about safe food, and safe feedingstuffs and animal nutrition inspections are the first step in all this.

I thank you for the fact that you will obviously now be able to table a motion for the primary inspection of European Union products, not just, as in this instance, products from third countries.

It only makes sense if we prevent this in unison and only then, Commissioner, does the White Paper on food safety, which you have presented, also make sense.

I therefore hope that, tomorrow, we will actually slap the Council of Ministers in the face by unanimously affirming the rapporteur' s four amendments.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I do not have time to philosophise in just one minute. The important thing, then, is to thank the Commission, and our rapporteur, Mr Staes, for having finally made sense of the White Paper presented by Romano Prodi, which included a chapter on the food chain and animal feedingstuffs.

Animals are just the first link in the chain which leads ultimately to human beings.

But our impression is that the Council does not see this.

The Council does not appear to see that, after the dioxin crisis, every day since the start of the year there have been cases of mad cows just about everywhere in Europe.

The Council does not therefore see what we have seen, which is that as a follow-up to European legislation it is necessary to have structures to monitor and take fast action in the event of a problem.

In the context of the forthcoming establishment of the European health authority, it would therefore be advisable to allocate this body real resources in order to enable fast detection and thus prevent contagion.

It would also be advisable that all animal feed industry operators should sign proper specifications with the competent health authorities that aim to reduce accidents as much as possible and that accept certain thresholds, making it possible to take any additive raw material or animal feedingstuff components out of circulation, and thus helping to restore consumer confidence.

Mr President, I would like to thank Mr Staes for his report on the organisation of inspections in the field of animal nutrition and for the broad support that was also given to the Commission position by Mr Olsson, Mrs Klaß and Mrs Roth-Behrendt.

I particularly appreciate the good collaboration with Parliament in this case.

Already at first reading, Parliament fully supported the Commission's proposal.

The proposal aims at improving control measures in the field of animal nutrition.

It intends to harmonise inspection procedures for all products imported from third countries.

In 1998, the detection of dioxin in some raw materials imported into the Community showed the need for a legal basis to permit the Commission when confronted by a serious risk to public health to adopt safeguard measures on products from third countries.

The proposal also extends the legal basis to carry out on-the-spot inspections, both in Member States and in third countries.

I have to say that I was surprised by the Council's rejection of the Commission proposal for the safeguard clause and by the introduction of a committee procedure that will not guarantee that a prompt decision is taken in the event of a serious risk to human or animal health.

As a matter of fact, the dioxin contamination has clearly shown how important rapid action is, in particular when a danger spreads from the feed to the food chain.

I should also highlight the fact that similar provisions already exist in food and veterinary legislation and there is no evidence of misuse of this instrument.

The Commission, although not opposed to most of the amendments made by the Council, strongly rejected the Council amendment concerning the safeguard procedure.

Council has denied the possibility for the Commission to take immediate action in emergency cases without consulting Member States beforehand.

The possibility for the Commission situations to react quickly in emergency cases even before consulting Member States is a landmark question.

The discussion in the present case constitutes an important precedent for the future.

Following the dioxin crisis of May 1999, the Commission announced legislative acts to improve the legal provisions regulating feed safety.

In the recent proposal to the European Parliament and to the Council adopted on 21 March, the Commission introduced the same safeguard clause concerning feedingstuffs produced within the European Union.

Consequently, this question will also be relevant for several measures on feedingstuffs which are of vital importance and which are announced in the White Paper on food safety.

For all these reasons, I can fully accept Amendments Nos 1, 2, and 4 by which Parliament reintroduces the original provision on safeguard procedures.

Although it is not so important as the other amendments, I can also accept Amendment No 3 regarding the carrying out of on-the-spot inspections.

In the light of the plenary's support for the amendments put forward by the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, I will press once more on the Council the strong case for supporting the proposal's original provisions.

The vote will be taken tomorrow at 12 noon.

Food additives other than colours and sweeteners

The next item is the report by Mr Lannoye (A5-0072/2000), on behalf of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive amending Directive 95/2 on food additives other than colours and sweeteners COM(1999) 329 - C5-0068/1999 - 1999/0158(COD).

- (FR) Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, we are now going to discuss a second aspect of the food safety issue.

The fact is, over the years, more and more additives have been used in foodstuffs, in connection, in particular, with the industrialisation of food production.

When I say 'more and more' , you only have to look at the figures.

A survey of the current situation shows that 307 additives are authorised within the European Union.

We are effectively working with a positive list.

All the additives given on this list are authorised; any not included are, by the same token, prohibited.

That makes 307 authorised additives, only 163 of which may be considered as totally harmless, indicating that many others are either suspect or actually cause food safety-related problems.

I am thinking in particular of the problem of allergies.

Not reducing the list, but extending it a little further since the Commission has made nine proposals, either to add certain additives to the list or to extend the uses of some already authorised additives.

In principle, there are three criteria governing the acceptance of a new additive: technological need, usefulness for the consumer and harmlessness.

It must be acknowledged that, in the course of time, technological need has always been the predominant criterion.

It is not that the criterion of harmlessness has been ignored, just that it has been modified slightly over time.

It is common knowledge today that the precautionary principle was practically unheard of seven or eight years ago, whereas today it has come to the fore.

The situation must therefore be reviewed from a different perspective to the one we took a few years ago.

I therefore find it quite astounding - as indeed does the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy - that a number of additives are being proposed for inclusion, for which we do not have assurances.

Of the Commission' s nine proposals, we think that five are suspect for one reason or another.

Firstly, an additive called sodium alginate is proposed for use on grated carrots.

The usefulness for the consumer is that the grated carrots will appear to be 'fresh' even though they are actually not.

This is quite clear, just from reading the relevant literature.

As for the risks to the consumer, apparently these are not very significant, but the Scientific Committees which have looked into the matter do consider that the laxative effect of this additive is likely to combine with other problems of the same type.

It is not, therefore, necessarily to be recommended.

In consideration of the fact that this involves deception of the consumer rather than improving the situation for the consumer, our opinion is that this additive must not be accepted.

There is another additive which presents a huge problem, E467.

I will refrain from giving its official name because it is far too long and complex, and I think it would be even harder to translate.

E467 is problematic in terms of assessing its harmlessness, because it contains extremely dangerous impurities.

One such impurity is ethylene oxide, which the relevant scientific authorities recognise is a proven carcinogen.

We must consequently reject this one too.

Finally, three other additives are proposed as propellants.

These are inflammable gases - butane, isobutane and propane.

In view of the fact that there are alternative solutions - the technological need is therefore a real one, but it can be fulfilled by other additives - and that, in addition, after cooking, after the use of these products, the residues in the form of organic products are not, a priori, harmless, we consider that these additives cannot be approved either.

That is a brief overview of the problem.

As far as we are concerned there are five additives which should not be authorised, and the four others do not seem to present any problem, based on a reading of the scientific literature about them. As we are not absolutist, we consider that they may be accepted.

I think it is important, Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, to reverse the trend in the current legislation on additives.

The Commission has announced a radical revision of the directive.

I think we would be sending out a positive message if we indicated that we do not wish to maintain the attitude which has dominated for years, allowing the number of additives to grow and grow, even though we know nothing about their synergistic effects in combination.

Quite the contrary, we think we should move towards a much more limited list, and remove the most suspect additives from the list.

I have counted around fifty of these myself.

Others should be used far less widely.

I am thinking, for example, of nitrites, nitrates and sulphites which are known to present proven health problems.

Mr President, the way in which we feed ourselves is an expression of how we live.

Some people criticise what I would call the modern western lifestyle, rightly or wrongly. The answer to this question is often determined by the choices we make.

What matters to the European People' s Party is that the consumer has choices. This presupposes both the availability of information and the guarantee that what is on offer on the market does not present any health risks and that all products are manufactured in accordance with current rules and procedures.

As far as additives are concerned, the basic rules are enshrined in the 1989 Framework Directive.

This directive stipulates that an additive shall only be admitted if there is sufficient technological need, if there is no risk to the health of the consumer and if the consumer is not misled in the process.

In our view, the latter condition has not been met regarding the admission of sodium alginate in peeled and sliced carrots. If consumers buy fresh carrots, they must be able to assume that these are untreated and not processed and they do not expect them to be dipped in a preservative.

To assess whether the use of additives is necessary, the Framework Directive lists various accepted objectives.

One of these is the supply of ingredients or components of foodstuffs to patients with dietary needs.

The use of E 467 - I will not attempt to pronounce the full word - as proposed by the Commission, seems to meet this requirement.

Finally, the Framework Directive also stipulates that facilitating the manufacture and preparation of foodstuffs is an acceptable criterion of usefulness.

In the light of this, our Group is not really opposed to permitting three additives in baking sprays, unlike the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy.

All other amendments tabled by this committee receive our support, including the amendment tabled by the PSE Group.

I would like to add the following if you will allow me.

Firstly: the rapporteur who, incidentally, has worked extremely hard - I have rarely seen a rapporteur put so much effort into one report and I would like to congratulate him on this - has every right to complain about the Commission providing Parliament with insufficient information in the COM document.

Something was added at the end, but I do not think that this is the way forward and I would like to find out from the Commissioner whether he intends to do anything about this in the future.

Secondly, the effects on public health must obviously be assessed on a scientific basis. For this purpose, we call on the Scientific Committee for Food for scientific opinions.

After the BSE crisis, the Scientific Committees were reformed at our request and, as we have said before, they have been reformed to our satisfaction. We now have to make a decision: either we accept the opinions of the Scientific Committees in principle, or we do not; but then these Scientific Committees will need to be reformed once again.

We cannot do a bit of both.

I fear that if we do not, out of principle almost, accept the conclusions reached by the Scientific Committees, this will cost us and the legislation we draft dearly in terms of credibility, and we will then end up replacing the expertise of the scientists in the Scientific Committees by our own convictions. This is something I find difficult to come to terms with.

Thirdly, I would like to know from the Commission if it intends to screen the permitted additives at set times and examine these according to state-of-the-art technology, as the rapporteur has asked in his explanatory note, and quite rightly so.

Fourthly, and on a final note, I would like to say a few words on the hierarchy of standards.

We have asked for a hierarchy of standards in the IGC report and we have also mentioned this elsewhere.

Could the Commissioner tell me whether he thinks that lists of additives should be drafted or completed within the European Parliament and the Council, preferably according to a codecision procedure, or is this a task which, in his opinion, should be carried out by an authorised executive body?

Mr President, our foodstuffs - and this also applies to entirely fresh produce, for example the peeled carrots we heard mentioned today - are nowadays doctored in all kinds of ways with colouring agents, sweeteners, flavour enhancers and preservatives, in fact with every possible type of substance. And all in order to disguise the products' natural characteristics.

It is, of course, not just a few substances we are talking about.

Nowadays, we use several thousands of additives and, where the majority of these are concerned, the fact is that we are not even aware of their consequences for health.

To top it all, we are in fact aware that a large number of them are harmful, and yet we still allow them to be used.

I think that Community policy in relation to the use of additives has developed in a quite irresponsible way.

I should therefore like to support Mr Lannoye' s report.

I think a splendid piece of work has been carried out.

New additives ought to be refused and any increase in the quantity of accepted and permitted substances should be rejected.

Instead, I think the Commission needs seriously to rationalise the number of additives.

In the general remarks in his report, Mr Lannoye points to many substances which ought to be investigated, including antibiotics added directly to foodstuffs.

I should like to point out a further problem.

It is a problem which Mr Lannoye also mentioned in his intervention, namely the question of adding nitrates and nitrites to meat products.

In my opinion, the quantities of these compounds that are permitted are way too excessive.

A major investigation by five consumer organisations in Europe has recently shown that a large proportion of meat products contains quite large quantities of nitrosamines.

Nitrosamine is a carcinogenic substance which is derived from, and produced by, nitrates and nitrites.

I think the situation is unacceptable in this area, but I do not see the investigation having made any impression upon the Commission.

I think that the quantity of nitrates and nitrites added to meat products ought to be considerably reduced and that there should be compulsory monitoring of the quantity of nitrosamine which, as I said, is of course a powerfully carcinogenic substance, the presence of which in our foodstuffs is not presently measured at all.

I hope that Commissioner Byrne, who has assumed responsibility for this area, will examine the question of added amounts of nitrates and nitrites.

I think we have a serious problem in this regard and I hope he will confirm that this will be done.

Finally, I would say that, in my view, we need quite a thorough rationalisation of the quantity of additives in our foodstuffs.

Mr President, the report is concerned with supplementing a list of permitted additives with additional foodstuff additives, other than colouring agents and flavourings.

This means that the Commission suggests supplementing the list with additives which have not yet been used. It does not, however, mean deleting any additives from the list.

In terms of food and food safety, the needs and wishes of the consumer need to be given more consideration than has been the case in the past. That does not mean, of course, that we can ignore the interests of the foodstuff manufacturers or that we should turn our back on modern food production methods, as Mr Pojarno mentioned a moment ago.

It does mean, however, that food safety must be at the top of the agenda. Whilst many additives are harmless, this does not mean that they all are.

And if harmlessness has not been established 100%, there is no doubt that the only correct way forward is to ban the use of the product.

In addition, it is useful to get manufacturers to spell out the benefit of adding substances for the consumer. The example of E401 or sodium alginate - a word which I can pronounce - has been mentioned.

This makes stale carrots look fresh. What consumer interest is served by doing this?

What is in the interests of the consumer differs from one consumer to another and from one consumer group to the next. But what is clear is that all consumers benefit from sound consumer information so that they are not misled.

This report literally takes a refreshing look at the problem, and not before time. The rapporteur is to be congratulated on this and the report can count on the support of the liberal group.

Mr President, naturally we too wish to congratulate our colleagues.

Mr Lannoye has done an excellent job; indeed, he has achieved what the Commission failed to.

The Commission only offers talk of the precautionary principle, whereas Mr Lannoye has shown in his report that it is also about implementing it in practice and actually making the precautionary principle a keynote.

I also fail to see what the Commission promised, i.e. transparency.

It is nothing less than consumer deception if we are giving the illusion of freshness which does not in reality exist.

Commissioner, you must finally come clean as to why you are not envisaging that unpacked foodstuffs, in particular fruit and vegetables, should also be compulsorily labelled.

I would also like to once again stress what Mr Lannoye has said.

This report makes clear that we need a reform of additives.

We cannot place hundreds of additives on the market simply because industry wants it.

It has nothing to do with competition that we reject what the Commission is proposing.

We actually need, as in Japan, a limited list of 70-100 additives and I would have liked to know what the Commissioner thinks of this.

Industry will then have to decide the ones it wants.

That would at least be an innovative viewpoint which makes competition the basis.

Mr Lannoye is right that we must lay our cards on the table in this regard and do justice to the precautionary principle.

Mr President, I should like to start by saying that, with Paul Lannoye as rapporteur, the report concerned has been placed in very competent hands, and I am able fully to support all his conclusions.

As is well known, there are three prior conditions which must be fulfilled if additives are to be included on the positive list.

There should be a technological need, the product should be useful to the consumer and there should be documentary proof of its being harmless.

Paul Lannoye rightly points out that none of the prerequisites are present in the case of sodium alginate.

The substance is not useful to the consumer. On the contrary, it directly misleads the consumer by making sliced carrots look fresh, even if they are not.

It is also very unfortunate that the synergy effect has not been investigated.

It is, on principle, very alarming that the Commission should be able to extend the list of additives just because the substances are permitted in parts of the EU.

This rule ought to be changed so that an additive can only be put on the positive list if there is a clearly documented technological need for it which is also, mind you, of benefit to consumers.

It is ironic to be having to deal with this proposal such a short time after the publication of the Commission' s White Paper on Foodstuffs.

In the white paper, the Commission itself attaches importance to limiting the consumption of additives in order - as the Commission puts it - to thereby avoid negative effects on health.

The Commission also states that it wishes to guide consumers as best it can so that they themselves can make a choice.

On examining this proposed directive, the conclusion has to be drawn that there is very little connection between words and deeds in the EU' s handling of additives.

I seem to remember that the original intention in drafting a positive list was partly that it should be possible to decide to remove additives from the list.

Current liberalisation of the quantity of permitted additives is worrying.

Let us, therefore, have the list shortened as soon as possible rather than extended.

In addition to what Mr Lund has said about nitrites and nitrates, I would mention that, in the course of the last part-session, I asked the Commission if the newly discovered scientific facts about these two substances' effects on health had caused the Commission to review its position.

The answer was unfortunately 'no' and, in common with Mr Lund, I should like to see that 'no' justified here today.

Mr President, I share in principle the opinion of the rapporteur that new additives in foodstuffs should not be approved if there is no actual need for them.

However, I would like to point out that we ought to consider the fact that there might be a regional or national tradition that justifies the approval of an additive.

The additive I am thinking of in this regard is ethylhydroxyethylcellulose.

This substance is no luxury and it is not addictive.

Ethylhydroxyethylcellulose has, however, been used for more than 20 years in Sweden and Finland, and I think also in Norway, as a binding agent in gluten-free bread and pastries.

It is used in order to prevent gluten-free bread and pastries from crumbling apart and in order that the relatively small group of people with an intolerance for gluten are able to eat bread and pastries in the same form as other healthy people.

Ethylhydroxyethylcellulose is particularly suitable for the kind of bread traditionally made in the northern region of the EU.

The substance is, therefore, not completely exchangeable for other, already approved types of cellulose.

The rapporteur claims that there is a risk of contaminants in ethylhydroxyethylcellulose that could have a carcinogenic effect and also suggests that high doses could have a laxative effect.

However, I maintain that in reality the opposite may be true.

The fact that the bread sticks together and does not have to be eaten with a spoon because it has broken into a mass of crumbs is particularly important for children with gluten intolerance.

These children have difficulty understanding why they should have to eat breadcrumbs when other children eat whole bread that does not crumble into pieces.

If children are careless about their diet, there is an increased risk of malnutrition.

If children with gluten intolerance abandon the breadcrumbs and eat normal bread, they will suffer from stomach pain and they can then develop diarrhoea.

In the long term, there is probably also an increased risk of contracting cancer of the stomach or intestine.

For many families with gluten intolerant children, life is very difficult and the extra work involved in managing their diet is tremendous.

These families cannot buy their bread, but have to make it themselves and add the binding agent themselves.

Why should we make life even more difficult for these families?

Why should they not be allowed to continue to use the binding agent that they are used to using?

Not approving ethylhydroxyethylcellulose makes life more difficult for people with gluten intolerance and for families with gluten intolerant children.

In this case it is not possible to invoke the precautionary principle in order to ban the substance.

On the contrary, the precautionary principle favours the approval of ethylhydroxyethylcellulose.

Mr President, like everyone else in this debate I should like to congratulate Mr Lannoye.

He and I sometimes cross swords on the issue of other nutritious additives, but in this case we are looking very much at the essence of the burden of proof before this list is yet further extended.

He has done a service to the committee and also to this House by pointing out that this procedure appears to be almost always one-way.

We need to hear from the Commission on two points of principle: the first is whether the procedures themselves need review as the Commission spokesman suggested in the debate in the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy; secondly, whether there is a more efficacious way of removing additives as well as bringing them into effect.

It seems to us that the list is getting larger and that the burden of proof must remain with those, be they in Member States, in the Commission or in the Scientific Committees, who want us to adapt these things.

I am prepared to accept that some of these are harmless.

Indeed, the committee and even Mr Lannoye were prepared to accept E949 and E650.

However, whilst I would not claim to be an expert - as no other member of the committee would - on the issue of which of the various propellant sprays can safely be used, enough doubts were raised in committee, not least when we heard from the representative of the Commission, about the propellant sprays themselves.

These are apparently needed by manufacturers because they produce an equal spray of fat on the utensil concerned.

One of them is there only for professional use.

The other two are regarded as safe for all.

We all want to look again at this issue and see why they have been chosen and whether we might now hold back any clearance of them, at least until the review which is suggested has been carried through.

With regard to the two amendments, my Group, whilst it supports the spirit of what Mr Lannoye proposes in Amendment No 1, would not go as far as this to write the precautionary principle itself into this particular directive.

It does not seem to us to be the right place for it.

We would prefer to strike out recital 5 and we shall so vote.

This is the place to discuss the burden of proof rather than the overall principle of precaution.

Finally, as regards Amendment No 2 in the name of my Group, this is purely a drafting amendment to remove references to the codecision procedure.

But its meaning remains crystal clear.

We do not think these additions should be made unless it can be demonstrated that the consumer benefits.

At the end of the line it is for the consumer that this is being done.

It is being done in the consumer's name.

For that reason we commend Amendment No 2.

I promise, Mr President, to be extremely brief.

I do not think we have time or that it is in fact possible to have an in-depth debate on such a complex problem, but I should like to be able to discuss the matter with the Commissioner outside this Chamber.

Firstly, I have an initial comment to make on the Scientific Committees.

It is not sufficient, Commissioner, simply to read the conclusions of the Scientific Committees.

You must read the report, as I have done.

Occasionally, reading the reports gives rise to more doubts than certainties.

I would ask you, therefore, to be a little more circumspect before rejecting all the amendments out of hand, since I can also claim to have made a scientific study of the situation.

I have gathered a number of opinions, I have read the texts, and I can tell you that you are going too far in sweeping aside the amendments we are proposing.

Next, there is one other aspect which has not been taken into account, to wit, the potential interaction between the many additives found in food.

They have never been studied together, they are studied in isolation; and that is an aspect that you must take into consideration.

The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon.

(The sitting closed at 9.20 p.m.)

Adoption of the Minutes of the previous sitting

The Minutes of yesterday' s sitting have been distributed.

Mr President, item 6 of the Minutes where we modify the agenda for the week is accurate but probably rightly does not mention that voting time on Thursday has been brought forward to 11.30 a.m. because of the large number of amendments tabled to certain reports.

I rise, therefore, to question whether Rule 139(1) of our Rules of Procedure is being applied correctly.

As you know, we spend an enormous amount of time voting on Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday lunchtimes.

We adopted a set of changes to the Rules of Procedure last year to try to rationalise our work.

In these changes we gave every Member the right to table an amendment as an individual at committee stage, but we limited the right to table amendments in plenary to 32 Members or a political group.

However, if you look at the amendments that have been tabled on Thursday, for instance to the Dimitrakopoulos-Leinen report, you will see that there are over 100 amendments which are tabled by individuals, supposedly in the name of their political group, but this may well not be the case.

I notice, for instance, that the EPP Group has over 100 amendments in its name but signed by 18 different Members, none of them the coordinator or leader of the group.

Over 20 of these amendments are contradictory, so they cannot possibly all be the position of the EPP Group.

Some are identical, tabled by different Members; and there is even a case of two identical amendments being tabled by the same Member.

Could the EPP Group please get its act together!

So much time is spent and wasted on voting as it is and this is a way to get around the rationalisation of the Rules of Procedure we adopted as a Parliament last year.

Amendments must either be tabled in the name of 32 Members or in the name of a political group and actually represent the position of that political group, not of the individual who happens to table them in the name of the group so as to circumvent the limitation on tabling rules in plenary.

I would ask the sessional services to verify in future that such amendments really are in the name of a group.

Mr President, I should just like to let Mr Corbett know that within the EPP Group an amendment cannot be put before Parliament unless it has been voted in the Group and has the support of the Group.

He should be quite clear about that procedure within our Group.

Secondly, as he is aware, there is a process going on at the moment for reforming Parliament.

If he has any suggestions to put to the Bureau about the voting procedures, that would be the correct way to go about it.

Mr Corbett, I will pass on your comments to the President, and the Bureau will look into all our working procedures in May.

Mr President, I was present yesterday and I signed the register but my name does not appear in the Minutes.

I should like that to be corrected.

It shall be done, Mrs McNally.

Mr President, in the capacity of draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Development and Cooperation on the granting of discharge for 1998, I would briefly like to mention that, last night, a partly joint committee meeting was held, involving the Committee on Budgetary Control and the Committee on Development and Cooperation, about the Rühle report.

During that meeting, agreement was reached, in principle, to adopt a compromise approach which was subsequently refined.

In practice, this means that the existing text will be replaced by a new joint compromise proposal, which will, in effect, lead to a delay in the proceedings and a reconsideration in June.

The political groups will undoubtedly submit this text some time this morning and the debate will be able to take place as normal, but it is useful for the Members to know that this debate actually took place last night and that, in actual fact, a new political situation has arisen in which the Members of the Committee on Budgetary Control and the Members of the Committee on Development and Cooperation once again agreed on what we consider to be a more positive approach.

Mr President, I should just like to say in reply to Mr van den Berg that the report on postponing discharge for the Structural Funds is ready and the vote will be taken on the premise that this is indeed merely a postponement and does not grant or refuse discharge and that everything which we worked on together yesterday will be taken into account in the final version, i.e. that we shall nonetheless debate and vote on Mrs Rühle' s report.

Mr President, I have a request; every member has a very precise timetable.

We agree on a great number of deadlines in the citizens' interest.

Today, yet again, the sitting has been brought forward, this time to 8.30 a.m.

I think it would be conducive to greater overall efficiency if we stuck to a basic programme and stopped changing arrangements at short notice.

Mr Rübig, look upon it as an exceptional decision taken in response to specific requests from the Portuguese Presidency.

Mr President, on a point of order.

It concerns a reference made yesterday by the President on the change of business which is taking place this week.

I am very concerned indeed about the reference that the President made as to who would be present from the Council when the President of Austria attends this Parliament tomorrow.

There was, and still is, concern among a lot of people that the change of business means that the Council will be absent on that important occasion.

I should like to have some assurances that the Council will be represented at a sufficiently senior level to offer the respect which this Parliament traditionally offers when these sorts of visits occur.

I will pass on your comments to the President, Mr Kirkhope.

Vote on request for urgent procedure

Mr President, whilst the Council has made this request and we are quite happy to do what we can to ensure that things are speeded up, there is no need to vote on this urgency today.

It is planned for our agenda in May.

The way the finances are at present, there will be no problem in financing the High Representative in Bosnia-Herzegovina, whose money is guaranteed until the end of this year, as are also the substantial funds available for the UNMIK operation there.

We can leave this until next month.

(Parliament rejected the request for urgent procedure)

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, "zero tolerance towards fraud and other forms of incorrect conduct is a precondition for regaining confidence in the European civil service" . These are the words of Mr Kinnock, the vice-president of the Commission in charge of reform, in the Commission' s consultation paper dated 18 January 2000.

It was on this premise and with the noble claim that it would not repeat past mistakes - the last Commission having been brought down just under a year ago as the result of fraud and irregularities - that the Prodi Commission took office in September.

The Commission must be measured against this claim and its self-evident obligation, as guardian of the Treaties vis-à-vis third parties, to guarantee that their application begins at home.

It was against this yardstick that the Committee on Budgetary Control came to the conclusion, as the leading committee, that it would recommend that discharge be postponed until 15 May 2000 and would call on the Commission to adopt 17 measures.

These measures relate mainly to four areas which still require clarification or the oft-quoted fresh start.

Firstly, the error rate of over five per cent calculated by the Court of Auditors over several years must be cut considerably by 2001 and a positive declaration of assurance must be achieved by 2003.

Secondly, the particularly blatant cases of fraud and irregularity in connection with the Fléchard case, ECHO, MED and contracts awarded to visiting scientists must be fully clarified and dealt with in disciplinary terms.

Thirdly, Parliament must be given unrestricted access to information and documents for its control activities, as called for in the 1997 discharge resolution.

Fourthly: reports must be filed on the relevant disciplinary hearings and fundamental reforms implemented.

The Committee did not pass this resolution lightly and finally adopted the proposal submitted by a large majority of 19 votes to 1.

The fact that this motion was tabled in the form of a compromise between the four main groups demonstrates clearly that Parliament is pulling in the same direction on this extremely important issue and wishes to signal its unity over and above party political divisions and any national interests or chauvinism.

The Commission should agree to it if it wishes to retain its credibility in its handling of the taxes paid by European citizens and its democratic dealings with the elected representatives of the people of Europe.

I feel particularly strongly about the integrity and the ability of the European executive to act, especially in view of the imminent enlargement of the EU, because the Commission needs to have its hands free for political policy-making and must not be hampered by time-consuming and irritating justification campaigns.

Parliament takes the control function assigned to it in the European Treaties seriously.

All the cases of fraud and irregularity addressed in the resolution relate directly to the 1998 financial year, even though some originated much earlier.

All the measures called for must be carried out by the deadline set.

All the cases are awaiting a decision.

Clearly, the new Commission cannot be held directly responsible for the cases I have referred to, even if not all the members of the Commission are new.

But it is responsible for dealing with this legacy and it will only distinguish itself positively from its predecessors if it takes a ruthless approach and clears up every last one of these cases.

The Commission should also take a close look at how it treats officials who deserve the highest respect for their courageous sense of civic duty in dealing with irregularities.

Despite countless lofty announcements, there is as yet no real evidence of a fresh start.

Commissioner' s Kinnock' s reform paper, which is broad in scope if nothing else, sets off every single alarm bell in the area of financial control.

Decentralisation must not result in the total de facto abolition of internal financial control.

On the contrary, care must be taken to ensure that reforms concentrate on basics and that the principle of quality before quantity still applies.

My conclusion is this: "Words enough have been exchanged, let me at last see some action.

While you fashion compliments, something useful may happen."

You see, good old Goethe had the right words even in this situation.

In this sense, I see the motion for a resolution as a chance for the Commission to justify the trust which Parliament demonstrated in it and its President when I was nominated last September and which it reiterated in its discharge for the 1997 budgetary year.

The motion should also send out nothing more and nothing less than a clear signal of Parliament' s support to the President of the Commission, who unfortunately is not with us here today.

I should like to call on the President to grab this chance and to make use, where necessary, of the powers to issue directives granted to him.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, we have a number of difficult decisions to take this week.

Controlling the Executive is one of Parliament' s main rights and that right centres on budgetary control.

However, it is difficult to grant discharge for a budget which is two years old and this problem is exacerbated by the fact that it was not the responsibility of the present Commission but of its predecessor, a Commission which resigned because it failed to take its responsibilities seriously enough.

Our yardstick must therefore be the central issue of what the new Commission' s attitude is towards responsibility.

A good example of this, in my view, is the discharge for the Development Funds.

Our Committee had confidential information on mismanagement and irregularities which amounted to suspicion of corruption.

In response to our questions, we received only inadequate information, for which we had to wait a long time.

The majority of the Committee therefore decided to suspend discharge in order to obtain more information.

In the meantime, however, we have good news to impart.

Together with representatives from the Commission and the parliamentary Committee on Development we have drawn up an action plan, which can be implemented by 15 May.

I am therefore able to correct my report in this respect, i.e. we shall replace my report with this specific action plan and propose that we suspend discharge until 15 May and we shall then grant discharge on 15 May on the basis of the Commission report on the action plan.

I think that this development clearly demonstrates the direction that we need to take.

The Commission and Parliament must work together and must create greater transparency in relation to the budget and its implementation.

Unfortunately, I was forced to include another postponement in my report, this time in relation to the Economic and Social Committee.

There are again problems with the Economic and Social Committee in relation to travel costs and mission expenses.

It took the Committee over 15 months to refer justified cases of suspicion of fraud to OLAF.

Discharge therefore had to be suspended pending the results of the OLAF investigation.

There is another problem with the Economic and Social Committee, the problem of buildings.

We are still paying rent for the Ardenne and Ravenstein buildings.

We are also paying rent for the Belliard building and Parliament must pay for its new building. This means that European taxpayers are currently paying rent for three buildings.

We want to exert pressure here to ensure that the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions move into the Belliard building as quickly as possible.

However, we have not moved for a postponement in this area because we hope that a satisfactory solution can be found and that we can grant discharge for the buildings in the 1999 budget with no further pressure needed.

However, I should just like to say on the subject of buildings that better management is needed at European level.

There are similar problems with the European Court of Justice.

The Court of Auditors has drafted a special report on this subject, which will be reflected in the 1999 discharge procedure.

As rapporteur, I should like to suggest that we need better cooperation between the various institutions at European level as far as the management of buildings and rents is concerned and that we should learn from each other' s mistakes so that, here too, we use the European taxpayers' money in a responsible manner.

As a new Member, allow me to point out that there are serious shortcomings in this area.

As I have little time left, I should like to give a very succinct and concentrated presentation of the rest of my report.

We are able to propose that the European Court of Justice and the European Court of Auditors be granted discharge.

Both institutions gave highly satisfactory answers to the criticisms in my report and we have had prompt and comprehensive replies to our questions and comments.

We are also able to propose that the Dublin agency and the Thessaloniki agency be granted discharge.

However, we would like to see the contradictory procedure shortened for the agencies.

We welcome the fact that the agencies have decided to carry out an evaluation and we expect this evaluation to be submitted by December 2000.

Overall, as a new member, I should like to reiterate my belief that the procedure for the 1998 discharge represented an important step forward in reinforcing the taxpayers' confidence in the European institutions.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, over recent days, just before the debate on this report, certain areas of the media created the impression that we needed outsiders to open our eyes to shortcomings in our own institution, as if Parliament would operate double standards, by being intensely critical of the Commission, but turning a blind eye to its own shortcomings.

I should like to report quite unequivocally that neither applies.

My draft report was presented to the Committee in all language versions on 10 February this year and all the shortcomings reported in the press, such as the article in the European Voice about 10 days ago, have already been addressed in an open and critical manner in the report.

The report before Parliament today both contains a description of the shortcomings and lays down clear conditions for the attention of Parliament' s administration, including deadline commitments, which clearly show what needs to be done in order to rectify these shortcomings.

In addition, contrary to the Commission discharge procedure, we have no cause to complain that we did not receive certain documents.

Some were perhaps a little late in arriving, but they did all arrive.

That is another difference in the discharge procedures.

We here in Parliament certainly have cases of mismanagement in certain areas which need to be criticised and cleared up, but we have no legacy such as cases of fraud.

I say that in order to highlight an important difference, because interested parties have "let it drop" that, if Parliament is using the same yardstick, then it should come to the same conclusion and cannot postpone discharge for the Commission on the one hand and be prepared to discharge itself on the other.

I am all in favour of the same yardstick, but the same yardstick does not necessarily give the same results.

We should not sit down with the strategic far-sightedness of garden gnomes and say, now we must kow-tow to those who have given the impression that we should go around in sackcloth and ashes just so that our decision to postpone discharge of the Commission seems more credible.

Were we to do so, I can assure you that, within half an hour of the vote on Thursday, you would hear the sound, from Brussels to Strasbourg, of the champagne corks popping in many a Brussels office in which many people would be delighted if Parliament were to make the content of its own discharge the variable upon which the Commission discharge depended.

If we did that, there would not be a single Commission over the next 20 years which needed to fear Parliament' s discharge or, at most, its merciless opportunism!

I should like to come now to the question of where the shortcomings which we must clear up lie.

We must, for example, reverse the trend whereby the number of direct contracts has increased dramatically in comparison with the number of open competitions.

This refers mainly to the fixtures and fittings in this building.

It is not a procedure which is illegal per se and it would be wrong to assume that it were.

However, we must insist that this trend be reversed in order to reinstate a sound administrative culture.

This direct contract procedure must not catch on and become the predominant procedure.

In the long term, it would mean accepting cost increases on orders without being able to check if they could be obtained more cheaply elsewhere, which is why this trend must be reversed.

The second point is this: Parliament has lost several cases on personnel issues before the European Court of Justice over recent years and the verdict of the European Court of Justice has been harsh and clear.

It has been clearly stated that our own, previously public, competition criteria have been broken for certain positions in order to lever certain persons into those positions.

Parliament and its members must ensure that there is no place for this sort of thing in our House and that we keep our employees motivated by ensuring that they can be certain that promotions and recruitments are made on the basis of merit and qualification, not cronyism.

Another important point addressed relates to the question of buildings.

We have come to the conclusion that Parliament is in an extremely difficult position, for which the Council is mainly to blame. The Council finances its own building out of compulsory costs in the budget but has denied Parliament the facility of direct financing.

I am not in favour - and I say so quite clearly, despite all the difficulties which we have to overcome - of sending yet another box of chocolates over to the Council in its building and tying yet another ribbon around it and saying, all right, we profess our faith in the fact that the whole procedure is beset with legal problems.

We have already discussed them at length.

We have received every document written on the subject.

What I say is, whoever still has a problem should please go to the European Court of Justice and get it cleared up there, rather than turning plenary into an extrajudicial seminar. They should also consider what it means, from a political point of view, if we go ahead and give these sweets to the Council.

The report itself lists the difficulties which have arisen, the huge number of items which have disappeared or, to put it bluntly, been stolen.

In the meantime, thank God, we have introduced an electronic inventory system in Parliament.

We are now waiting for an explanation as to how this electronic system functions.

I should like to come back to the question of yardsticks and results.

If the majority in Parliament decides, not for reasons which have something to do with this report, but for reasons which have to do with the fact that certain groups have more skeletons in their cupboard than others when it comes to what they have done with their group money and what they have done with party financing; if a majority plays pass the parcel with this report, then we here in Parliament will end up in the position over the next few weeks of having to ask ourselves what future the Commission and Parliament discharge procedure has, now that it is no more than an excuse for party political manipulation and manoeuvring.

I hope I do not have to sit in such a Parliament.

Mr President, the discharge which we are discussing today, as far as agriculture is concerned, pertains to 1993, 1994 and 1995 and you may well wonder why we are so late.

The reason for this is that we delayed the discharge for 1992 for a long time, because we had made certain requirements of the Commission which up to last year it had failed to meet.

We are pleased to note that this has meanwhile been rectified.

So what exactly were Parliament' s requirements?

Firstly, we asked for 15 extra jobs to be created in the inspection department within agriculture and for the financial corrections to be increased from 10% to 25% maximum, in case something went wrong with agricultural expenditure.

This has since been done and we are grateful for this.

It still causes Parliament some concern that the jobs have not yet been filled and that it is extremely difficult to do so.

In general terms, the error rate for agriculture is below the general error rate for the budget.

Where the general rate is 5%, as already mentioned, that for agriculture is 3%. This is moving in the right direction.

This may also partly be due to the fact that agricultural policy has changed over the years.

I believe it is easier to keep income policy in check than it is price policy.

There has since been an increase in expenditure for development within rural areas but I will come back to this.

Special attention should also be paid to the European revenue.

Although the own resources are falling, they are still an important source of income and it has now been decided that certain Member States are allowed to retain 25%.

This is all the more reason why the Commission should keep tabs on all the money coming in to which the European Union is entitled.

What does the Committee on Budgets mainly want?

First, the Commission should work towards driving back the current error rate within the short term.

In my opinion, we should be able to have a 1% error rate within a number of years.

One way of achieving this is to establish an estimated reliability level for each sector.

This is something which the Commission could undertake itself. What is the error rate in the milk sector, the dairy sector, the cereal sector, etc?

In this way, the various offices will benefit from a healthy rivalry.

Everyone wants to outstrip the others and agriculture would be able to take the wind out of the sails of the other budget components.

For many years, we have also talked about an integrated management and inspection system for agriculture and lamented the fact that many countries are still unable to meet this requirement.

I think it is about time this stopped.

We have stipulated in the resolution that the Commission will have two years to solve this and I have been given assurances that this should be possible.

Although the agricultural budget components are scrutinised, they cannot be scrutinised in the same way as guaranteed expenditure, which is down to the Guidance Section for agriculture.

We think the Commission should come up with proposals to actually apply the financial corrections system to structural expenditure for agriculture.

In common with the Court of Auditors, the Commission is also concerned that huge mistakes are still being made in the export refunds system.

The Committee on Budgets, therefore, recommends discharge.

There are, however, a few problems remaining, one of which I have already mentioned, namely export refunds.

We are expecting a report on this.

We are also waiting for a report from OLAF on fraud involving the aid provided to flax in certain countries, notably Spain.

Finally, and I may come back to this at a later stage, we are waiting for a report from the Court of Auditors on the Fléchard affair.

We can grant discharge to the Commission without these three elements.

Since 1995, there has been a conciliation committee for agricultural expenditure.

If there is a difference of opinion between the Member States and the Commission on the financial correction to be imposed, we can call upon a conciliation body to mediate.

We have as yet to be convinced of the usefulness of this conciliation body.

The Commission has promised to assess this.

We look forward to the findings because we would like to considerably reduce the number of court cases at the Court of Justice in Luxembourg.

Mr President, my report is about the European Coal and Steel Community and how that fits in with Mrs Stauner's report and the discharge.

We have decided to give the discharge on three conditions, and the conditions are clearly spelt out.

We hope that by 15 August those concerned will give us the information that is requested.

What I find extraordinary is that EUR 2 billion are being managed by this vestige - the last remainder of the European Coal and Steel Community, which, of course, was very important historically but is not important any more.

It is being wound up and it is remarkable that such an instrument should continue with that budget and 145 staff.

I believe such an instrument should be wound up as quickly as possible so that it is incorporated in perhaps a reformed European Investment Bank: a European Investment Bank that is transparent and accountable.

Such investments can and should be made by professional banks rather than the little outfit that we have at the moment.

The number of people employed for the amount of money being invested is again quite disproportionate.

I am hoping that this can be wound up speedily and incorporated in either the EIB or the European Investment Fund, because that would be a better way of using the money and resources.

This is for the social and research fund, but again these objectives could be better addressed by a bank that would ask other banks to manage investments so that we have the highest return.

I hope that the three conditions, the conditional discharge and the obligations on those concerned to address these conditions will be taken seriously.

Far too often in the past we have found that promises have been made and not kept.

So I hope that the answers will be given to Parliament and to the Committee on Budgetary Control.

I think that is about all I need to say.

On that basis I recommend to this House a discharge.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, as rapporteur for the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs, it is with some satisfaction that I would like to point out that, in our own area of competence, the Court of Auditors had no criticism to make of the way the appropriations for the financial year 1998 were implemented.

I have, what is more, received no complaints from any officials at all.

I am not aware of any vengeful articles by investigative journalists, or any OLAF inquiries, and personally I have not managed to discover any proven cases of mismanagement, fraud or misappropriation of funds in our sector.

In a word, as far as our committee' s area of competence is concerned, there is nothing to prevent the discharge being granted to the Commission.

And now, to express my own personal opinion, I would like to say more generally that I support the conclusions of Mrs Stauner' s report with a view to postponing discharge to the Commission for the year 1998.

The citizens' primary right is to see that their money is managed and spent properly and as long is this is not clearly established discharge must not be granted.

I should, however, like to make two observations.

Settling political scores or making personal attacks must not be mistaken for combating poor management, irregularities and fraud.

In this context, it is essential to prevent a climate of political vendetta arising between the main institutions of the Union.

My second observation is that, in my opinion, it is essential to be as implacable in criticising oneself as in criticising others, and I therefore wonder about the effects, which I expect to be disastrous, of postponing discharge to the Commission on the one hand, even though Parliament is prepared to grant its own discharge, despite the administrative problems it acknowledges, and although the political groups gloss over their own administration.

My personal preference would be for adopting a more self-critical attitude.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, expenditure for research accounts for nearly two thirds of the budget for internal policy.

Consequently, the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy has requested the Court of Auditors to carry out a thorough investigation into the legality and lawfulness of payments in research as a matter of high priority.

The Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy regrets the inaccuracies in one third of payments.

The European Commission has paid over the odds most of the time because the beneficiaries had failed to declare non-eligible costs.

Inadequate inspection by the offices of the Commission and the lack of contractually determined penalties for excessive declarations have also led to deliberate over-invoicing in nearly two-thirds of the payments.

What does the Commissioner intend to do about this?

Has the Commission ever taken legal action?

I would like to have these questions answered.

The success and usefulness of the research programmes are beyond dispute.

But effective implementation requires better management and coordination, as well as inspections carried out by various Directorates-General.

According to the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy, it is essential that the tasks pertaining to financial management be carried out by officials who are required to render full account of their tasks to the institution.

If money from Brussels is spent, then the responsibility should lie with Brussels and not with external service providers.

We are prepared to grant discharge under these conditions.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen.

Alas, I sit here between a rock and a hard place. On the one hand, I would and should recommend, on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism too, that the Commission be discharged due to the satisfactory take-up rate of the budget lines which affect us, despite numerous critical comments.

On the other hand, I cannot in fact recommend discharge due to unclarified incidents at the Commission which are beginning to threaten the very existence of regional project agencies and which, as the representative of my home region, I have been fighting to have clarified for months.

It is not enough for the present Commission to acknowledge the errors of the old Commission without finding a solution.

However, this is not the place for such personal experiences.

Allow me rather to highlight the causes for criticism as the representative and draftsman of the RETT Committee.

Firstly, certain measures dating back to before 1989 have still not been completed.

Secondly, the irregularities identified by the Court of Auditors refer mainly to errors in relation to proof of expenditure which are signed by Member States, and for which they are responsible.

The Commission is indirectly and to some extent jointly responsible here insofar as it should have issued clear rules for grants and aid.

Thirdly, delayed payments by the Commission which unsettle and, sometimes, ruin our citizens, as the result either of transgressions or inefficient bureaucratic structures and cover-ups or liquidity problems following cuts in payment appropriations by the Council.

The conditional postponement of the discharge suggested by Mrs Stauner is to be welcomed.

I personally would like to have better facilities for quality control, in situ, of how EU funds are used.

Mr President, the Committee on Cooperation and Development has been extremely critical in its appraisal of what became of the development and cooperation expenditure in 1998.

We have translated this criticism into a number of very concrete questions, answers and proposals in order to make drastic changes to the policy as it is being adopted now and will be adopted this coming year.

To our great delight, we are also at the dawn of a drastic reform of development policy.

Policy as it was adopted in 1998 by Europe as one of the world' s key players did not really have a clear poverty focus or clear-cut, result-orientated objectives and, as such, it was difficult to judge whether we had achieved our goal.

We have now agreed to re-arrange the entire budget in a number of clearly defined sectors according to international agreements in the field of poverty control and, following on from this, to submit annual reports on the results within the various sectors to our Parliament.

It has also been agreed that in these sectors, clear objectives will be formulated and that, in these objectives, basic health care and primary education will be considerably reinforced as components of social development.

This is not just restricted to either the European Parliament budget or the EDF budget, but refers to the total.

This brings us to the desire and agreement that the EDF, even if it is just in terms of figures, will at least be absorbed into the 2001 budget, so that we in Parliament can actually see where the money is being spent.

After all, we are talking about a huge amount which the European tax payer expects to be used to combat poverty.

If we look at what really happens, however, it is often not about a child who goes to school or food which is grown locally in a more productive way. Very often, economic interests of the various Member States in Europe take priority over poverty issues in the relevant countries.

In terms of inspection, this is all undoubtedly neatly justified in accounts, but is incorrect in terms of content.

This poverty focus is essential in order to actually get value for money.

We hope that, with the inclusion of the EDF in the 2001 budget, even if we do not have any formal budgetary authority there, we will be able to pursue a more result-orientated policy by breaking it down into clear sectors.

Then there is still the staffing problem.

Many shortcomings, the lack of spending and the fact that 80% of the commitment appropriations are sometimes not spent, are due to an organisational structure which is inadequate, not sufficiently decentralised in the various relevant countries and guided by a form of regulation which does too little examining after the event and is too bureaucratic before the event.

In the light of this, there is a great need for reform on this score.

We at the Committee on Development and Cooperation have every confidence that we can bring about this reform thanks to the agreements we have reached with the Commission.

Further to the agreement we concluded with the Committee on Budgetary Control, I also expect that the action plan on 15 May will help us at the Parliament to turn a corner, in tandem with the Commission.

I would like to underline the confidence we have in the Commission and all its Commissioners.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, today, for the second time this year, we are debating the discharge of the Commission for the budget of a previous financial year.

Two and a half months ago, you granted the Commission discharge for the 1997 budget. That discharge was accompanied by numerous, far-reaching calls to the Commission which provided strong momentum and incentive for the reform of the Commission and which are incorporated in the Commission' s White Paper.

I should like once again to extend my thanks on behalf of the Commission, especially to the rapporteur at the time, Mrs van der Laan and, in this context, to the rapporteur for the reforms, Mr van Hulten.

Today we are debating the discharge for the 1998 financial year.

Under the European Treaty, Parliament has a duty to audit the accounts, the statements of assets and the annual report of the Court of Auditors, together with the replies from the bodies being audited.

In its report on the 1998 financial year, submitted in November last year, the Court of Auditors granted the Commission a declaration of assurance with regard to receipts and the handling of commitment appropriations.

The Court of Auditors did not grant the Commission an auditor' s certificate establishing that payments had been implemented in a lawful and proper manner.

The error rate was considered to be too high by the Court of Auditors.

As the Commissioner for the Budget, I subscribe fully to the opinion that, in some areas, the shortcomings in the implementation of the budget are simply unacceptable.

That is why I immediately took the initiative, in my official capacity, of drafting an action plan listing specific measures sector by sector on the basis of a specific timetable, in order to reduce the number of errors identified.

Nearly 90% of all errors identified or highlighted by the Court of Auditors concern the Member States.

The majority of payments out of the EU budget are paid not directly by the Brussels administration, but by administrative units in the Member States.

This decentralised implementation of the budget has numerous advantages, but, of course, it also calls for efficient and close cooperation.

As rapporteur for the SEM 2000 programmes and decentralised management measures, Mr Kuhne has dealt with these questions in detail and I should like to thank him for his work in this area.

The Council, which recommended discharge for the Commission, included the question of shared management in its debate on the 1998 budget discharge and the proposal was mooted that the Member States should perhaps set their own objective for reducing shortcomings in the implementation of EU funds, an interesting proposal.

For its part, the Commission will step up its efforts to formulate more manageable financial rules for the administrations in the Member States and to provide advice and information, especially on the control systems. Alternatively, should it prove necessary, the Commission will use financial corrections to refunds paid to Member States as a monetary lever, as is the case in agriculture.

The fact that the error rate for agricultural expenditure is well below the error rate for the Structural Funds is perhaps due to this financial correction instrument.

My colleague Franz Fischler will go into this in greater detail in a moment but I should like at this point to thank Mr Casaca for his report and to congratulate Mr Mulder on his report.

The Court of Auditors made no critical remarks on the budget for the European Coal and Steel Community and I should like to thank the rapporteur, Mr Khanbhai, for the report which he has just presented.

The European Court of Auditors also issued a declaration of assurance for the budget of the European Development Fund, although it did find cause for complaint.

Overall, there was a clear drop in the error rate for the Funds in comparison with previous years.

However, this gives the Commission no cause whatsoever for complacency.

On the contrary, the Commission also wants to achieve more satisfactory results for this financing instrument, which is so important to development policy, and this applies in particular to the question of the speed of aid.

You addressed this point, Mr van den Berg.

This is also one of the concerns of the rapporteur for this area and I should like to thank you, Mrs Rühle, for your willingness to include the arguments of the Committee on Development and Cooperation and the Commission in your report and to propose an action plan and also, at this point, to thank Mr Blak for his preparatory work in this area.

The legislative, budgetary and control powers of the individual institutions overlap even more in the European Union than they do in the Member States.

It is therefore essential that we act in unity if European policy is to work.

This presupposes a clear and reliable division of tasks, which is why current talks and negotiations between Parliament and the Commission on the agreement, which also includes the question of access to and dealing with confidential information, are extremely important.

The chairman of the Committee on Budgetary Control, Mrs Theato, also has a very responsible role in this respect.

It is in all our interests for these negotiations to come to a swift conclusion, hopefully with results which enable there to be a good policy and collaboration on such important matters as discharge.

The Commission has made a commitment to transparency and openness.

These are not just empty words as far as the Commission is concerned, which is why I have transferred all the confidential audit reports needed to the Committee on Budgetary Control, or rather to the rapporteur, during the course of the discharge procedure and which is why the Commission has also replied in detail to questionnaires, even though this differed from past reporting practice.

The Commission has nothing to hide and this Commission sees it as its duty to support Parliament fully in the performance of its duties.

But we need a procedure which safeguards the confidentiality of information and, more importantly, the principle of the rule of law whereby people cannot be pre-judged.

That must also apply to the Commission staff, just as it applies to people who belong to the other European institutions and to all our citizens.

The Commission is called on in the report adopted by the Committee on Budgetary Control to answer various questions or take direct action by 15 May.

I should like to thank the Committee on Budgetary Control for this resolution and also for the deadline attached to it.

Some of the points refer to dealing with so-called old cases, i.e. cases of irregularities or suspicion of fraud from previous years.

I should like to say quite clearly at this point that the Commission will do everything within its powers to fight fraud and that applies not only to the future, but to clearing up past cases.

This Commission has no fear of any findings.

The Commission has proven this in the so-called Cresson/Barthelot case by passing documents to the courts, introducing disciplinary proceedings, lifting the immunity of a former member of the Commission, giving the investigating magistrate access to the Commission premises and demanding repayment of missing EU funds.

But I repeat: for the Commission, the rule of law applies. This means that it cannot of course influence judicial proceedings, even if they are unsatisfactory, as for example in the ECHO case, on which the competent courts, which received the file a long time ago, have still taken no action.

It also means that proportionality is required when meting out punishment and demanding refunds and this applies both to demands by the Commission and to refunds demanded by the Member States.

The European Court of Justice again made that clear in its most recent judgement a few weeks ago, when it halved or even cancelled fines in the case of the cement cartel.

My colleague Franz Fischler will shortly be going into the question of the agricultural budget in connection with discharge in greater detail.

But I too should like to say at this point that I do not see the letters drawing the Commission' s attention to the fact that companies may fold or jobs be destroyed following certain Commission measures as an illegal attempt at intervention, irrespective of whether the letters originate in Parliament or in a Member State and regardless of whether they come from France, Ireland or Bavaria.

Naturally, decisions must be taken where there is room for discretion and they must be taken according to clear rules and in a transparent manner.

I shall fight for clear rules within the framework of the financial regulation.

Of course the Commission will take very careful notice of the Court of Auditors' recommendations and findings in the so-called Fléchard case and all I can say is that I, for my part, am very grateful to the Court of Auditors for taking on this task.

I am not in a position at this point to go into the individual points of the resolution in detail.

However, the Commission will immediately notify OLAF of your demands and, as far as the administrative investigation is concerned, I have set the procedure of clarification in motion.

Your resolution insists first and foremost on a reduction in the error rate.

I can assure you that the Commission is doing everything it can to achieve this, which is why we submitted the action plan, containing specific measures with specific deadlines and which is why we are completing revising the financial regulation and I shall shortly be reporting on this to Parliament.

This is why the European Anti-Fraud Office is being reinforced.

This is why the Commission has started reforming financial management as a whole by increasing the responsibility of everyone who handles the money of the European taxpayers, by improving efficiency and by setting the clear objective of restoring trust in the European institutions.

The Commission will do everything to ensure that the reform is a success and it would be a good thing if all the European institutions were to expose themselves to such reform.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I should like to restrict my comments to the so-called Mulder and Casaca reports.

Mr Mulder, I should like to start by thanking you on behalf of the Commission for your report on granting discharge in respect of the decisions on clearance of accounts of the Guarantee Section of the EAGGF for the 1993, 1994 and 1995 financial years.

The main thrust of the report is that clearance of accounts for the expenditure financed by the Guarantee Section of the EAGGF was a job well done.

This can also be seen from the financial corrections quoted under number 1.

I consider this to represent a certain degree of acknowledgement and, at the same time, to be an order to do even more in the future.

I expressly state that I agree with number 4.

The date of April 2002 is needed in order at last to guarantee the proper operation of the integrated administration and control system in all the Member States.

It is also a prerequisite to our being able to reduce the error rate still further.

As regards the question of building up a central database containing data on all payments to final beneficiaries, I should like to draw your attention to the following. The interaction between the common agricultural policy and the final beneficiaries currently passes via approved paying agencies in the Member States.

These agencies have all the data on the final beneficiaries and the Commission services naturally have unrestricted access to them.

However, I should like to stress that the Commission does not need a central database per se in order to exercise its control function and I would therefore suggest that a cost-benefit analysis should be considered here.

A study is currently examining if it is technically feasible to set up a central database for recording all payments and hence all final beneficiaries.

Even if it is not prescribed under law, it could of course simplify a number of operations, not only for the Commission, but also for the Court of Auditors or OLAF.

The Commission is aware of the fact that the European Parliament considers it important to know the names of the recipients of the largest sums.

However, I should point out here that, because of data protection at Union and Member State level, it would be impossible to publish such information, even if it were technically feasible.

As far as staffing the clearance of accounts unit is concerned, I can confirm, Mr Mulder, that only the three posts of the new unit leaders have yet to be published.

The recruitment procedure for the remaining six posts has already been completed, or will be shortly.

The Conciliation Body referred to in number 16 of the report is one of the measures which should ensure that efforts to speed up the procedure do not compromise the quality of document audits.

However, this is only a consultation process and it is the Commission itself which takes the decision in all cases.

I can also assure you that refunds and the aid regime for flax and hemp will be examined very conscientiously.

Corrections totalling EUR 249.8 million were made to refunds for the financial years from 1994 to 1998.

However, before we can make any further corrections for subsequent financial years, we must first carry out the scheduled control visits.

Allow me to conclude with a few comments on the declaration of assurance.

It is proposed in the resolution that there should be a separate declaration of assurance for the EAGGF and the individual sectors.

This question is, of course, addressed first and foremost to the Court of Auditors.

The Commission notes this proposal with interest.

A first step in this direction should of course be a declaration of assurance for individual policy areas, i.e. separate declarations for the agricultural fund, the Structural Fund and so on. This alone would considerably improve this instrument.

And finally, my thanks in this respect to the Committee on Budgetary Control for their excellent cooperation in drafting the report.

A few words now on Mr Casaca' s report.

I should also like to thank you, Mr Casaca, for your report.

According to Council Regulation No 723/97, the Community contributes towards the costs "incurred by Member States in implementing new action programmes, arising out of new Community obligations, approved by the Commission and aimed at improving the structures or effectiveness of EAGGF Guarantee Section expenditure controls" . The purpose of the proposed amendment tabled here is to improve controls.

In addition, provision is made for the Community to make a contribution in cases in which the Commission calls on the Member States to carry out additional controls over and above the minimum rate laid down in the regulations.

I should like to make the following comments on the proposed amendments.

The Commission cannot, unfortunately, accept proposed Amendment No 1 insofar as the rapporteur proposes changing the legal basis for the regulation from Article 37 to Article 280.

The Commission takes the view that Article 37 of the Treaty is the correct legal basis because the most important objective of the proposal is to prevent irregularities in EAGGF Guarantee Section expenditure.

As far as proposed Amendment No 2 is concerned, the Commission cannot accept the part which refers to the second paragraph of Article 5a, in which mention is made of administrative and staffing costs incurred by the Commission in administering this scheme.

I agree with the idea behind the proposal, i.e. to ensure that the Commission has sufficient means at its disposal to perform its tasks, but the proposal confuses the administrative and staffing costs incurred by the Commission which are covered solely from Part A of the budget with the operational costs in Part B of the budget and I am unable to agree to this.

Mr President, fellow Members, Mrs Schreyer, Mr Fischler, I should like to make one thing clear from the outset: postponing a discharge is not tantamount to refusing a discharge, irrespective of what is always wrongly assumed.

On the other hand, granting discharge is a serious procedure with serious consequences in that the controlling body answers for the fact that the activities and financial conduct of the body being controlled have been correct from a legal, economic and political point of view.

This responsibility on the part of Parliament vis-à-vis European citizens and taxpayers is a heavy burden, which is why discharge for the Commission' s management of the budget cannot be reduced to a compulsory, but somewhat tiresome annual exercise and I am sorry that the President of the Commission could not be here today.

On the contrary, what is needed is a thorough examination on the basis of pertinent sources of information and a conscientious appraisal of the results.

And that is what we have done in the Committee on Budgetary Control over recent weeks.

The rapporteur, Mrs Stauner, and the draftsmen of the opinions of the other discharge reports and working documents, whom I should like to congratulate on their work, have based their work first and foremost on the annual and special reports of the Court of Auditors and on the Commission' s replies.

The sources for the information and documents needed from the Commission, on the other hand, gushed little, if anything at all, despite a great deal of paper and, unfortunately, no clear answers were given to the questions asked.

When the Commission then writes to complain about the questionnaires and working papers of the members of the Committee on Budgetary Control, that shows that something has gone wrong with the flow of information between the controlling and the controlled parties and this must be rectified as quickly as possible.

However, I am warning you that the Commission is heading straight for the same fate as its predecessor.

According to Article 276 of the Treaty, Parliament, and hence the Committee appointed by it, is entitled to any information or documents which it needs or demands in order to prepare its discharge.

The rapporteur quotes four cases by way of example.

Other cases should be on the list, but the Commission has unfortunately not yet passed them on, despite the date of March 2000 set in the 1997 discharge.

Here too the Commission misunderstands our basic cause for concern.

The rapporteur and the Committee on Budgetary Control are not holding the present Commission per se responsible for the deplorable state of affairs in previous years.

The resignation of the previous Commission did not put an end to it.

On the contrary, the new Commission was completely aware of all the outstanding accusations before it entered office and it undertook to assume responsibility and establish transparency.

I take this to mean that it must clear up all the old cases without exception and - where necessary - must pass them to the courts.

Cover-ups or even sweeping issues under the carpet are not the answer.

On the contrary, the answer means being prepared to draw conclusions from the unhappy events of the past, so that the same thing does not happen again in the future.

This ranges from precise filing rules, so that documents cannot simply disappear, to a fundamental reform of disciplinary proceedings and much else besides.

This approach also informs the White Paper on the reform of the Commission tabled by Mr Kinnock.

Mrs Stauner' s report lists our short-term demands with respect to these conclusions and we all consider that they can be met by the stated deadline.

The Committee debated them at several meetings and finally adopted them with one vote against.

Here we must thank the rapporteur for her honesty, on the one hand, and for her perfect readiness to compromise, on the other.

One of the most important objectives that we consider the Commission should achieve is to reduce the error rate in payments to well below the persistent figure of 5%.

I know, Mrs Schreyer, that you have tabled an action plan.

Nonetheless, the error rate has remained at the same high level for the last five years.

We shall have to debate this.

However, we also know that most errors occur in the Member States and we are prepared, as a committee, to discuss this with you.

Nonetheless, we take the view and the Treaty states that the Commission is responsible for implementing the overall budget.

Excuses and promises are no use.

We need clear proof of improvement.

On balance, my conclusion is that we need a strong Commission, which is able to act, which works openly together with Parliament and which supplies Parliament with all the information needed or requested.

Using the pressure of postponement to advance discharge is constructive pressure because it gives the Commission the chance to clear up shortcomings caused by slowness, pettifogging or unwillingness so that Parliament will be able to grant discharge for 1998 as quickly as possible, hopefully before the summer recess.

I think that the President of the Commission, Mr Prodi, should direct his team forcefully here in order to take transparency in Europe a stage further.

Mr President, the Committee on Budgetary Control has considered several reports recently, mostly relating to the 1998 discharge procedure.

It is a strange time for us to be considering how the Commission is faring after its forced resignation last year due to many of the issues highlighted in the 1996 discharge.

The discharge procedure is, of course, an opportunity for the European Parliament to exercise its responsibility in terms of monitoring the Commission and the other institutions' behaviour.

We ensure that policies have been well managed.

The Commission spent the last year preparing for a radical reform, outlined in the White Paper presented on 1 March, and we appreciate that it will take more than a few months to turn this massive tanker around.

Parliament and the Budgetary Control Committee are, however, keen to ensure that the reform occurs at a speedy pace, which is why we have decided to postpone discharge in the expectation that the Commission will hit the targets that we have set them within the next two months.

The report as it stands at the moment is very different from the initial report that was submitted by Mrs Stauner on behalf of the EPP Group.

That was clearly used as a political battering ram.

The report was full of sound and fury signifying nothing.

That is why the explanatory statement attached to this report has not been agreed by the Budgetary Control Committee.

It makes no sense in the context of the postponement report, and it is totally nonsensical and hysterical in tone.

We are delighted that there was an almost unanimous consensus, however, on the new practical approach to the general discharge.

We would like to thank the rapporteur for her cooperation on that.

We expect and hope that the Commission will deliver and the rapporteur will perhaps take a more considered approach in her final report.

But one thing which has become manifestly clear to me during this process is that we need an overhaul of the discharge procedure to avoid this kind of confrontation again.

This discharge procedure should be an opportunity to study systems failures within the Commission.

In an ideal world, it should be based on the Court of Auditors' Report, but that does mean that both the Budgetary Control Committee and the Court of Auditors must develop a much closer relationship.

There is a massive amount of expertise in the Court of Auditors, expertise that Parliament should draw on in order to reach its own political conclusions.

The discharge procedure should not be a time to score political points nor to hound individuals but, where systems fail and lead to inefficiency or - worse - to fraud, it is the duty of Parliament to correct them.

We must also make sure that we find a mechanism within this system to make sure that we take account not only of the reports that are submitted by members of the Budgetary Control Committee, but also those by members of other parliamentary committees.

In postponing the discharge, we have set out clear points that we expect the Commission to act upon.

Never again will we accept the situation where we cannot get to the bottom of a case, because documents have gone missing.

Clear lines of responsibility must be established so that if problems occur, disciplinary action will follow.

Never again will we accept a situation where misconduct or a bad administrator will be judged by his or her peers.

We expect an external element to be included, as advised by the Committee of Independent Experts.

These are just two examples of how the Commission can improve its act in the short term without waiting to implement all the recommendations of the White Paper.

There is a question to answer as to whether the current Commission should or can take responsibility for the mistakes and problems of the past Commission.

Let us not forget that here we are considering the discharge for 1998.

If we took this to its logical conclusion, it would mean that Parliament could only judge a sitting Commission during three years of its tenure.

That is why it is clear that we must address systems failures rather than attack individuals or individual Commissioners who may no longer be involved.

We want answers as to how best we spend European taxpayers' money.

I would like to turn very briefly to the other reports that we have considered in committee, and first of all to the Kuhne report on the European Parliament.

Mr Kuhne has done an excellent job as rapporteur for the Parliament discharge.

There is no doubt that there have been vast improvements in Parliament's performance.

Our financial control system does not have the quantity of payments that the Commission has and therefore things are more manageable.

We have had everlasting problems, of course, with the buildings, often through no fault of our own but because decisions have been imposed on us by the Council.

If the Council had any concern about budget control, we certainly would not be sitting in this building right now.

There has been a great deal of talk about a report on political group expenditure.

The fact is that our committee has not seen this report.

It has still not been published officially, and therefore it is difficult for us to comment on it.

But transparency is a principle that we must hold dear in this context.

I am delighted that Mrs Rühle has done such a great job on the EDF report.

Mr Mulder has done a great job as well, displaying his usual wizardry with the EAGGF accounts.

We support Mr Casaca in his approach, although we did not expect the Commission to support us on that of course.

We certainly do not expect the Council to support our position on the Casaca Report.

We are voting for postponement on many accounts.

The important reports, of course, will come next.

We hope that we will be able to develop a better approach in the next part of this discharge procedure.

It is important that we find a new way of doing it.

Thank you, Mr President, for all your kind support over the years for the Budgetary Control Committee.

Mr President, I would like to echo what some speakers have already expressed before me: after last year' s events, this Commission will need to have all its wits about it if it intends to ignore what this Parliament has to say in resolutions.

All I can say at the beginning of this first debate is that the Commission would do well to go through the resolutions with a fine tooth comb, because this time Parliament is serious.

As far as the Stauner report is concerned, the liberal group is able to support the compromise resolution.

We are in favour of the Commission publishing an extensive report before 15 May which covers all the points we have raised.

In common with Mrs Theato, we hope that everything will be signed, sealed and delivered before the summer.

I should add that we, as a group, have less appreciation for the explanatory note which the rapporteur has added to her own resolution.

This was already mentioned last night.

In our opinion, an explanation should reflect the resolution itself and should not include any new elements.

I would like to make a brief comment on the report by Mr Kuhne.

We too have a great deal of appreciation and admiration for the way in which Mr Kuhne has drafted his report.

If we are to criticise the Commission, we should perhaps make sure that we have put our own house in order first.

It is difficult to scrutinise somebody else if we as Parliament do not ensure that we are completely beyond reproach ourselves.

I also think that Parliament' s administration would do well to stick to the many dates and deadlines included in the Kuhne report.

I would now like to come back to the Stauner report and a number of points made in it.

The Court of Auditors will shortly be publishing a report on the so-called Fléchard affair.

There have been many speculations in the press, in Parliament, and so forth.

We must not get ahead of ourselves. A few things are already clear, however, irrespective of the fraud affair itself.

Firstly, how is it possible for documents intentionally to go missing from the four Directorates-General or directors dealing with these?

The big question to the Commission is: what has it since done on this score?

Secondly, we would like proportionality explained.

Should large businesses pay larger fines than small businesses?

Thirdly, where does the Commissioners' responsibility lie?

To what extent can officials decide some things for themselves?

This is an extremely political issue.

The following general rule will need to apply to this Commission: the error rate is too high.

It is not enough to say that it should come down.

We need a plan of action: by such and such a year, the Commission should bring the error rate down to such and such a level.

Then Parliament would know where it stood.

The Commission would then have a goal to work towards and we could market ourselves better to the general public.

This is what it is all about at the end of the day.

Europe' s ideal needs to be preserved.

Mr President, Commissioners, I too should again like to confirm that postponement must not be construed as a refusal of discharge.

On the contrary, we had no party political axes to grind in our committee and we obtained a broadly-carried compromise across all groups with just one vote against.

We can see that the new Commission is making an effort, but the 1998 discharge is at issue here and we must take it very seriously.

We must restore the public' s lost confidence in the European institutions.

We must re-establish confidence and that means that, as a committee, we must make a critical examination of the 1998 budget.

We want neither to play down nor sensationalise the problem. On the contrary, we need to exert constructive pressure and we see the decision as a chance, not a punishment.

Our yardstick was how responsibility and transparency were dealt with and requires an open approach to shortcomings and an open approach to mistakes.

We hope that the action plan will help the administration to achieve better management.

We also take the view that the same yardstick must then be applied to Parliament and in this we completely disagree with Mr Kuhne, although we welcome his critical report.

Criticism is just one side of the equation; consistency is the other and we hope that a majority in Parliament will vote to postpone the decision, subject to the clear condition that the administration of Parliament must also table an action plan to improve management.

The questions of the award of contracts, buildings and staff are at issue.

We know all about the pressure of time up to the point of discharge.

The report by the financial controller, for example, was submitted relatively late.

Obviously it was not possible to submit this action plan in time for today' s decision.

However, we call on Parliament for precisely this reason to vote for a postponement here, so that an action plan can be drawn up jointly by 15 May.

This too we see as an important chance for Parliament to restore confidence and make it clear that it takes its own administration and the shortcomings in its own administration seriously.

I must also highlight something else, since Mr Kuhne appeared to be hinting that a hush-up would be in the groups' interest.

I can only say, as the new treasurer of the Greens, that I went to the administration and to the Court of Auditors back in November or December and pointed out that I had discovered a number of errors in the management of the finances on entering office, that there was mismanagement and that I would fight to get this mismanagement dealt with over the next three months. I also pointed out that I was in favour of maximum transparency and openness in this area and that we urgently needed to address the financing of European parties in order to be able to refute the accusation of indirect party financing which was rightly being levelled at Parliament.

We need clear-cut criteria and clear-cut guidelines.

We must do away with grey areas at European level because, as we all know, grey areas can and will always be abused, which is why we want transparency and openness.

Transparency and openness mean - and this is my clear call - that we must apply the same yardstick to all the institutions.

We should vote for a postponement whenever we are of the opinion that an action plan can be drawn up within a month which will show the public that we take our errors seriously and are trying to correct them and I would stress once again that it has nothing to do with dismantling institutions; on the contrary, we want to strengthen them and we want to restore trust in the eyes of the public in Europe.

Mr President, it says "BUDG 1998 discharge" on the notice board, but it should say CONT.

Perhaps this could be corrected because Budgets and Budgetary Control are always getting confused.

It is the question of control which is at issue here.

It would be difficult to confuse them, Mrs Theato, but, in any event, we will try to correct it on the screen.

They tell me that it has to be written with a limited number of digits.

We will try to find a formula which will make it clear that we are talking about the COCOBU.

Perhaps CCB would be useful since this is the formula used in other bodies.

Mr President, the European Union lacks moral authority.

That is particularly problematic in matters of finances.

Parliament could achieve it, and it does wish to, which is clear from the reports now under discussion, but it lacks credibility in this area.

To maintain its own self-respect Parliament must accept the rules and regulations for the Members forthwith.

Parliament must investigate the misappropriation of funds by its political groups.

Our group will not agree that the practice of party aid should be introduced at the taxpayer' s expense to cover up such malpractice.

Parliament must investigate why it was so lax in its vigilance when it came to millions of euros' worth of Parliament property disappearing.

I do not really understand why it should discharge itself just now, when the report by the Court of Auditors of the European Communities on monetary and economic issues for 1998 is being prepared and is about to be published.

I would remind you how difficult it was in Parliament to raise the issue of malpractice on the basis of the accounts of the Commission for 1996.

I would remind you how the Social Democrats in particular defended Mr Santer' s Commission, and how we were obliged to compile a list of Members' names when passing a motion of censure.

Those parliamentary members that compiled the list were obviously right.

The 1998 accounts and data give weight to earlier conclusions: Mr Santer' s Commission appears to have approved a framework of budgetary discipline in which it was possible for malpractice to exist.

The members of the Commission in many cases are not themselves guilty of furthering their own interests, but the officials continue to act as before, and this Commission must take them to task.

To support them will be the fifty or so trade union officials employed by the EU, defending people who are guilty of malpractice. They are the home guard for the officials that have behaved dishonourably.

Most of the officials in the EU are diligent and decent people.

In this case there is a need for increased vigilance, and that is something Mr Santer' s Commission was unable to achieve.

It would appear that Romano Prodi' s Commission has not got off to a very good start in this respect either, and the President of the Commission, in particular, has delivered opinions that show that the notions of public accessibility and transparency are not being honoured in this Commission.

However, postponing the discharge is justified and is the correct course of action in this situation.

We want to give the Commission the opportunity to improve the way it does things and show that it is able to do the job it inherited from the previous Commission.

Postponement of the granting of discharge is in itself the result of a quite incredible situation.

Even though it is not a question of discharge being refused at the present time, the postponement is a consequence of the Committee on Budgetary Control' s not having been able to obtain adequate information on time, of documents' having disappeared and of the fact that there is so much that can be criticised in the financial and administrative spheres that the impression is one of dealing with a South American banana republic rather than with a supranational European organisation.

These extraordinary results from a seedy administrative culture go back to 1998 and are not this Commission' s direct responsibility, but it is the present Commission' s responsibility to show that the misconduct, fraud and betrayal of mandates which have taken place really do belong to the past.

We have still not obtained proofs of this in all areas. We have heard excuses, often in a dismissive tone, from the Commission, as if it were the Commission which was to be giving us discharge, rather than the other way round.

We have seen an express reluctance to hold those officials to account who are responsible for the circumstances open to criticism.

It is not that there are no rules. Rather, it is a case of rules having been quite deliberately set aside in many areas.

As Mr Kuhne rightly pointed out, it is important that we should also direct criticism against Parliament' s own economic administration.

I would especially point out the quite unacceptable buildings administration and the way in which the rules for using the competitive tendering procedures were circumvented.

The impression cannot be avoided of systematic nepotism of precisely the kind which the competitive tendering procedure should prevent.

We shall therefore vote against the discharge for Parliament' s 1998 accounts.

If there are no dramatic improvements in the financial administration, European taxpayers will know how to react against this irresponsible misuse of their money.

The Commission must understand that they are not Europe' s overlords but the servants of European citizens.

I should like to emphasise that there is broad agreement within the Committee on Budgetary Control about postponing the discharge for the most important accounts, and I would thank the rapporteurs for the splendid and painstaking work they have carried out.

I would also especially draw attention to Mrs Stauner' s and Mrs Rühle' s very efficient work, just as I should like to thank Mrs Theato for her very conscientious and effective leadership of the Committee on Budgetary Control.

Mrs Theato should know that we value her desire to call a spade a spade.

Mr President, before I comment on Mrs Stauner' s report, I would like to endorse what has been said before, namely that the European Parliament is quite right to rap the European Commission over the knuckles and to at least postpone the discharge on the 1998 budget.

It is quite ironic that this should happen at a time when a draft report by the European Court of Auditors is being circulated which shows that our Parliament has not exactly spent the taxpayers' hard-earned money wisely either.

In the light of this, it might be expedient to establish in all honesty at this stage that the reproaches which we are quite rightly hurling at the European Commission today might well be heading in our own direction tomorrow, again quite rightly.

Indeed, if we are to believe the draft report, the groups deal with the many millions which are made available to them for God knows what reason in a very careless, even fraudulent manner, and the administrative department of this Parliament gets off anything but scot-free, to put it mildly.

This is just to add to the issues which have been dragging on for many years, such as the nonchalant way in which we deal with the expenses we are paid as MEPs, in principle with a view to recruiting personnel, or the way in which we handle the building policy of this Parliament, which is so strange as easily to prompt thoughts of large-scale fraud.

In short, today we are quite rightly acting as the plaintiff, but we need to be very aware of the fact that, tomorrow, we will be in the dock ourselves.

The fact that this is a case of the pot calling the kettle black should not, however, be any reason for tolerating deceit, fraud and further theft of taxpayers' money and should not, especially, give certain people any excuse for tolerating these things. Nor should it be any reason or excuse for allowing those who have lined their pockets and taken advantage all these years to go unpunished.

I only wanted to make the remark because I am quite convinced that fraud and mismanagement are inherent and are causally linked to systems where there is no obvious connection between revenue and expenditure, between the levying of taxes, on the one hand, and the policies being financed with these taxes on the other.

In my own country, for example, I know of projects which have been launched with so-called European money which would never have been accepted or requested by the people, if it they had known that their own tax money would be used for them.

European money is always spent with less thought than tax money which has not made a detour through Europe.

This is done under the motto: if we do not spend this European money, somebody else will.

This may sound harsh or even simplistic, but that is how it is.

I have not even mentioned the overlap which exists in a large number of these European credits.

National states provide development aid, so does Europe.

National states combat racism, so does Europe.

National states support the women' s movement, so does Europe.

National states support the trade unions and parties, so does Europe.

National states support all kinds of Third Way movements, so does Europe.

And so on and so forth.

Manna falls from heaven and nobody knows whether it is all spent wisely, or worse, we know for a fact that a great deal of that money is not spent wisely, but there are no complaints because, in the case of European money, a kind of pro-European goodwill is systematically bought from all kinds of pressure groups.

Returning to today' s topic, I would especially like to congratulate the rapporteur, Mrs Stauner, on her report.

It is true that the explanatory note to the resolution reads much like a piece of crime fiction. It contains scandals which are now out in the open about waste, nepotism, theft, the Fléchard affair, the ECHO affair and such like, not to mention the direct involvement of Commissioner Cresson.

There is no need to keep on about what is stated quite clearly in black and white in this report.

I would only like to add that I, as representative of hundreds of thousands of tax payers, am shocked to find that the present Commission too is manoeuvring in all kinds of directions and making all kinds of attempts to protect a number of people responsible for this mismanagement.

I think that we need to do some straight talking to the Commission and that we may have to penalise their persistent bad conduct with a new crisis of confidence after 15 May, if necessary by means of a motion of no confidence, because desperate situations call for desperate measures.

Mr President, the Committee on Budgetary Control is doing sterling work under Mrs Theato' s, Mrs Van der Laan' s, Mr Bösch' s and Mr Blak' s expert leadership.

I should also like to complement Mrs Stauner on a good report.

My group will not grant discharge in connection with an account which conceals more than it reveals and has been submitted by a Commission which despises openness, subsidiarity and democracy.

How is it different from the Commission which was overturned?

Are our rapporteurs now getting complete information and full answers in response to their questions?

Have administrative procedures been instigated against those who had their hands in the till or covered up for those who had their hands in the till?

Has Mr Paul van Buitenen been rewarded for his courageous efforts to turn the Commission into a responsible organisation? No.

He has moved to Luxembourg and has had to agree to keep quiet. Moreover, any future van Buitens know that they will be fired if they behave as any person of integrity would expect of officials of the Commission.

Mr Prodi' s Commission is not responsible for the sins of the past, but all 20 Commissioners are now responsible for the fact that procedures have not been cleaned up and put in order and a fresh start made.

It is you 20 who are responsible for the fact that the Commission' s draft regulation on transparency will cause documents which are at present readily available to be locked away.

It is you 20 who are responsible for the fact that we, as Members of Parliament, are still not receiving the information we request.

You operate on the principles of absolute monarchy.

Come out into the open and acknowledge that it is no longer possible to govern with old-fashioned secrecy.

Admit that you will be replaced if you continue to sweep the dirt under the carpet.

You will soon have been in office for a year, so we have to observe that you too will be accountable if you fail to meet your responsibilities.

And we must apply the same critical standard against ourselves.

We ought not to approve Parliament' s accounts for as long as we have assistants who do not pay tax and yet obtain social security and for as long as travel expenses not connected to actual costs are refunded.

Mr President, a few years ago discharges in this House used to be perfunctory debates, certainly not held on Tuesday mornings.

But we now have a wider remit to discuss this subject. and over the last few years it has been realised that discharge is a very important part of the life of the European Union.

Under Article 276(2), the EC Treaty requires the Commission to submit to Parliament any necessary information on the execution of expenditure and operation of the financial control systems.

Article 276(3) of the Treaty requires the Commission to take all appropriate steps to act on Parliament' s observations concerning execution of expenditure.

It should not be any surprise to outside observers, or those in the system, that as Parliament has become more authoritative in ensuring the democratic accountability of the institutions, it will not be simply fobbed off with a lack of reply to questions which have been asked, however far they go back into the past.

I congratulate all the rapporteurs on the discharges before the House this morning.

I have a few comments on Mr Kuhne' s and Mrs Stauner' s reports.

Firstly, on the question of the Parliament discharge.

There has been significant progress on a number of issues outstanding but it is clear from Mr Kuhne' s report today that there are still a number of issues to be clarified: the question of the calls for tender; the issue of the financing plan for buildings; the question of the security service for this House here, and not least the question which is raised under paragraph 15 of the Kuhne report, concerning personnel policy.

Here it states and I quote: "deplores most strongly the residual impression left by these cases, whereby it would appear that favouritism plays a significant role in the granting of appointments to high-grade posts within the administration of Parliament" .

If we take the context of this report we will see that it has to stand on its own merits.

If we add to that the Court of Auditors' report on the operation of the political groups, we have come to the conclusion in our political group that we need to postpone discharge on its own merits.

It is not a question of the popping of champagne corks between Brussels and Strasbourg, that is an irrelevance if I might put it politely.

It is not a question of parallelism, it is a question of substance.

As for the admissibility of the amendment, I draw to the attention of the services of Parliament and to your attention, Mr President, the fact that Annex V of our Rules of Procedure does not apply to the Parliament discharge but applies to the Commission discharge and therefore our amendments should be considered to be admissible.

Secondly, I turn to Mrs Stauner' s excellent report and the explanatory statement.

It is a pity Mrs Morgan is not still here in the Chamber, because I understood her to say that you cannot just leave a discharge to systems alone; it is the question of access to information, so that we as a Parliament can grant discharge.

You can ask for access to information, but if you do not get it then you have to start applying a certain rigidity and postpone discharge.

The explanatory statement very clearly sets out the reasons for so doing.

I come to two points here.

The first is access to information.

We do not have at this time a framework agreement between Commission and Parliament - that is still outstanding in the context of Annex III.

Because Parliament and the Commission cannot agree about what access we have to information.

The impression is left that we are foot-dragging, but in fact we are not getting complete answers to the questions put by Mr Bösch and Mr Blak.

Parliament is not getting the answers it requires.

Secondly, the question of the disciplinary procedure.

It seems that high officials get off and ex-parliamentarians, who are in the Commission services get downgraded for no apparent reason and against the information available.

I am thinking of the case of Mr Zavvos in particular.

Therefore we, as a Parliament, should look at each of these cases as it stands.

My group will be in favour of postponing discharges both for the Commission and for Parliament until all the information is available to us.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, this debate is probably one of the most important matters which this Commission has to negotiate with Parliament at the present time and not just for the reasons which have already been addressed.

The fact has been overlooked today that, if memory serves me well, this is the first time the finance ministers of this Union have not unanimously recommended that the Commission be granted discharge.

So things are not improving, Commissioner Schreyer; they are obviously going in the opposite direction, which is why we must follow the recommendations proposed by Mrs Stauner in the Committee on Budgetary Control as closely as possible. As far as the information policy is concerned, I am in full agreement with Mr Elles.

We are not holding you responsible for past errors, but I believe that, pragmatically speaking, we are entitled to expect two things of you.

Firstly, you must ensure that monies paid in error or, as in the Fléchard case, sums waived in error are recovered.

In other words, you must repair the damage to the taxpayer, insofar as it can still be repaired.

Secondly, you must ensure that the people responsible for mismanagement and erroneous developments are punished consistently, if necessary by making them compensate for part of the damage caused out of their own pocket.

That would represent two innovations at the Commission because, as far as I am aware, officials implicated have never yet had to pay money back into the EU budget.

The provisions of the financial regulation on this point do not need to be revised.

We need no reforms for the purpose, we merely need to apply these provisions, otherwise they will remain dead letter.

Having said this, you will understand, I think, that we have serious doubts about some of the proposals which you have put before the European public in the much-publicised Commission reform.

I need only refer to your plan to do away with independent - I repeat - independent financial control or your plan to delete provisions on the financial liability of authorising officers from the financial regulation.

It is obvious that some people have been living in glass houses in Brussels for a very long time.

If any of us goes to our constituency and tells our voters, now that one Commission has had to resign because of fraud and misconduct, that independent financial control and the liability of officials are to be deleted from the relevant provisions, then, by God, we shall have done Europe a bad turn.

Mrs Schreyer, Members of the Commission, use the postponement of discharge for the 1998 budget as an opportunity to show that the new team is strong on management and able to act.

Mr President, the key task of this European Parliament is, and remains, that of restoring European citizens' confidence in the European project.

Our most powerful weapon in this regard is the discharge. This is why the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party is in favour of postponing discharge, as suggested, until such time as the Commission has fulfilled our specific condition.

In this way, we can keep the pressure on and bring about real reform.

Unfortunately, the Council failed once again this year to follow the good example of Parliament, and discharge for 1998 has been granted as if the matter were quite insignificant.

This is particularly regrettable because the national governments are responsible for 80% of European spending and are, as such, responsible for a proportionate share of the irregularities.

It is now high time that the Council followed our example and searched its own heart.

There is no doubt that our discharge resolutions are effective. This is borne out by the far-reaching reforms which the Commission has now undertaken.

I would like to illustrate this with a recent example.

Our pressure has prompted the European Commission to undertake drastic reform in foreign policy.

I am keen, therefore, to share with you my initial reaction.

The plans for changing the project cycle and transforming the SCR into a European bureau are a positive step forward.

But the real political prioritising we need for the purpose of employing our very limited resources is still lacking.

The attention paid to the discharge granted to the European Commission is overwhelming, but I am of the opinion that the discharge granted to the European Parliament deserves just as much, if not more, attention.

Within the European Commission, a drastic reform programme has been launched at our insistence.

Unfortunately, it has proved impossible so far to take the same drastic steps in this House.

The Kuhne report is Parliament' s first report which takes discharge seriously.

Not only did Mr Kuhne manage to identify the sensitive areas where all the key points were concerned, he also managed to set fixed deadlines.

This is what Parliament will be judged on and he deserves our true appreciation for this work.

Some claim that the European Parliament should be judged by the same stringent measures as the European Commission.

I do not share this view.

In my opinion, we should raise the standard for ourselves.

We have the direct link with the citizen.

We are primarily responsible for restoring their confidence in the European project.

This is why it is not enough to measure up against the non-elected officials within the Commission.

We should outstrip them by far. Unfortunately, nothing is further from the truth.

I would like to emphatically lay the blame for Parliament' s bad image with those who have always had a majority.

The two large parties are responsible for the ethos of nepotism and underhand dealing which permeates this House.

But the small parties too which have mismanaged the party funding have once again put our name in a bad light.

The Kuhne report will be an important weapon which can be used by those in favour of reform in this House.

But whether it will be adopted at this stage remains to be seen.

There is in fact a risk that, if we grant discharge to ourselves whilst not having done so for the Commission, we will then take the edge of this report and this is exactly what we do not want to do.

We must think very hard about this so that we can actually restore the citizen' s confidence.

Mr President, Commissioners, ladies and gentlemen, do not try to argue that what is wrong is right.

That is the attitude we must adopt in this difficult exercise constituted by the annual discharge.

Mrs Theato was right in stating that granting discharge is a serious matter.

To grant discharge is, when all is said and done, to grant a certificate of good management.

I would like to thank all rapporteurs, but also the Committee on Budgetary Control, for all their hard work.

The Stauner report, including the explanatory note - which I fully support, by the way - is very critical of the European Commission.

The four largest groups have reached a compromise in which it is recommended that discharge be delayed and that the European Commission be given a list of 17 specific questions.

I am in favour of this approach and as such, would like to ask you to adopt Mrs Stauner' s report without any further ado.

Secondly, I would like to comment on the Kuhne report.

I am not trying to argue that what is wrong is right.

I wish to make it absolutely clear here that the Kuhne report does not follow this theme.

Mr Kuhne has completed an excellent piece of work.

His report incisively denounces what is going wrong in our institutions.

Mrs Morgan told us a moment ago that we do not want witch-hunts.

But Mrs Morgan, this is not happening.

What we denounce is stated quite clearly in the courageous report of our financial controller, Mr O'Hannrachain.

The complaints are staggering and include a faulty inventory and many thefts.

I was a victim of this myself in a previous life when my computer and printer were stolen.

Secondly, there are far too many restricted and private allocations.

These should be the exception, but we have noticed that in 1998, 50% of the cases were awarded privately.

This is no longer the exception.

Thirdly, I would like to mention buildings policy, a policy in which decisions are taken step-by-step, rather like slicing a salami, and which is made up of faits accomplis.

Ladies and gentlemen, we need a long-term building policy, to ensure that policy is not only carried out correctly, but that unnecessary expenditure is also avoided, a case in point being the underground tunnel being built here in Strasbourg which links the printing department in the IPE-I building to the distribution department in our building.

The price tag is FFR 27.4 million.

Mr Kuhne has hit out in the press and also here today at the stance taken by my Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance.

He is blaming us for playing a party-political game. Well, Mr Kuhne, I can assure you that this is not the case.

What we are doing is being consistent in our approach, however.

Surely, asking for our offices to be treated in the same way as the Commission is not a political game.

Hence our amendment which recommends postponement of discharge for Parliament' s budget and which has given the Secretary-General a list of queries which we expect to be answered by 15 May.

I am delighted to state that Mr Deprez has adopted the same stance a moment ago.

I am delighted to state that Mr Elles has tabled a similar amendment on behalf of the Group of the European People' s Party and European Democrats.

I therefore hope to receive more support for our amendment which was completely voted down in the Committee on Budgetary Control.

I am now counting on a majority in the plenary meeting.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, Mrs Stauner' s report, which we are discussing today, is important in more than one respect.

Indeed, it is of direct concern to the citizens of our respective countries, since it discusses European Union finances, and the citizens of Europe are entitled to ask for explanations regarding the use made of their money.

This report is also important because it deals with serious inefficiencies in the European Commission' s implementation of the budget, inefficiencies involving considerable amounts of money.

Our Group is in favour of any action which may be taken to combat fraud, by definition, and therefore shares the rapporteur' s opinion regarding the overwhelming need to make the management of the European Commission more efficient and effective.

We are extremely concerned at both the irregularities committed within the scope of the MED and ECHO programmes and at some of the details of the Fléchard case.

The Union for a Europe of Nations Group is convinced that such practices can only seriously impair the credibility and, hence, the image of the European Union as a whole.

We should also remember, ladies and gentlemen, that we have been forced to note shortcomings in the procedure for dialogue with the Commission, which seems not to have been able, or not to have wished, to respond to the expectations and questions of the members of the parliamentary supervisory body.

In view of the many contentious issues still pending, whether they involve irregularities or budget funds, our Group considers that, at the moment, it is essential to refuse discharge for the year 1998.

All we can do is urge the European Commission to pass on, within the necessary time limits, all the information requested by the Committee on Budgetary Control regarding the measures adopted, in order to overcome the obstacles to the granting of discharge.

For us to grant discharge without asking the European Commission for further details would, of course, be evidence of weakness on the part of the European Parliament.

This House would lose face and would discredit itself in the eyes of public opinion in our countries, and that is something we do not want.

Regarding the European Commission' s proposal, there could be no question of the Union for a Europe of Nations Group' s accepting sharing responsibility for the decision on discharge.

The Treaties clearly establish the exclusive competence of Parliament in matters of budgetary control.

Mr President, the 1998 discharge procedure illustrates once again that the European Union' s bad image is not totally unfounded but is actually based on facts.

In its 1998 annual report, the Court of Auditors mentioned an unacceptably high error rate and felt compelled, would you believe, to issue a negative Statement of Assurance.

As long as the Commission does not commit itself to drastically reducing that error rate from the beginning of next year, we cannot grant discharge to the Commission.

The Stauner report deserves every support on this score.

We in Parliament set high standards for the Commission, but do we set them for ourselves too?

We are right in insisting that the Commission base its budget on accurate estimates, but how accurate are the estimates for our own budget?

Year in year out, many EP budget lines show up enormous surpluses which are subsequently used to purchase buildings by means of a collective transfer.

I cannot help thinking that many administrative expenses are intentionally estimated on the generous side in order to have the extra funding for buildings in reserve.

These shady tricks must stop at once.

We also need to search our own hearts regarding public tenders.

It is unacceptable that the number of privately awarded contracts in 1998 increased to half of all contracts.

The Secretary-General has mentioned a few procedural reasons, but is this the full story?

A clarification regarding this drastic rise is urgently required.

Rapporteur Kuhne also puts his finger on the problems regarding the financing of the Spinelli building.

This is the umpteenth affair involving new buildings.

Is it not about time we commissioned an independent inquiry into the decision-making process for building projects?

We can no longer afford to cover the above issues with the cloak of charity.

We need to exert parliamentary pressure to bring about the necessary reforms.

We will therefore support the amendments to postpone discharge until such time as the Secretary-General has produced concrete plans.

Mr President, I welcome the two Commissioners who are most involved in the development of the budget, and I have no doubt that President Prodi will be present at the debate that will take place in two months time.

Beginning with the most important discharge, the discharge of the Commission' s accounts - in political terms, the most relevant and, in terms of quantity, the most significant - we are aware that your responsibility in terms of expenses is limited and that a majority of the responsibility in the field of expenses lies with the Member States.

It is important that you try to become, firstly, an example for the Member States to follow and that, therefore, you understand that we demand more of you, if possible; and one day we will have to start to talk very seriously about these cases which are always detected in the Council rather than in the Commission.

Furthermore I would like you to look at Mrs Stauner' s report from the most positive point of view possible.

All the groups have reached an agreement to raise 17 questions in relation to certain cases.

They are not the only ones.

We could have mentioned other problems arising from the TACIS or PHARE programmes.

After the crisis of the previous Commission, which you have begun to deal with, what we want - because we believe in your intentions and we want a strong and independent Commission and we are therefore giving you time - is for you to give us a positive response to certain very specific cases.

I can assure you that you will be able to reply in the affirmative to each of the cases which we are putting to you.

Therefore, between now and the summer, we could hold a sitting for the purposes of discharging the accounts.

Not only are we as interested as you in the discharge of the accounts, but in fact we are more so.

I would therefore like you to study the report which has been presented by Mrs Stauner with the broad consensus of the Groups.

This is a political debate, and you must understand that we need you to act.

You must do something, irrespective of the fact that I want us to reach an agreement soon on the way we will have to deal with the documents you call confidential.

As rapporteur for the 1999 Commission budget, I would love to be able to do my work in the clear knowledge of which documents we have access to and which we do not and why.

I will give you an additional piece of information.

This debate must not concentrate excessively on the accounting issues.

As you can see in this budget, this is a political debate which goes beyond a strict examination of what you have done with regard to the 1998 budget.

We will also have to reach a framework agreement on how we can include in this debate - which is becoming increasingly important - not only accounting issues but also issues from other years relating to expenditure or management.

You know that an unknown amount of money is lost through fraud or misappropriation.

You are facing a great challenge, because even more resources are lost through a lack of motivation, that virus which has infected the entire administration of the Commission and which you must eradicate.

More resources are lost through lack of motivation than through misappropriation.

This is a quality issue which will also have to be increasingly discussed in the context of this debate.

I will refer finally to the European Parliament' s budget, and I would like to reply to those people who say that, since we are supposedly tough and demanding with you, we must also be so with regard to our own institution.

However we must not compare separate issues.

For example, the auditor has not detected any irregularity in Parliament' s budget.

We must therefore be prudent and fair and try to treat everyone as they deserve.

The same must be demanded of Parliament as of all the others, but this is our House, we have more information and we can therefore take a different approach when it comes to proposing, as the Kuhne report does, a conditional discharge and not a postponement of the discharge.

I will end by saying that you can reply to the 17 questions we have raised.

We want you to do so, and we understand that in that way we can support you so that you, who have just joined this Commission, can really control your house. 'Take the bull by the horns' - as we say in Spain - and we will be able to achieve a discharge for this year on the part of the majority of the Groups in this House before the summer.

Mr President, the new Commission is not responsible for matters from the past, but it is to be judged on the basis of its willingness to straighten out its affairs.

So far, it has not shown much desire to do so.

The Commission has put the lid on the issue, and it has been impossible to obtain the necessary information.

The Commission maintains that the matters in question do not fall under the 1998 discharge.

All these matters surfaced in 1998 and they should therefore, of course, also be dealt with under the 1998 discharge.

The Commission has, on the whole, employed many dodges to avoid responding to our questions, and that is completely unacceptable.

The Treaty is clear: in accordance with Article 276, Parliament is entitled to obtain all necessary information in connection with the discharge procedure.

I should like to give an example.

In accordance with general practice, I, as the rapporteur responsible for the subject of development aid, sent the Commission a questionnaire concerning ECHO.

It was sent to the Commission in November.

Only in March did I receive an answer in which, moreover, I was told to take a running jump.

In the meantime, Mrs Fontaine received a letter from Mr Prodi, stating that the Commission was tired of answering all the stupid questions from the Committee on Budgetary Control.

Excuse me but, either the man has been out in the sun too long or he must have some incredibly bad advisers.

The Commission is obliged to answer our questions, irrespective of whether or not it likes the content of these.

Until they understand this, I think we should postpone granting discharge.

I hope the Commission will take our demands seriously.

If they do not, we shall be ready to send them on a very long holiday in May.

I should like to explain what the ECHO case is about.

First and foremost, I should like to emphasise that this is not a smear campaign directed against individuals, but a question of putting matters in order.

What signal is being sent out to present and future leaders of the Commission when the people responsible escape indictment?

The ECHO scandal has still not led to any repercussions.

The case is at present before the Court of Justice in Luxembourg which admits that nothing will probably come of the case and that it will no doubt refer it to the Belgian authorities in a couple of years' time.

The problem is that the ECHO case is not about property crime.

It is about gross negligence and about an official who has taken decisions without regard to the finance regulation.

The decision to exonerate the previous director was taken by the previous Commission, and this was a political decision pure and simple.

Now, the Commission has until 15 May to solve the problem.

If they do not come up with satisfactory solutions, I shall campaign for our obtaining a parliamentary committee of inquiry which can examine the matter in depth.

I also think it is a good idea to look a little more closely at the discharge for the development fund.

There are still unresolved demands but, if we postpone granting the discharge, this will be accompanied by clear demands upon the Commission.

The Commission' s delegations have failed.

There are several examples of cases where they could have prevented fraud if they had been just a little observant.

Unfortunately, there are too many delegations which are just there for the ride.

I have therefore asked permission to prepare an own-initiative report so that we can have these issues clarified.

The final thing I want to say is that the Commission should undertake to refer the fraud cases to OLAF.

I obtained 11 reports under Pentagon-like conditions, but OLAF still does not know anything about these. I therefore think it is time that these matters were tidied up, and I am pleased that Mr Nielson has now shown that he wants to get this process under way.

I look forward to seeing the results.

Mr President, the issue of discharge is an immense one for the institutions of the EU.

Its importance is evident in the fact that in many cases it is now being proposed that the discharge should be postponed.

As far as the Commission is concerned, this is the fifth year in succession that the Court of Auditors has not delivered an unambiguously favourable verdict.

As the Member States, that is to say the Council, has advocated discharge, this is almost a matter of structural conflict.

Apparently, the Court of Auditors should specify the shortcomings and incidences of malpractice in more detail and place less trust in mathematics.

Although I say this, in no way does this diminish the Commission' s responsibility, which is a great one.

The reports concerning discharge show just how badly administrative reforms are needed.

Commissioner Kinnock' s package of reforms must be pushed through without delay.

The main focus is the reform of internal auditing in each of the institutions.

Administration and auditing must go hand in hand to preserve a sense of personal responsibility and help it grow.

The present system, in which it takes various signatures to authorise payments, does away with the notion of personal responsibility.

It is totally impossible to find anyone who will take responsibility.

Improving the quality of administration is a basic requirement for a greater sense of responsibility and better efficiency.

Increased control is only a reflection of the fact that the organisation has failed.

The main financial difficulties focus on the largest budgetary category, agriculture.

This is because agricultural aid is largely based either on land area or the number of livestock, and the Member State in question pays it.

This development is largely due to the WTO agreement, which determines the various forms of agricultural aid, their classification and the desired trend it should adopt.

The system has led to a tremendous amount of bureaucracy, an enormous increase in monitoring, and, in the long term, we can assume it will also lead to inefficiency and the entrepreneurial spirit of agriculture will vanish forever.

At the same time, the European farmers have become the most closely observed section of the population on the Continent, and, for that reason, I am hoping for a lucid clarification of the agricultural aid system at the forthcoming WTO talks.

Mr President, over the last few days we have read in the press that the European Parliament is a haven for thieves.

This is both embarrassing and distasteful.

We must act in such a way that EU property is treated with the same respect as other property.

In this connection, we must check up on the matter of parliamentary administration.

In the EU budget this year there is an appropriation of EUR 300 000 set aside for an investigation into parliamentary administration.

According to the budget, this investigation will be given to an independent expert.

What has happened to this investigation, why has it not got under way, and what is going to be done about it?

- (PT) Mr President, because of problems stemming from large-scale fraud in the production of wine and other types of fraud, we are more aware that EAGGF Guarantee Section appropriations are frequently used to promote the products of large-scale farming operations whose only real aim is to obtain subsidies, without even considering whether there is a market for these products.

This applies when small family-run farms, such as those dedicated to producing milk, find themselves outside the subsidy arrangements and find their very survival is threatened.

We therefore feel that the Commission' s proposal to amend Regulation No 723/97 and to change the legal basis of the Regulation on preventing fraud and other irregularities from Article 37 to Article 280 of the Treaty, as the rapporteur Mr Casaca proposes, is extremely timely.

This will ensure that agricultural expenditure is treated like any other expenditure involving EU resources, and this will strengthen Parliament' s power of intervention.

Mr President, Commissioner, I was responsible for the research section of the part of the report by my fellow member, Gabriele Stauner, relating to internal policy.

I was perfectly aware of its importance.

However, what we could not foresee was that, with the vote on the overall report, outbursts very similar to those at the time of the refusal of discharge for 1996 would occur once again.

To refer to the corresponding passages on research, I also make a statement on what have deliberately and disparagingly been referred to on occasions as old cases.

Old cases are not the same as obsolete cases; they are an outstanding burden which the Commission must finally remove from our shoulders.

The Court of Auditors highlighted a series of shortcomings in the research area in 1998.

It complained about the pre-dating of contracts and a high overall error rate in payment audits due to incorrect proof of or information on costs, an error rate for which the Commission is perhaps not 100% responsible, but is at least 90% responsible.

There is the old case of visiting scientist B and how his contract came into being.

They also include the internal audit report drafted in 1997 on the area of jurisdiction of the former Commissioner for Research, Mrs Cresson.

This report disappeared from the filing cabinet at the end of 1999/beginning of 2000.

At the same time, there was the so-called European nuclear affair.

Who then is going to be surprised that a link between the financial controller' s filing cabinet and the roaming plutonium was established at the end of 1999?

We might be satisfied with some of the explanations that the Commission offers for these incidents.

Having spoken on many occasions, I am pleased to say, with trustworthy Commission officials, I have the impression that they are ready and willing to make corrections.

But mistakes have been made and the audit was organised as politely as when an auditor visits a company.

However, it was the Court of Auditors that carried out the audit, an institution that has no form of personal interest in the matter and it is no good playing down the mistakes.

If, nonetheless, the rapporteur takes the view today that these cases have not been solved properly, then I would like to side with her fully and unreservedly, as did the Committee on Budgetary Control with just one vote against.

I call on the Commission to immediately give us satisfactory answers, which stand up in public.

Then everyone will have a true picture.

We asked them because mistrust and criticism have been spreading since the refusal of the 1996 discharge.

But what matter are the results which will be presented on 15 May.

Mr President, representatives of the Commission, ladies and gentlemen, the discharge procedure is a complicated exercise.

We have to assess a budget two years after it has been implemented by the Commission, while taking into consideration the budget which is currently being framed, the improvements needed for the implementation of the budget and the practical realisation of the political goals of the European Union.

This already complex situation is further complicated by the peculiar situation we have found ourselves in for almost a year now, to wit, the discrediting of the European Union to a certain extent following the resignation of the Santer Commission last year; a new Commission, in which most of the Commissioners were not members of the Commission which was led to resign; a new Parliament, with many Members facing this discharge procedure for the first time; and reforms or proposed reforms directly concerning European Union finances.

I am thinking of the Structural Funds for the things already achieved, and the Financial Regulation for the things already achieved.

This is the context in which we received Mrs Stauner' s report, a report which, unfortunately, makes only a limited assessment of the Commission' s implementation of the budget for the financial year 1998 against the yardstick of the political goals which the European Union set itself.

If it is unthinkable and intolerable for public money to be used for irregularities and fraud, and if we must both dismantle the mechanisms enabling such abuses to take place and denounce the people involved, then we can also question the methods used to draw up this report.

This report was unacceptable in its initial form because it did not give us the material to form an opinion as to whether or not the budget for 1998 was correctly implemented by the Commission.

It has been possible to adopt a compromise, but the fact remains that we find the explanatory statement unsatisfactory, as it does not reflect the new direction of the report, and portrays relations between our institutions as frozen in an attitude of defiance, at a time when we and our fellow citizens are hoping that productive cooperation in the interests of improved cohesion between our States will develop.

The content and the arguments presented in other more specific reports provide no more justification for postponement of discharge.

Let me refer, by way of example, to Mr Khanbhai' s report, which revealed some problems in the ECSC accounts, including, among other things, the solvency ratio and the transfer of property, although the Commission and the High Authority are currently reducing these problems with a view to the expiry of the ECSC Treaty in 2002.

In this specific situation, it would seem that the current discharge procedure would be a perilous exercise.

Should this not require giving a more precise framework to the work of Members of Parliament within the Committee on Budgetary Control?

I shall conclude by mentioning the internal reform of the Commission.

Among other objectives, the Commission has set itself the task of improving financial control by various means: new structures, responsibilities of authorising officers, and financial controllers within each directorate-general.

We must be attentive to ensuring that this reform makes it possible to achieve the set objective and that it requires the various financial operators within the directorates-general to assume real responsibility.

It also seems essential that, in combination with the determination to reduce irregularity and fraud effectively, the reform should be able to look into the implementation of our policies within Member States, where one of the problems arising concerns payment deadlines and the inadequacy of some payment appropriations.

Mr President, this is a useful and very necessary procedure.

One problem that I have about it is that there is a natural tendency to concentrate much more on the 4% of the budget that might have been lost, or the 2% that probably was lost, than the 98% of the budget that was properly spent.

It is necessary to acknowledge that 98% was properly spent.

It is also important to try to correct the situation where things have gone wrong, but in so doing not to exaggerate it in such a way as to create in the European public's mind an image of a European Union that is out of control, that is a sea of corruption and cannot be trusted with taxpayers' money.

There is fraud at every level of government at which I have served - local, national and European and regional.

It is always there, but local and national bodies can stand up to criticism better perhaps than this younger institution of the European Union, which is less accepted.

While it is important to put things right and to give people confidence, nevertheless it does not help their confidence if we exaggerate the extent to which abuses occur and money is lost.

I thank Mrs Stauner for her report.

Some people have criticised it for being a bit too severe.

Mrs Stauner is new to the Budget Control Committee, but her statement is a real reflection of the mood and the debate that went on.

I do not agree with all of it, of course, but nevertheless it was agreed by a majority.

I would not entirely accept the explanatory statement.

It is Mrs Stauner's own explanation but it is the motion for resolution that we the Parliament have to decide on.

Another point that I would like to make is that in seeking to bring everybody into accountability, whether they be officials or Members of the Commission, we ought, like Mr Deprez said, to avoid this vendetta between institutions.

We ought avoid particularly vendettas between an institution and individual commissioners.

We should see this Commission as a college and while the individual commissioners must be held accountable, nevertheless we must take an objective view of what is going on and beware of either European party politics or international politics colouring our judgement.

The last point I will make is that we have not only an obligation to ensure that accounts are better kept and money is better accounted for.

We also have an obligation to ensure that when we make regulations they are regulations which can be put into effect.

Over the years, I witnessed the making of all the regulations that are creating the problems and my experience in this Parliament was that we wanted to pander to public sentiment.

We never sought to ensure that our regulations were enforceable.

Mr President, Parliament' s refusal last year to grant discharge on the 1996 budgetary year heralded the fall of the Santer Commission.

Parliament employed its powers in a sound manner under special circumstances.

A college of Commissioners, which has since been appointed, has presented an ambitious reform programme.

Last year' s opposition from the Commission to Parliament has now developed into good working relations.

Needless to say, Parliament needs to keep a critical eye on the Commission.

It is unseemly, however, to deploy the discharge procedure as a weapon in a party-politically motivated battle and, what is more, it undermines Parliament' s influence in the long run.

Mrs Stauner' s motion for a resolution, which was before us initially was, in this respect, unbalanced.

It over-simplified the issue and its sole aim appeared to be to malign the new Commission.

Her motion for a resolution contained damning accusations regarding the Commission which, as it happens, did not even relate to the 1998 budget year.

Meanwhile, the motion for a resolution has been amended drastically and the suggestion was made to postpone the discharge decision.

The Commission is being given the opportunity of responding to a number of urgent questions raised and requests made by Parliament before 15 May.

I would like to single out one point from among these questions and requests.

Over the past year, it has become clear that the Commission' s disciplinary procedure does not function properly.

In countless cases, no action was taken or if it was, it did not lead to any result.

The procedure needs to be completely overhauled.

The Commission has made suggestions to this effect in its White Paper.

However, these suggestions do not go far enough. The Committee of Independent Experts has recommended the appointment of an independent outsider, preferably in the role of chairman of the Disciplinary Committee.

Parliament supported this proposal in January and does so once again by means of this motion for a resolution.

I would ask the Commission to reconsider its position.

The European Parliament' s financial situation has been the subject of extensive media coverage over the past few weeks.

Mr Kuhne has drawn up a report on this subject, on which I would like to warmly congratulate him.

He did not let himself be talked into adjusting his well-balanced approach in the face of sometimes heated publications.

The Kuhne report proposes granting Parliament discharge, provided a number of well-defined requirements are met.

For example, the offices of Parliament are expected, from now on, to offer, in the majority of cases, contracts for tender which are public in nature.

In addition, Parliament needs to indicate when the reform process which is being launched within the Commission will start taking effect in Parliament.

One of the key proposals is to separate the audit and financial control functions.

The Commission has already indicated that it will submit proposals to this effect before the summer.

I am of the opinion that such separation should also take place within Parliament.

An independent parliamentary audit office needs to be set up as soon as possible whose task is to ensure the effectiveness of public spending by Parliament.

Such an office should make annual - and if necessary, more frequent - recommendations regarding the working method of Parliament' s offices.

Only when Parliament has its own financial housekeeping in order will it gain credibility when it comes to assessing and sometimes condemning the Commission and Member States.

Mr President, as the Commission is well aware, I am not accustomed to being an easy-going, meek or lenient speaker when it comes to the Commission in its role as executive.

I am therefore all the more at home today in expressing the concerns I have due to the discharge procedure which is being carried out.

I do not wish to challenge the compromise which appears in the resolution negotiated between the political groups and the rapporteur.

This compromise has three distinct advantages over the rapporteur' s initial draft.

Firstly, it no longer uses the vehement and aggressive tone of the initial draft report, a tone which I do not find, as I might say in the style of Kenneth Starr, worthy of this House, being rather more suited to the tabloid press, and one which should not in any case be used to characterise relations between a responsible institution, such as our own, and a Commission in which we expressed our confidence but a few months ago.

In this respect, the report has been improved.

Secondly, this report ceases to indulge in the unjustified implication of officials who may have taken more or less appropriate decisions but who do not in any way deserve to be exposed to public condemnation and pilloried in a procedure which is not subject to judicial process.

Thirdly, this report asks the Commission questions which it can answer within reasonable time limits, enabling us to vote upon discharge within the time limits stipulated by the Treaty.

These are the three positive features.

There are, however, three forms of sidelong shift which give me pause.

The first is that we are forgetting what the discharge procedure consists of.

We must remember that discharge involves, and must only involve, accepting the financial statements for the year and ensuring that expenditure is in order, and does not involve digging out again and again the skeletons which have been hidden away for years in the cupboards of the various institutions.

It is paradoxical, and even unfair, that the report in question makes so little mention of the financial year 1998.

The second shift in emphasis involves the failure to make it clear that the explanatory statement is distinct from the report.

On the one hand, we have a dispassionate and objective report, undoubtedly insistent, but legitimately so, and on the other hand, we have an explanatory statement which, even though it represents only the opinion of the rapporteur, nonetheless is a godsend to the press.

How many journalists are aware that the resolution represents the opinion of the House but that the explanatory statement represents only the opinion of the rapporteur?

This gives us grounds for concern.

The third and final anomaly is the gap between Parliament' s handling of its own problems and Parliament' s handling of other people' s problems.

We cannot adopt a sliding scale for measuring correct behaviour, and we are taking a major political risk if we are more indulgent towards ourselves than towards others.

Mr President, thank you for letting me conclude. I should just like to mention the maxim that the police always catch serial killers as soon as they step up the rate of their killing.

We brought the Commission down a year ago, and we had better not give in to our homicidal impulses again.

Mr Bourlanges, you have spoken rather longer than the time allocated to you, but you are such a committed fighter, there is no stopping you!

Mr President, I shall focus on only one point: access to information.

Many of my colleagues have raised this issue this morning.

We need better access in order to move forward.

In my committee, the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy, we are determined to take our responsibilities as MEPs very seriously indeed.

We have asked Members of Parliament to volunteer to follow budget lines.

These Members of Parliament are now approaching Commission services to talk to the officials responsible for those budget lines.

We are having problems and we are having problems in finding out who is the right person; the people we talk to are not clear what their responsibility is, what information they should be giving us.

Some services cooperate very well; some are setting up briefing meetings for Members of Parliament - but others are not.

What we need from the Commission is a new system.

We need a better reporting mechanism to parliamentary committees, to the spending committees, so that we know what information it is going to give us.

A start would be a list of who is responsible for what in which budget lines of each committee.

Only in this way can we do what we are supposed to do, and restore the public confidence that Mrs Schreyer spoke about this morning.

We need to know that money is being spent properly.

If we have that confidence we can pass that message on to the public in Europe.

My colleague, Mrs Morgan, spoke earlier about the need to overhaul the whole discharge procedure.

For too long discharge was seen as something bureaucratic and rather unnecessary - something to get out of the way very quickly.

Now we have to move away from that, we have to overhaul it, and I hope proper reporting mechanisms to committees will be part of that overhaul.

Mr President, I am speaking here especially in the capacity of rapporteur of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs.

First of all, I would like to extend warm thanks to the rapporteur for her report.

I am delighted that we now have a broad-based compromise on the issue of discharge which enables the Commission to make progress and to solve a number of problems which have cropped up recently.

I would also like to comment on a few points which are included in the report of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs.

Firstly, we share the Court of Auditors' criticism regarding the inadequate measurability of the effects upon employment of the structural fund measures.

I would ask the Commission to pay more attention to this aspect.

We have, slowly but surely, made tremendous progress in this field, but this does not seem to be evident from the way we are dealing with the funds.

Secondly, I would like to mention the issue of financing.

There have been problems recently regarding the payment credits of the Social Fund, in particular.

Unfortunately, these problems have not been solved.

Finally, I would like to mention the problem surrounding the Leonardo programme.

You will be aware that the Leonardo programme has played an extremely important role in the events which have led to the previous Commission resigning from office.

Nevertheless, we wish to underline that this association needs to be brought to a definite close, and it is also important that sufficient consideration be given to the lessons we have learnt in the field of BAT.

These are the key points which I would like to highlight here.

The Committee on Budgetary Control has naturally been unable to adopt all these points in their entirety.

This would not have been appropriate either, but I would like to take this opportunity to add these specific points to the list which is, in fact, already before you.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, we discussed Mrs Stauner' s report in the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy on the basis of an opinion by Mr Thielemans and reached a number of unanimous conclusions containing a different political evaluation of the 1998 discharge on which I have three comments to make:

First, we take the view that we must learn lessons from past cases and, of course, clear up every single case for which we have new, additional proof.

Nonetheless, we want to give the Commission instructions which look to the future, not instructions to deal with a past for which it is not even responsible.

Secondly, we passed punishable offences to the courts in a one-off show of strength during the last parliamentary term.

We ensured that OLAF had the structure and facilities needed to pursue any suspicions or irregularities.

We want, in the final analysis, to place our trust in the courts, OLAF and the disciplinary measures and decisions taken and to work together with President Prodi' s new Commission on a basis of trust and on the basis precisely of the relevant new rules and obligations introduced.

Thirdly, this includes, as Mr Bourlanges explained earlier, acknowledging and accepting results such as the disciplinary proceedings carried out in the ECHO case, even if Mr Blak wants to fight this tooth and nail, as he said earlier.

But every Member must, in the end, understand that, as Members of the European Parliament, we have to carry out our control duties as accurately as possible, but that we are neither detectives nor public prosecutors, let alone black angels of vengeance.

Demanding a new audit, without submitting any proof or evidence, is hardly going to enhance the credibility of our Parliament.

Mr President, I welcome all the reports on the discharge procedures, especially Mrs Stauner's report.

Before I make my initial comments, I just wish to welcome what Mrs McAvan said about access to information from the Commission.

I have found it remarkably difficult to get important documents and information from it on a number of occasions, especially for various budget lines relating to culture.

It would be very useful if the Commission were to release more information to us and give us the reports we ask for.

I welcome Mrs Stauner's report for a number of reasons.

One because, as we are dealing with 1998, we should be looking at the past and trying to find answers to the questions we have raised about Fléchard, ECHO and the MED problems.

These are all relevant nowadays because we must learn the lessons from them.

Any new proof that arises from these cases must be investigated.

These investigations must be very rigorous and must be reported back to us.

The three cases I have mentioned are also quite important because they reflect remarkably on four current Commissioners.

All four of them must look carefully at their past, come clean and show this new Commission where reform is needed.

I hope that Commissioner Kinnock listens to this debate and will reflect upon.

There are lessons to be learned and many questions to be answered and he is the man in charge of getting these questions answered for us now.

I also wish to make a couple of points on the Kuhne report on Parliament's own budget discharge.

We regularly cast stones at the Commission, but when it comes to looking at our own finances sometimes we are a bit slow on the uptake.

Although we have recommended discharge for our own budget this time, there are a number of points in the discharge report we should look at, especially the inventory services and the new system.

I welcome the fact that the Kuhne report has called for a report on the new inventory system for Parliament.

I hope the Commission takes the time to look at this debate seriously.

This Parliament is very serious in the way it discharges various budgets.

I agree with Mrs Morgan that maybe we need to reflect on how we discharge budgets in the future.

However, for now, the Commission has a number of questions to answer and I hope it will start right now.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, this is the second time I have spoken today and I should like to thank you for the highly constructive atmosphere in which this extremely detailed debate is being conducted.

Because of the time available, I cannot, of course, comment on every intervention; however, I shall try to summarise the various points.

The question of access to information in order to be able to carry out the discharge procedure with the required degree of seriousness and with the documents which you need for the discharge process was central to various interventions.

I should like to point out once again in this context that the Commission has passed all the confidential reports requested to the rapporteur, or rather to the Committee on Budgetary Control.

I must simply therefore ask, if we are being accused of withholding something, that you specify what has been withheld, because it is only on this basis that we can clear up misunderstandings or give you more information and this should not fail because of the Commission.

There is in fact a contentious issue, which also needs to be regulated for the procedure for the future, and that is the question of the minutes of disciplinary proceedings or administrative investigations.

This question has again been left out of the agreement on the grounds of valuable personal interests and I should like to point out that specific regulations also apply to Parliament in disciplinary proceedings.

I should also like to comment on Mr Blak' s question on the questionnaires.

There has been a specific procedure for questionnaires in the past.

The committee has now changed this, albeit informally.

This resulted in the Commission' s confusion as to whether or not the questionnaire drafted by Mr Blak, but not confirmed by the committee, was an official questionnaire.

The Commission then said that it would, of course, reply to the questionnaire, despite the fact that this point was not clarified.

That again shows that it really does make sense here to lay down clear procedural rules.

The Commission is really not interested in such misunderstandings or discussions; let us lay down clear procedures here so that our cooperation is complete and satisfies all concerned.

I should like to pick up on a point made by the chairman of the Committee on Budgetary Control because the question of why the list of old cases was not passed on was asked.

I can only say in this context that the procedure changed with the legal basis for OLAF.

The legal basis for OLAF clearly states that the director of OLAF is responsible for information on investigations or the results of investigations.

I think we need to discuss this at some point together with the Committee on Budgetary Control and the director of OLAF because the Commission no longer has jurisdiction here.

It has no more information than you do, on which investigations are at what stage.

We have to discuss this with the director of OLAF.

I shall, of course, pass on any requests but I cannot give you any information in lieu of the director of OLAF in this respect.

Another important point is the question of disciplinary procedure and I should like to comment on this.

The Commission explained to Mr Van Hulten in its White Paper that it would reform this disciplinary procedure as it now stands.

Nonetheless, our reform must remain within the bounds of the European Treaty.

But what we can do is become involved in disciplinary procedures externally in order to make it clear that this is not some sort of closed shop but a regulated procedure conducted objectively in order to examine accusations.

A multitude of points were made but I should like to comment on the question of the discharge procedure.

Mrs Morgan, I should like to thank you for your proposals concerning clarification of the discharge procedure, together with Mr Bourlanges, who referred to it in his point on the question of the interpretation of the current Treaty.

Mr Bösch, you made the comment that the Council did not unanimously recommend discharge for the Commission this year.

In fact, it was the Netherlands which failed to carry the decision on the grounds that the Commission should draw up a clear timetable.

Mr Mulder, you also returned to this point.

I think we should discuss this at some point - including in the Committee on Budgetary Control - because although the procedure in the Netherlands is of course different, there are valuable points which we could perhaps adopt for the procedure in relation to the European budget.

Now to the question of reform and financial control, which was also raised in several comments, criticisms and demands. The Commission made it perfectly clear in its White Paper that one of the most important points was to reform financial control.

Even if one of the suggestions made in it was that previously centralised, ex-ante financial control would be changed, abolished and decentralised, Mr Bösch, it also includes a suggestion which is stressed time and again by the independent experts and the Court of Auditors.

It is not a question of reducing control but of making it more efficient.

I firmly believe that this can only be done by making every official who handles European money responsible for ensuring that money is disbursed efficiently and correctly.

No one must be able to hide behind centralised financial control.

The Commission has also decided to set up a separate, internal ex-post audit service and I think that this will again demonstrate that the Commission takes the subject of improved financial control extremely seriously.

It has been clearly stated that the objective must be to reduce the error rate and I can only agree with this.

But obviously I cannot reduce the error rates for the 1998 or 1999 budgets in retrospect.

On the contrary, the objective is to take clear steps to achieve a better result in the future.

That is the purpose of the action plan submitted by the Commission.

I should like in this respect to come back to what you said, Mr Pomés Ruiz, i.e. that the Commission should perhaps tell the committee which confidential reports it has submitted for the discharge procedure.

I would be glad to comply with this request because I think it too helps clarify matters.

Mrs Langenhagen used her intervention to criticise the independent financial controller of the Union in connection with a report on the research centre in Geel.

However, I should like to point out that to say that the financial controller is responsible for the plutonium incident in Geel is unfounded because she exercises no atomic supervision or any other type of supervision in Geel.

But I have of course taken note of this accusation and have already started an administrative investigation in order to ascertain if there was a duty to provide information about the discussion of the report with the research centre and to pass the report on to the European Court of Auditors.

Mrs Ferreira, allow me to congratulate you on your first speech in Parliament and to thank you for your call for cooperation for the benefit of European politics.

I should like to end by saying that I do not see any confrontation in the postponement of the discharge; what I do see is that the European Parliament has exercised its right to demand information, set conditions and call on the Commission to take action, as it is entitled to do.

I also see in the demands in the resolution support on the road towards a renewal of European politics and, in this respect, I really can promise you that we shall examine every point of this resolution very carefully and take it very seriously and we shall give you our reply on the information demanded and the steps taken without delay.

The vote will take place on Thursday at 11.30 a.m.

(The sitting was suspended at 11.45 a.m. and resumed at 12 noon)

On behalf of the Commission, and in particular, on behalf of my colleague Mr Byrne, let me say that the Commission sees its way to accepting all the amendments that have been proposed by Parliament.

I need not add anything further since Parliament, I am sure, will welcome this.

(The President declared the common position approved as amended)

Report (A5-0072/2000) by Mr Lannoye, on behalf of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive amending Directive 95/2/EC on food additives other than colours and sweeteners (COM(1999) 329 - C5-0068/1999 - 1999/0158(COD))

Report (A5-0090/2000) by Mr Kirkhope on behalf of the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs, on the initiative of the Republic of Austria with a view to adopting a Council Decision to combat child pornography on the Internet (10317/1999 - C5-0318/1999 - 1999/0822(CNS))

Ladies and gentlemen, the Commission supports all the proposed amendments adopted.

Report (A5-0091/2000) by Mr Frahm, on behalf of the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs, on the proposal for a Council decision creating a European Refugee Fund (COM(1999) 686 - C5-0120/2000 - 1999/0274(CNS))

Before the vote on the amendments:

Mr President, the European People' s Party would like a separate vote on Amendment No 19. As such, we would like to propose a split vote.

I am sorry but it is too late.

The request was not submitted in time.

It has to be made the evening before the votes.

I should explain to the House that the reason we do this is so that all the groups can prepare their voting slips and so that there is no confusion during the votes.

If we start breaking that rule then it just creates chaos during the votes.

The proposal before us today aims to amend Directive 95/53/EC in order to provide a legal instrument more appropriate to the requirements of inspections in the field of animal nutrition.

Following the dioxin crisis in May 1999, it was apparent that it was necessary to adapt this legislation.

At that time the Commission announced a legislative programme with a view to improving food safety regulations.

The programme was adopted by the Council and by the European Parliament, and included a revision of Directive 95/53/EC.

At the time, several problems had been identified.

Mismanagement of the crisis, particularly the poor coordination between the various authorities involved, became apparent and was noted in the course of the Commission inspection.

There were delays in transmitting the information on dioxin contamination to the Commission, and measures taken at national level were inadequate.

In order to offset these omissions, the proposal aims to stipulate that Commission and Member State experts should have the possibility of carrying out inspections not only within the Community but also in third countries, particularly following the emergence of a phenomenon likely to have an adverse effect on the fitness for consumption of animal feeding stuffs marketed within the Community; that a safeguard procedure should be set up and that the Commission should have the opportunity, if necessary, to assign Community experts to the site in order to check whether Community regulations are being observed and to take any appropriate measures necessary; that the Commission should be responsible for adopting specific coordinated inspection programmes, in addition to the general programmes already stipulated by Directive 95/53/EC, in the event of unexpected contamination which may represent an imminent and serious risk to human and animal health.

The common position did not adopt the European Commission' s right to take safeguard measures appropriate to the context of animal nutrition in the event of an emergency.

Obviously, this is extremely reprehensible and even irresponsible!

This is why the rapporteur proposes reintroducing this clause, and I am pleased to see it because without this clause there is no guarantee of consumer protection in food crisis situations.

I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on his work on the proposal for the directive amending Directive 95/2/EC.

This directive authorises the use of a number of new food additives which are currently banned but which have been assessed recently by the Scientific Committee for Food (SCF) and deemed fit for human consumption.

The report clearly expresses consumer concerns in the face of the flood of additives, of chemicals, into our daily diet.

Indeed, our diet has changed radically under the influence of lifestyle changes and the contributions of new technologies.

The time devoted to preparing meals has been reduced considerably.

This often leads us to eat ready-made meals, which are practical but which do not really suit our tastes or fulfil our vitamin and mineral requirements.

The fact is, the industrial foodstuffs which wind up on our plates have often undergone intense processing leading to the loss of flavour, texture and colour.

In order to overcome these disadvantages, the chemists of the agri-foodstuffs industry add artificial flavourings, flavour enhancers, firming agents, colorants, etc. What is more, with food distribution chains becoming ever longer, it becomes unavoidable to have recourse to preservatives and oxidation inhibitors.

This cannot fail to give rise to concerns on the part of consumers who, following recent food crises, are increasingly anxious to know just exactly what they have in their plates!

In response to these concerns, the European Union has endowed itself with a particularly complex arsenal of legislation which is supposed to eliminate any risk to the consumer.

So, in order to justify the inclusion of an additive in a foodstuff, there are three criteria which must be fulfilled, though there is still rather a wide margin for interpretation.

The technological need for the additive to be approved, for example, is obviously determined by the industry itself, which argues primarily in terms of reducing production costs and winning markets.

At the moment, this criterion is the weightiest consideration.

Usefulness for the consumer is a particularly vague concept.

Does the consumer really wish to eat a fruit or vegetable which has remained in his fridge for a month without changing in appearance?

Finally, there is the criterion of harmlessness.

Before any substance may be authorised for use as a food additive, it must, in principle, be subjected to toxicological assessment.

Normally a great many tests are carried out on laboratory animals in order to determine whether the substance is harmless, and at what dosage it may be safely consumed.

On the one hand, the human being does not always react in the same way that animals do, so extrapolating from the results of tests on animals to human experience is always problematic.

On the other hand, these experiments assess the effect of each substance taken in isolation.

Our diet, however, often contains a cocktail of different substances whose combined effect is rarely identified!

The precautionary principle must be used with the utmost rigour in matters of foodstuffs!

The Commission' s proposal has not taken adequate account of this principle!

We therefore await Commission proposals for provisions that are directed more at improving consumer protection but also at promoting quality foodstuffs!

The Danish Social Democratic Members of the European Parliament have chosen to vote in favour of the report and fully and wholeheartedly support the initiatives being taken where this is concerned.

The Internet has created an entirely new situation where the duplication, sale and distribution of child pornography is concerned.

The Internet operates across national borders. It is not, therefore, possible for an individual State effectively to contain the spread of child pornography.

Initiatives such as this, in which cooperation between States is increased in the common struggle against the spread of child pornography, is absolutely necessary.

As I stated during the previous part-session, in our debate on child sex tourism, there is nothing that arouses more horror and disgust than the sexual exploitation of children, and we have to admit that the Internet facilitates such 'practices' by enabling all manner of perverts to consult illegal sites anonymously.

Having made this extremely alarming observation, it is essential to consider the means of combating this phenomenon in order to protect our children.

I must, in addition, congratulate the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs on its work, which produced some very interesting proposals.

One suggestion it makes is that every European Union Member State should make special police units responsible for monitoring the Internet, looking for pornographic material involving children.

If we wish to take effective action against child pornography on the Internet, it is not enough to simply react to crimes which have already been discovered.

In addition, the report sets the cut-off age at 16 for the definition of what must be considered to be child pornography.

I further support the rapporteur in insisting that the Council decision should be more binding and that the proposed measures should not be left to the discretion of the Member States.

In the same way, the idea of the 'offence of child pornography' must be seen as quite comprehensive!

There was a proposal to add that 'the production, sale and distribution or other forms of trafficking in child pornography material and the possession of such material is punishable' , but 'possession shall be punishable only where it is the result of an intentional or deliberate act or, if it is not, where possession is deliberately retained.'

Without this qualification, users 'surfing' the Internet and inadvertently accessing a site displaying child pornography would also be punishable.

Productions which, although they do not actually feature children, may suggest or intend to suggest that children are involved are also covered by the definition of offence.

Users of child pornography must be punished severely to serve as examples.

In addition, it is very important to organise better cooperation between Member States police forces through Europol.

The European Parliament must make bold proposals and must remain very vigilant.

We must utilise all the preventative and restrictive means possible to combat such phenomena.

This proposal is a step in this direction and I can therefore only give it my support.

This Council initiative is essential because it is not possible to allow childhood and naivety to be exploited for degrading commercial purposes, in denial of all humane values.

It is of the utmost importance to prevent such violations of the rights of individuals and the rights of children and not to confine ourselves to merely reacting.

I share the opinion of our rapporteur and the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs, that the Council proposal should be made more binding.

The definition of offences of child pornography must also be stricter, and I find the definition given by the parliamentary committee perfectly appropriate, 'the production, sale and distribution or other forms of trafficking in child pornography material and the possession of such material is punishable' with the proviso that 'possession shall be punishable only where it is the result of an intentional or deliberate act' .

We need all citizens to be involved and to be vigilant, not just police forces through Europol, and public authorities, but also Internet users and the economic network producers, in order to be able to identify the people who use these electronic messages.

There is too much at stake for us to fail to call for the mobilisation of the general population against this danger, and that is why I am compelled to vote in favour of this report.

Regarding Amendments Nos 22-28, which are the subjects of a joint vote, we would state the following. We regard the problem of child pornography with the utmost seriousness, whether it be on the Internet or in other media, and we obviously share the view that both the Member States and the Applicant States should do everything in their power to combat child pornography.

In the same way, it is important that joint, effective measures should be taken and that the European Parliament should be kept informed of how this work is progressing.

For the same reasons that we have a negative attitude to the proposals to establish special registers of convicted sex offenders (Amendments Nos 21, 30 and 32), we do not consider Amendment No 24 to be politically desirable.

Even if it were technically possible, registering the identities of everyone allocated e-mail addresses would constitute too far-reaching a curtailment of personal privacy, as well as risk discouraging such lawful use of the Internet as is much to be desired.

The twenty-first century is the century of communications.

Paradoxically, it has become more usual to contact friends or colleagues on the other side of the world than to chat with one' s next-door neighbours.

Within the vast Internet market there are some people who have found ways to make easy money from exploiting human poverty.

Amoral producers and distributors of material have decided to respond to the deviant urges of some individuals by disseminating pornographic documents involving children over the Internet.

No one gets upset at finding large numbers of prostitutes in the streets around this building or at seeing them on display in the windows of Brussels, no one protests when newsagents sell, albeit on the top shelves, magazines flaunting the worst deviations, including paedophilia.

And yet this House is indignant today at child pornography as if it were not all part of the continuum.

Once again this damage is caused by permissiveness, which, while it may satisfy the mania of some, remains a source of unhappiness for many others.

The police and judicial authorities of our respective States must therefore receive adequate resources to combat this plague which affects the most vulnerable of us. In this area which is cross-border in nature, it may be useful for the European Union to make its own contribution.

While the combat must involve international cooperation, however, it is also essential to fight on a day-to-day basis by preventing all these practices becoming commonplace.

Some people will retort, as they often do, that it has always existed and will always exist.

What a fatalistic comment, and what resignation, what contempt for the human condition!

I am delighted to see that our institutions are today becoming aware of the tragic fate experienced by thousands of children throughout the world, including our own countries, and are deciding to find a solution to it.

I am however afraid that the usual double standards may make these measures meaningless, for how credible are policies which would restrict the fight for human dignity to some parties and leave out others?

Obviously we need to offer children special protection, but in a society which has lost its points of reference, whatever they may be, and which leaves life' s victims by the wayside in the name of individual freedom, it is our duty to fight to ensure that everyone, man, woman and child, is enabled to live in dignity.

I hope, without too much confidence, that the day will come when our main concern will once again be for the public good, responding to the highest aspirations rather than to the lowest temptations.

Mr President, creating this European Refugee Fund is the very least that could be done to face up to the reception of refugees and forcibly displaced persons likely to enter European Union territory.

We are therefore voting in favour of creating the Fund, although it is clearly inadequate to ensure the decent reception of refugees and it is, above all, an alibi for lack of action.

Let us just mention the unspeakable attitude of the countries of Europe, particularly those responsible for the bombing raids on Serbia and Kosovo, with regard to the refugees forced into exile, many of them precisely because of these bombing campaigns.

Refugees which wealthy Europe has abandoned, in the most part, to the care of neighbouring countries in the region, which have still not recovered.

We also deplore the fact that the States of the European Union are making the allocation of refugee status ever more restrictive and more arbitrary.

We deplore the fact that great numbers of women and men fleeing from oppression are being refused this status and are being made stateless persons under permanent threat of being returned to their country of origin with the risks, often serious risks, that that involves.

The creation of a European Fund for refugees, which the European Parliament has just adopted, despite the Union for a Europe of Nations Group' s voting against it, provides a fine example of these hypocritical proposals which will solve nothing at grass-roots level and will serve only to make the situation worse by transferring costly and unsupervised jurisdiction to Europe.

As I explained in my speech yesterday, this fund is not specifically intended to handle infrequent, exceptional and tragic instances of influxes of refugees originating from crisis-stricken countries, but to handle the day-to-day distribution of appropriations for the management of the usual flow of refugees of all kinds towards the most developed countries.

But what additional contribution is this Fund going to make exactly, in comparison with the present situation?

As in the case of the structural funds, the citizens will be led to believe that Europe is handing out heaven-sent money in order to assist them in managing refugees.

This money is not really heaven-sent, of course, it is taken away from those self-same citizens without their being aware of it.

Europe is thus creating a good reputation for itself on the cheap.

It is always the same process: some pitiful situation is selected (the plight of the refugees, in this instance) in order to appeal not to rational argument but to people' s sympathy.

We are given the explanation that Europe will bring about the synergy that will solve the problem at minimum expense and, as proof, we are told that the new Fund will be a lightweight body, allocated only limited appropriations.

Over the coming years, however, it will be noted that the competences transferred to Brussels are executed with little discipline, as they are too far removed from the citizens, that the Fund has made the States less responsible, that therefore more money is needed, that European inspectors are also needed in order to supervise the use of appropriations, and that an entire European administration is needed to manage what will have become an uncontrollable monster.

We have just witnessed live the birth of a new sideways shift in Europe, one which will be extremely costly for everyone, and whose only effect will be to make the States mere onlookers and, what is more, it will achieve this using their own money.

At the end of 1998, the Commission proposed a Community action programme with a view to promoting the integration of refugees within the Union.

Following our opinion and the response of the Council, the Commission replaced this project with a proposal to create a European Refugee Fund, initially for a period of five years (2000-2004) and I must say that I am delighted with it!

In putting forward a multiannual plan with a wider sphere of activity, the Commission is acting in compliance with the Treaty of Amsterdam in undertaking long-term actions in favour of refugees and displaced persons and responding to the requirements expressed by the European Council in Tampere in October 1999 regarding the creation of an instrument appropriate for emergency situations.

This represents a clear improvement on prevalent practice to date.

The Fund is to establish a financial redistribution system in order to balance out the financial expenses incurred by Member States in receiving refugees and to enable those with the least developed systems to bring them up to speed.

The Fund is a single instrument intended to integrate the three facets of European policy on refugees: the reception, integration and repatriation of refugees and displaced persons.

It will therefore make it possible to support actions within the Member States such as improving reception conditions and procedures in terms of infrastructures and services (accommodation, material assistance, social welfare, assistance with administrative procedures), the integration of persons entitled to some form of stable international protection, voluntary repatriation and reintegration into the country of origin.

The target groups are refugees, under the Geneva Convention, persons that have applied for this status, and displaced persons that have requested protection on a temporary basis.

In addition to the structural measures, the Commission proposes to use this Fund to finance emergency measures in the event of an unexpected massive influx of refugees.

For the financial year 2000, the Commission proposes an allocation of EUR 26 million for structural measures and EUR 10 million for emergency measures.

As is often the case, this allocation is inadequate to handle the actual requirements.

In order to obtain real results, the budget for this Fund must be increased.

The European Commission must provide us with financial estimates covering the entire period of the programme within the scope of current financial perspectives and, if necessary, a proposal for the revision of appropriations, in view of the fact that much greater amounts will be necessary in order to achieve the Fund' s objectives.

Let me conclude by emphasising that creating this European Refugee Fund represents the first step towards a common asylum system and we must continue to work towards this.

If the purpose of creating a European Refugee Fund were to make asylum and refugee policy in the Member States of the Union more humane and open, then it would be a welcome step.

The Fund, which is merely the product of a combination of three budgetary lines, will not do this.

There is evidence in addition to the debate as to what the creation of the European Refugee Fund really means. It means "distributing the burden" .

An approach whereby immigrants entering the EU in search of protection are seen as a "burden" which has to be "distributed" is fundamentally flawed.

No policy which takes humane account of the needs of persons fleeing persecution can be constructed on such a basis.

The policy of the Member States and of the Union is geared towards heading off and turning away refugees, as the recent inclusion of a "re-adoption" clause in the Lomé Convention demonstrates.

If this is what the outlines of European asylum and refugee policy really look like and if refugees are seen as a "burden" , then creating a Refugee Fund is a cosmetic exercise designed to hide the real face of a European policy of turning refugees away.

The Fund will not, in this form, cause any country to switch to a policy of greater openness towards the immigration of refugees.

Nor will it improve the legal security of persons fleeing persecution and in search of protection.

But it is precisely the legal security and the right of participation of refugees, which must be considered.

The European Union calls throughout the world for freedom of movement for capital. But it is reducing the freedom of movement of persons yet further by closing borders and cutting itself off from refugees and asylum seekers.

Every year many refugees die, killed on the external borders of the EU.

To assume in these circumstances that creating a Refugee Fund will make for a more humane asylum and refugee policy is an illusion, which is why I have abstained.

(The sitting was suspended at 12.25 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m.)

Outcome of the European Council in Lisbon, 23 -24 March 2000

The next item is the debate on the European Council report and the Commission statement on the outcome of the European Council in Lisbon, the Social Summit.

Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, the Lisbon European Council has certainly given new impetus to the European agenda and I am sure that you will be aware of its results, both through reading the conclusions and also as a result of the broad public coverage that this Council received in the European and international press.

The key aim of defining a new world-wide strategy for the European Union within a world economy that is open, competitive and truly global was achieved. That strategy is to make the European Union the most dynamic and competitive economic area in the world, based on knowledge and able to guarantee sustainable economic growth with more and better jobs and with greater social cohesion.

A knowledge-based economy underpinned by a society based on information and research will be a powerful factor in the European Union' s development and of course requires a swift and consistent process of structural reforms and the completion of the internal market.

This objective also involves modernising the European social model, investing in people and combating social exclusion. It also involves implementing sound macroeconomic policies encouraging economic growth and employment.

Strengthening the European Council' s coordinating and guiding role will be vital to developing the Lisbon strategy. The European Council will annually monitor the progress that has been made, by holding a European Council meeting each spring.

It will also establish the broad guidelines for the sectoral Councils. A coordination method was established, with specific timetables for the short, medium and long term, outlining objectives, benchmarking based on best practice and also other kinds of indicators.

This is an open method of coordination, which we hope will produce optimal results.

These guidelines will also be transposed into national policies, and will be periodically monitored and assessed as part of a process of mutual learning between Member States.

The goals set at the Lisbon European Council are extremely ambitious and give specific mandates to the Commission.

Just yesterday, President Prodi presented the Commission' s programme in this area to the Council and also to the various Council formations, and it is therefore crucial that we bear in mind the diversity of platforms on which the strategy laid down in Lisbon was developed, with its implications for the fields of scientific research, education, the single market, industry and so forth. Developments in electronic commerce, the liberalisation of the telecommunications market and the establishment of a framework for reducing the costs of access to the Internet are, of course, crucial factors in the success of this modernising strategy, and the e-Europe Action Plan, which will be presented to the Feira European Council, will also be a key instrument in speeding up the progress of the European Union towards becoming an information society.

Just yesterday, I was able to inform the General Affairs Council that the Portuguese Presidency had already prepared a timetable for the remits given by the Council for implementation of specific measures in the various areas, and also for appropriate preparation of the Feira and Nice European Councils.

The Ecofin Council will primarily assume responsibility for strengthening the Cardiff process, the action plan for financial services, the action plan for venture capital, the tax package, the mid-term review of the employment guidelines and for the assessment of the contribution made by public finances to growth and employment.

The Internal Market Council will assume responsibility for electronic commerce, copyright and related rights, for the dual-use export control regime, for removing obstacles to services and public contracts, for Community and private sector electronic procurement systems, for the establishment of a coordinated strategy with a view to simplifying laws and rules and for the Community patent.

The Employment and Social Affairs Council will assume responsibility for conducting a review of the employment guidelines, for mandating the High-Level Working Party on Social Protection to prepare a study on the sustainability of the pensions system up to 2020, for applying an open method of coordination to policies for combating social exclusion and for considering the future direction of social policy, with a view to reaching agreement on a European social agenda at the Nice European Council.

The Research Council will assume responsibility for the e-Europe Action Plan and for promoting the establishment of a European research area.

The Telecommunications Council will assume responsibility for concluding the review of a regulatory framework for telecommunications and for the liberalisation of the market in this field.

The Consumer Affairs Council will assume responsibility for the distance selling of financial services - by approving pending legislation - and for alternative systems for resolving consumer disputes, by establishing a Community network.

The Education Council will assume responsibility for considering the future objectives of our educational systems, with a view to contributing to the Luxembourg and Cardiff processes by establishing new basic skills at European Union level, for creating a European diploma for basic IT skills, for removing obstacles to the mobility of teachers, for developing a European format for curricula vitae, for monitoring national policies on implementing these objectives, for access to the Internet in schools by 2001 and for the minimum training, by 2002, of the network of information technology teachers.

The Industry Council will assume responsibility for drafting the charter for small businesses and for establishing a procedure for standardising appropriate practices for the creation and development of innovative businesses, particularly small- and medium-sized businesses.

The Justice and Home Affairs Council will be responsible for adopting the pending legislation on jurisdiction and enforcing judgements.

It should be borne in mind that implementing the remits decided in Lisbon will require close cooperation between the Commission, the Council and the European Parliament, since many of the laws to be adopted are subject to the codecision procedure.

As you can see, the task of setting objectives at the Lisbon European Council is developing into a major timetable for action that the Commission and the various Council formations must now implement.

The Portuguese Presidency has already taken appropriate measures in Council so that the specific Council formations can immediately start implementing the programmes defined for their respective fields, and so that appropriate coordination takes place in this area, through the presentation of a synthesis report, either by the time of the Feira European Council this June, or by the Nice European Council, during the French Presidency.

Madam President, Mr President-in-Office, ladies and gentlemen, as Mr Gama said, the recent Lisbon Summit was a great success for Europe.

It was certainly a turning point.

The European Council defined a new Union strategy, a strategy which will make us a leading power in the new knowledge-based economy and make it possible to restore the necessary conditions for full employment.

Even at this early stage, the revised forecasts for both economic growth and employment are cause for optimism.

The Lisbon European Council made a firm political commitment to an ambitious socio-economic plan; clear objectives were agreed for the reforms, the European social model was consolidated and, most importantly, it is now possible for the pledges made to be followed with immediate, practical actions.

This amounts to a completely unprecedented sign of confidence in Europe' s future and in the future of our economy and our social cohesion.

Our success in Lisbon was largely due to the excellent preparatory work of the Portuguese Presidency. António Guterres' handling of the debate was exemplary.

The Commission also made a decisive contribution to this success, for the conclusions are significantly similar to the contents of the preliminary synthesis document which we drew up in preparation for the Council.

The Lisbon debate generated substantial agreement on most issues.

The only truly disputed points were the time frames for the liberalisation of the energy and transport markets, public services, the tax package and the competences of regional authorities in education and training.

These issues are major but they are limited in number.

This high level of consensus allowed the Presidency to set an extremely ambitious agenda.

I will not go into the conclusions in too great a detail, but stick to the main points.

The European Council stressed the importance of a strong, sound macroeconomic policy, consolidation in the field of taxation and sustainable financial policies and the structural reforms.

With regard to the information society, the principle elements of the e-Europe initiative proposed by the Commission were put into effect, in particular regarding the legal framework for e-commerce, the opening of the telecommunications market, internet connections for schools and teacher training.

The Commission was asked to develop a benchmarking strategy to define best practice and to guarantee both the development of the necessary infrastructures and the availability of the necessary funds.

With regard to the internal market, the European Council adopted ambitious objectives in the field of procurement and in order to implement action plans for financial services and risk capital.

In addition, measures will be taken to accelerate the liberalisation of transport, energy and postal services.

Research, education and lifelong learning all received a boost.

The Council also agreed on the need for a sharp increase in employment, particularly employment of women, and, I repeat, the forecasts are currently very encouraging.

One of the most significant steps forward was the consensus between the Member States regarding the need to explore the possibility of modernising the social security systems and making pension systems sustainable, on the basis of a Commission initiative.

Until recently, such an agreement would have been unthinkable, and this could be an extremely important development.

The Commission is therefore going to play a central role in the follow-up to this Summit.

I would just like to mention some of the items on our agenda: firstly, we are going to draw up new legislative proposals, in particular regarding the legal framework for e-commerce - which has become extremely urgent due to the inadequacy of the present framework for e-commerce - and for procurement; secondly, we are going to introduce benchmarking in all the stages of the "open coordination" process in the areas of research, enterprise policy and social exclusion; thirdly, we are going to present our communication, entitled "A new European social agenda" , which will serve as the basis for the Nice Summit organised by the French Presidency; finally, we are going to prepare for the spring Councils by producing an annual synthesis of economic and social progress which will be a sort of general report on the economic and social situation in Europe.

These spring conferences, which will take place each year, will be important in terms of assessing progress made and developing future strategies.

The Commission will therefore play a crucial role in ensuring that the Council' s undertakings are translated into practical measures, and that Lisbon is thus a genuine success for Europe.

The Commission must act as the driving force in this process.

Tomorrow, I am going to meet my fellow Commissioners to ensure that work starts immediately and that the various different objectives set are achieved.

I am determined to see that this Commission makes good its promises.

I would like to thank Parliament, before this House, for its encouragement, but also for the new ideas that it has given us during these debates.

In Lisbon, we also tackled the issue of the Balkans - in a meeting held during the break for supper, which was not on the agenda but was nevertheless a working meeting.

At that meeting I raised the point of the European Union' s political responsibility for the Balkan region, and stressed that our entire credibility is at stake.

The European Council subscribed to the joint report prepared by the Commission and the High Representative, and also our request for more effective coordination between the various programmes implemented by the Union in that region.

I repeat before this House that the need for this coordination is urgent, spectacularly urgent.

Following my lead, the Heads of State and Government agreed upon the need to clean up the Danube.

We have accumulated the necessary resources and I now expect appropriate measures to be taken.

We also agreed to speed up the procedures for supplying aid to the Balkans.

Finally, on the subject of Russia, the European Council recognised the strategic nature of our relations with Moscow and invited President Putin to take note of our concern over the situation in Chechnya.

I sent him a letter congratulating him on his election and stressing the Commission' s genuine interest in cooperating closely with the Russian Government, but the Chechnya issue was mentioned specifically.

To sum up, Madam President, I would like to thank this House for its valuable contribution to the Lisbon Summit and for all it did to ensure the Council' s success.

Ladies and gentlemen, I find the outcome of this Summit very encouraging, and I would like to stress once again the Commission' s commitment to ensuring the swift, efficient implementation of the decisions taken at the European Council.

I am counting on your full support and your cooperation to help us to achieve this.

The eyes of the citizens of Europe, whom you represent, are on us, and they expect a great deal of the follow-up to Lisbon. It is our duty not to let them down.

Madam President, Mr Gama, President Prodi, with good reason the Lisbon Summit could be dubbed historic in terms of its political content.

At the meeting the Union' s strategic objective was to create the world' s most competitive and dynamic information-based economy, with steady growth and the ability to create more and better jobs.

The aim alone does not, however, make the meeting a historic one; what does is the range of measures that the meeting is recommending the Union and its Member States take to achieve their objective.

I will borrow the words of the Presidency. Firstly, to achieve the model, we have to put our faith above all in the private sector and in cooperation between the private and the public sector.

That will be dependent on the mobilisation of market forces available and action on the part of the Member States themselves.

The Union will act as a catalyst in the process.

Secondly, we must reduce the tax burden among the workforce, especially among the relatively low paid and less educated.

Thirdly, we have to reallocate public money to increase the relative importance of the growth of capital both physically and in terms of human beings.

Fourthly, we must speed up the process whereby competition is freed up, for example, in the gas, electricity, postal and transport industries, with the objective of having a fully functional internal market in these sectors too.

I have given just a few examples to show that the Council of the fifteen countries of the European Union, fourteen of which have socialist governments, has adopted a totally central to right policy with regard to the economy and development, one which is associated with social responsibility, in many respects like that of the PPE-DE Group.

When I speak of this with such satisfaction on behalf of my group, it is not with the slightest hint of mockery. In our opinion, the essential thing is not to look for political conflict, but to use the right tools for the benefit of our citizens.

In the decisions taken at the Lisbon Council, those tools took the form of a social market economy, which was a good thing.

Let me utter a few words of warning. The main responsibility for achieving results lies with the Member States as far as the liberalisation of markets and the making of electronic commerce cheaper for consumers are concerned.

I would ask whether the astronomical price of the third generation mobile phone licences now being put up for auction in England will be of benefit to the consumers of the future?

Greed will bring its own revenge in that the system will be made expensive and will be slow to establish itself.

I give the example because it is relevant and not because I want to draw attention to the fact that the United Kingdom is doing something than runs counter to the decisions of Lisbon.

Let me issue a second word of warning.

We are on the threshold of enlargement. As we now step on the gas with regard to an eEurope within the Union, are we making it more difficult for those countries joining the Union to adapt?

The answer cannot be not to speed up developments in the direction of an eEurope.

The answer is, in fact, a question: are enlargement, which has been planned, albeit relatively slowly, and the budget in accordance with the decisions of Agenda 2000, mutually compatible?

Is structural aid to be increased after all, so that those states intending to join are not left even further behind in terms of development compared with the Union?

Ladies and gentlemen, I would like to say finally, on behalf of the PPE-DE Group, that we have full confidence that Romano Prodi and the Commission he heads will be able to achieve the Lisbon objectives.

The PPE-DE Group and, to the best of my knowledge, the whole of Parliament, support the Commission' s work while voicing constructive criticism.

As the imperfections of the Single Market now also stem from protraction on the part of the Member States, the implementation of each of the decisions taken at Lisbon will also depend at institutional level above all on whether the Member States will stand by the solemn theses of Lisbon in the years to come.

Madam President, the Lisbon Summit will mark a milestone.

Following on from Luxembourg in 1997, when Europe revealed its joint responsibility for employment, the European Council has just outlined a new economic strategy, intended to make the European Union not only the most competitive and most dynamic knowledge-based economic system in the world, but also a model in terms of employment and social cohesion.

"The novelty of this summit is that it dealt with the entirety of economic and social policy."

This is a quotation from Belgium' s Liberal Prime Minister.

Along with him, the President of the French Republic, and the Heads of Government of Austria, Spain, Ireland and Luxembourg have endorsed the Lisbon conclusions.

Some political forces within this Parliament nonetheless appear to wish to turn the Lisbon Summit into some sort of Socialist International 'happening' .

How else is one to interpret the refusal of the PPE and ELDR Groups to negotiate a joint resolution common to the main political forces within Parliament?

Some conservative and liberal ayatollahs seem not to want to hear anything about a macroeconomic and monetary policy of benefit to the European social model.

The untrammelled free market seems to be their only god.

Yet the market economy must necessarily have a social dimension. Here is a riddle.

In Lisbon, who was it that said that the citizens of Europe are looking to the European Council to give shape to a social Europe?

Who was it that said that, for European citizens, I quote, "unemployment wrecks lives and societies for entire generations and, even though it is starting to fall, unemployment remains the main concern" ?

That "the across-the-board return to economic growth means that we can do things today which were impossible yesterday" ?

That citizens are scandalised by "untrammelled capitalism, whose relocations, social dumping, ruthless exploitation of the disparities between the social and fiscal legislation of the Member States and remorseless pursuit of profit at the expense of working men and women" ?

These are the words of Mrs Nicole Fontaine, the President of this Parliament.

The Group of the Party of European Socialists also supports Mrs Fontaine in her declaration made in Lisbon to the effect that, I quote, "The European Parliament is committed to the social model in all its aspects" .

The President has our support when she asks the European Council to, I quote, "introduce balanced rules on company mergers within the European Union" ; and says that there should be "a ban on any mergers that do not comply with binding European legislation on prior notification and consultation of workers" ; "that, before such mergers can take place, a serious assessment of their social impact is carried out" , and when she points out that "unregulated mergers, based merely on dominant capitalist concerns, have a devastating effect on the Union' s social cohesion" .

The Group of the Party of European Socialists agrees with the President, when she demands an observatory of industrial change, and a fairer distribution of income between capital which enables and work which produces.

In short, the Group of the Party of European Socialists endorses the conclusions of our President, whom we congratulate on her fair and courageous statements.

Parliament would appear ridiculous if it voted in favour of the joint resolution tabled by the PPE and the ELDR, who seem to wish not only to disown our President, but also to disassociate themselves from both President Prodi and the Conservative and Liberal Christian Democrat Prime Ministers who endorse Lisbon.

I therefore advise all the Christian Democrats, all the Liberals and all the Democrats in general who want to see a social market economy, to vote in favour of the resolution proposed by the Group of the Party of European Socialists.

We wish to combine economic efficiency, quality of life and social protection.

We want sustainable development in all these aspects.

Madam President, Mr President of the Commission, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, I should like to start by saying that we in the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party did not especially agree with the observations made by Mrs Fontaine in her speech at the Lisbon Summit.

However, we were very pleased about the far-sighted messages which were to be found in the conclusions from the Summit.

We are particularly pleased about the emphasis placed upon Europe' s creating prosperity and employment by strengthening the market economy and increasing competitiveness, partly through greater flexibility in the labour market and reduced social charges in connection with low-paid jobs.

I also want to express satisfaction at the fact that the open coordination with which we are familiar from employment policy is to be used as a tool in other areas to promote the use of information technology and reinforce training and strengthen research.

Working for common goals in this open and flexible way, in which countries can measure themselves against each other and learn from one another, is a good way both of ensuring progress and, at the same time, of guaranteeing individual countries' freedom to seek their own solutions to their own problems.

I would also express great satisfaction at the fact that the opinion sets a time-frame for developing the single market in important areas, chiefly through the commitment to rapidly create a legal framework for e-commerce.

However, there is, in fact, just a great a need to develop the traditional economy, and I am therefore delighted at the emphasis on increased research efforts and on the enlargement of the single financial market, as well as at the Council' s support for liberalisation within the energy, postal and transport sectors, even though it has not set a time scale for such liberalisation.

In developing employment policy and combating social exclusion, it is only right to invest not only in economic growth but also in education and training as a way of giving those who are excluded from society a foothold in the labour market and enabling them to help themselves.

There are major advantages in a form of coordination based upon benchmarking, but we should of course be careful that the whole process does not take a bureaucratic turn or lead to over-zealous management.

Finally, I would offer an important and perhaps less complimentary remark.

In the Lisbon conclusions, the Council refers a good deal to what it is going to do in the future, perhaps following proposals on the part of the Commission.

I hope that we are not to read too much into this apparent emphasis upon the intergovernmental character of EU cooperation.

Madam President, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, President of the Commission, I think it is clear that, in January, when the Portuguese Presidency issued its first paper, the original impulse was perfectly laudable.

The widespread dissemination of communication technologies was going to cause, indeed, is causing considerable change in the living and working conditions of the citizens of Europe.

The conclusions of the Portuguese Presidency contain many positive commitments and objectives.

Having said that, these are in danger of being watered down, and the motion for a resolution tabled by the PPE Group and the Liberal Group presents an absolute caricature of this, giving Parliament the opportunity to split along the good old left-versus-right divide, which does not match the observation of the practical policies implemented within the fifteen Member States, and which certainly does not meet the challenges of the future.

Having said that, Mr Prodi, the real challenge would be if, in coming months, you did not endorse this motion for a resolution, in the event that Parliament votes in favour of it tomorrow.

We therefore call upon you, along with the Council, to consider in further detail a number of points which we feel are noticeably absent from the Lisbon conclusions.

The first point is the strategic goal.

Has the strategic goal of sustainable development which was supposed to be an integral part of a twenty-first century economy, which would meet the requirements of the planet and its citizens, been forgotten?

There is not one line on the reports which the Commission nonetheless submitted at the European Council in Helsinki.

Not one line on the practical implementation of Article 6 of the Treaty on European Union.

The connection must be made between the dissemination of modern communication techniques and the implementation of sustainable development.

The second point relates to employment.

European citizens must not be kept in ignorance of the fact that the dissemination of these communication technologies is going to destroy jobs as well as create them, and that at the very core of our societies, at macroeconomic as well as at microeconomic level, it presents a challenge to the redistribution of working time and the redistribution of incomes.

Avoiding these questions is to invite serious social crises despite the spirit of optimism currently characterising the economy.

The same applies to the matter of taxation, which you mentioned.

In one of its documents on the integration of financial markets, the Commission itself said that such integration was possible only with a minimum of tax regulation.

This is also true of the Monti package.

These matters are going nowhere, and integrating the financial markets without fiscal regulation at European level is still tantamount to establishing a two-speed Europe.

Finally, in social matters, I do not think it wise, Mr Monti, for the Commission to give up any legislative proposals in matters of employment law.

The new economy also involves enabling workers, in the event of company restructuring or necessary discussions about the incorporation of technological innovations in companies, to proceed in decent conditions.

This must also be included in the Nice social agenda and we urge you to ensure that this is the case, because my Group wishes to see a strong and ambitious Commission, and will support you if you take the comments I have just made into account.

Madam President, many observers have stressed the fact that the Special Summit was characterised by the triumph of the contentions of Mr Blair and Mr Aznar.

If that means that the Lisbon Summit sanctioned a liberal view of Europe, then I must of course, unfortunately, concur with this analysis.

I cannot however be delighted by it.

I do not by any means wish to allow the current British and Spanish Heads of Government to monopolise the offensive position with regard to the information revolution.

In my opinion, this is indeed a huge challenge which must be accepted.

So when I read the summit conclusions which state that Europe has set itself the goal of promoting a dynamic knowledge-based economy 'capable of sustainable economic growth with more and better jobs' , I say, 'Go on then, I dare you.'

An annual upturn in investment in people and adopting a proactive policy to promote full employment is something I am firmly in favour of.

The political difference between us is not a question of whether or not to adopt modern methods, but of what our concept of these modern methods is, particularly on the place and the role which all men and women, bar none, must play, both as workers and as citizens.

In this respect, however, Mr Blair and Mr Aznar and their followers are held captive by archaic liberal ideas, which are conformist in the most ordinary way: allow the market, particularly the financial market, to operate, introduce wage flexibility, reduce labour costs, even if it means boosting the mechanism which produces inequality, precariousness and exclusion across the entire planet.

There' s the rub: do we or do we not have the courage to tackle these taboo areas at the very time when we are starting to see such promising beginnings of a new phase in human civilisation?

This, in my opinion, is the yardstick against which we will be able to measure Europe' s true ambition and also the true modernity of the left.

- (PT) Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, I would first like to highlight some positive conclusions resulting from the Lisbon European Council, which essentially relate to the joint motion for a resolution supported amongst others by my group, and which has already been attacked so fiercely here by the Socialists.

These conclusions were presented by the Heads of State and Government as part of a strategic objective to make the European Union the most competitive area in the world within ten years, by developing a knowledge-based economy and adopting policies geared towards growth and full employment.

I must ask this, however: do the statements by those currently in power in Europe, who are, in the majority, Socialists, and who, for various years have headed the governments of their respective countries, not above all reveal more about their shortcomings and the serious failures of the European development model which they have been promoting?

Is there anything genuinely new and original about the Lisbon Summit conclusions that had not already been diagnosed and stated in the 1993 White Paper "Growth, Competitiveness, Employment" ?

A commitment was made at that time to, and I quote, "information networks" ; today the commitment is stressed, and I quote again "to the area of knowledge and access to the information society" .

In the White Paper, the stress was put on "lifelong learning and continuing training" .

Now, and I quote once again, the issue is "lifelong learning" .

I could go on, as there are countless conclusions completely identical to those in the 1993 White Paper.

There is nevertheless one aspect that deserves a particular mention in the area of policies for full employment.

In 1993, the objective was to halve the number of unemployed in the European Union, from 17 million to 8.5 million.

The fact is that we are now in 2000, unemployment still stands at 15 million and the summit conclusions promise us rates of almost full employment in ten years' time.

This is at best politically irresponsible and displays a mentality which is quite typical of the Socialists, even for those followers of the third way, which is based on the proactive development of a strategy which, as you all know, is the product of many different factors and is ultimately based on the actions of businesses.

As one well-known analyst said, Europe' s leaders have decided on something that they cannot possibly achieve.

To promise, as they have done, ambitious targets for growth and employment is equivalent to announcing an increase in the population or the number of days of sunshine.

We believe that the role of governments should instead be to focus on developing means to enable social and economic agents to generate wealth and to produce positive results in these areas.

Another aspect that is worthy of attention is essentially that the summit appears to have ignored the fact that the countries of the European Union have different historical backgrounds and economic and social structures. These are disparities which eastward enlargement will only accentuate, and the summit also appears to have ignored the fact that there are still imbalances that even average levels of development cannot hide.

This applies to both positive and negative aspects.

How can we explain, for example, that Sweden and Finland, countries with highly developed social protection systems, have levels of Internet use identical to those in the United States, that is around 50%, whilst the United Kingdom, a much more liberal country, has levels of around 29%?

On the other hand, how is it that there can still be gross disparities in the minimum wage levels of some Member States, marked differences in the quality of social security systems and in the value of retirement pensions, and even in levels of unemployment or hidden unemployment, not to mention increasingly widespread pockets of poverty and exclusion?

The European Union may have begun its race towards levels of development already seen in America' s economy and businesses, but this, the real Europe, will not become a reality until the convergence of national economies and internal economic and social cohesion are given top priority.

It was with great interest that I followed the European Council' s summit in Lisbon. There was a very impressive display of rhetoric, chiefly indicative of impotence on a massive and growing scale.

It is, of course, all well and good to have the strategic goal of becoming the most competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy in the world with a view to creating sustainable growth.

The first problem, however, is that no specific actions of any kind have been outlined which can give actual substance to this ambition.

The second problem is that the social problems entailed and which (for better and, particularly, for worse) are a very significant part of actual life in the European Union have been ignored.

The Presidency' s conclusions talk of "the European social model" .

I am not aware of any European social model.

I am familiar with a number of different models for social welfare, tied to specific national traditions.

In my own country, there is a tradition which differs markedly from the dominant tradition in the European Union.

The real problem is being completely ignored.

This was hinted at in the negotiations prior to the intergovernmental conference, namely the problem of implementing reforms so as to create a European social model.

I must issue a strong warning against doing any such thing.

There is to be a commitment to majority decision-making in this area.

My own country' s government opposes this, and so do we who are sceptical about this self-fulfilling development within the European Union.

The most significant legacy of the European Council' s summit in Lisbon is all the unresolved problems.

Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, Lisbon focused on employment, economic reform and the shift to the digital age.

But Lisbon is not the first summit to discuss the topic of "employment" .

Since Essen, we have had numerous declarations of intent and well-meant action programmes.

The only way to achieve a sustainable increase in the employment rate is to give companies the entrepreneurial room for manoeuvre which they need in the form of framework conditions.

The proposed measures to promote SMEs are confined to analyses and to drafting yet more non-binding declarations of intent.

Unfortunately there is a total lack of concrete results.

A sustained improvement in the employment situation can only be achieved through structural reform, which means reducing the tax burden, simplifying tax systems and making it easier to incorporate a company.

We are all familiar with these requirements.

Everyone says, "Yes, that is quite right" .

But implementation is where it falls down.

As an Austrian member, I must also address the sanctions of the 14 in connection with Lisbon.

The ability to be democratic goes hand in hand with the ability to discuss.

The efforts of the presidency to ban the subject of Austria from the agenda gave me even more food for thought.

It is in the interests of the Union to clarify relations between Austria and the EU.

Refusing all discussion was never a recipe for resolving a conflict.

Many people back in Austria ask me "How can the peaceful house of Europe be built if the highest representatives are not on speaking terms or refuse all discussion?"

These symbolic gestures are the right way to open up old wounds between people.

I therefore say to everyone who declares that the sanctions are for the government but not the people, that such a separation is not possible.

A democratically elected government cannot be separated from the people who elected it.

This is illustrated by absurd examples such as the taxi boycott in Brussels, problems with school exchange programmes and much else besides.

The distrust shown towards Austria, despite the fact that it has not once violated democratic principles since 1945 stands in clear contradiction to the spirit of this Community.

Judge the Austrian government by its deeds.

You will not find any violation of the spirit of the Union.

Madam President, I wish to welcome the President-in-Office of the Council and to wish him every success in the Portuguese Presidency of the European Union.

I am sure that we are all in broad agreement with the Lisbon Summit' s strategic objective to make Europe, and I quote, "the most competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy in the world capable of sustainable economic growth" .

Nobody doubts the importance of preparing the European public for the demands of a society based on information, knowledge, and new communications technologies as strategic weapons, in order to emerge victorious in the future, generating employment with higher-quality work and higher pay.

This would all be fine if the Lisbon Summit had been held specifically to discuss this kind of issue, which would mean that it should have been called the Information Society Summit, or the Knowledge Economy Summit or the New Economy Summit, according to people' s whims, taste or pretensions.

To call it the Employment Summit, however, would be to depart from its real purpose.

It is like putting a fake label on a product, which does not match the content.

In this case, it was done out of political expediency.

The truth is that the objective of employment goes far beyond these issues.

Firstly, the new economy, which essentially represents a challenge for this generation, cannot put a bomb under the old economy, which is the mainstay of our lives and whose modernisation and structural adjustment represent a stage that we cannot dispense with.

This means that we must immediately discuss strategies for restructuring the traditional sectors of our economy, which rethinking the choices that we will have to make in relation to the guiding principles of the World Trade Organisation would require.

Secondly, a strategic debate on employment would have to start with a substantial analysis of the European Union' s agents of competitiveness, because that is what sustainable economic growth depends on, and hence employment and social well-being.

The truth is that in a debate of this kind, we are bound to wonder why the EU has grown at half the rate of the United States of America over the last few years, and why no government has had the courage to question the more harmful effects of the so-called "European social model" , because, without wishing to detract from its positive aspects, this model is, to some extent, an incentive to passivity, to indolence and sloth in some elements of society, who could and should work. We should therefore ask ourselves why the level of economic reintegration into the active population has been so low amongst those who have benefited from certain support policies.

This applies particularly to the "minimum guaranteed income" type of system. We must also ask ourselves why we in Europe have a system that is so state-led and so interventionist that it regulates the competitiveness of the economy in a damaging way, and which, in the guise of arguments about society and stability, sometimes conceals high-spending strategies and even, very often, strategies for helping their political cronies.

These strategies certainly have a harmful effect on economic growth, on the distribution of wealth, and consequently, on employment. A far-reaching debate on the problem of employment in the European Union would inevitably, therefore, have to address these issues properly.

Madam President, I wish to add my warm welcome and congratulations to the presidency on the successful achievement of the Lisbon Summit.

I think we will come to see in the future that all roads did lead to Lisbon via Luxembourg, Cardiff and Cologne, because Lisbon should be the end of a process, one that can actually deliver as regards the sort of priorities we want to bring to a successful conclusion throughout the whole of the European Union.

The key question is how we turn the conclusions of the Lisbon Summit into action; we must ensure that we turn the rhetoric of Lisbon into a reality.

I shall not dwell too much on the specifics of the Lisbon Summit.

A lot of us have been through that already and we welcome many of the conclusions.

I want to look at the challenges that are inherent in the Lisbon process for Parliament, the Commission and, indeed, all three institutions.

In particular, for Parliament there is a huge challenge in realising the full legislative implications of completing a single market.

There is a challenge in realising the full potential of the e-economy.

There is a challenge for Parliament in playing its part in helping Europe to become the dynamic centre of sustainable job creation, innovation, competitiveness and modernised social welfare.

It is a challenge that Parliament must rise to, working with the other institutions, Commissioner Prodi and his colleagues, and the Council.

If we do not, nobody will understand or forgive us for not realising our aim.

The reason, as I mentioned before the Lisbon Summit, relates to those who are in the gallery with us today - the citizens of Europe.

We have to turn Lisbon into something that means something to them, something to the people in my home town of Wolverhampton.

To me, Lisbon is all about creating a Europe of highly-paid, highly-skilled, high-value-added jobs.

If we can achieve that sort of Europe from the Lisbon process, it will be good for our citizens and for Europe as a whole, because what could be more socially just and inclusive than a Europe that genuinely benefits from full employment and good jobs that everybody can enjoy?

In conclusion, I thank the Portuguese presidency very much.

I thank the President-in-Office, the Minister and, in particular, Prime Minister Guterres for all the personal effort he put into this process.

At Lisbon the Portuguese presidency gave us the key to unlock a decade of sustained innovation, competitiveness and job creation across our continent.

Now is the time for us as a Parliament, the Commission and the Council to work together to ensure that key is turned.

- (PT) Mr President, Mr President of the Commission, Mr President-in-Office, the document adopted at the Lisbon Summit is rather abstract, and this may mean that it is not implemented equitably.

The policy that has been adopted could conceivably result in a high rate of growth, rivalling that of the United States, but it is unlikely to prevent social exclusion or achieve social cohesion and regional balance.

I wish to discuss this problem, which affects fundamental European policies.

The European Council ought to be aware that in Europe today, the lowest per capita income and the highest levels of employment exist side by side in the same regions or countries.

This requires a European employment policy with its own budget, linked to the Structural Funds policy that the European Council does not want to blindly accept. The Council should also be aware of the fact that there are countries in Europe that are not highly developed, but which are nevertheless prepared for the knowledge economy.

They have a high-quality system of technical, university and professional education, but since they do not have the necessary economic development, they are once again seeing their sons and daughters emigrate. These young people, paradoxically, are acting in the same way as computer experts who are trained in India but then go to work in the United States.

The Council ought to think about this and work towards a real Europe.

- (PT) Mr President, the results of the Lisbon Summit demonstrate that everything the Portuguese Presidency has up to now presented as a priority for employment and for combating social exclusion has merely been a massive attempt to pull the wool over our eyes.

Its supporters may try to make its conclusions look rosy, whether they are talking about the so-called modernisation of the European social model or about the need to make the European Union the most competitive area in the world, but they cannot hide their real aims, which are to produce a labour market free from the conditions imposed by legislation designed to protect workers' rights, to put social security entirely in the hands of the financial markets and to speed up the process of liberalisation in fundamental sectors such as gas, electricity, postal services, transport and telecommunications.

Therefore, instead of more high-quality jobs with employment rights, instead of a reduction in working hours whilst maintaining salary levels and without flexible working arrangements, the summit' s decision will, in practice, lead to poorer jobs, which are less secure, which provide fewer rights, and do not offer an effective system of social protection.

Instead of high-quality public services which meet users' needs, protect the most vulnerable sectors of society and generate high-quality jobs, the Council has decided to speed up privatisation to satisfy the interests of economic groups and to increase their profits. This will have a harmful effect on employment and on working conditions - which will deteriorate - and on the environment and town and country planning.

If we are to draw something positive from this, it is the major demonstration by tens of thousands of workers who condemned the growing instability of employment as they marched past the Lisbon Summit. They condemned unemployment and social exclusion and demanded more high-quality employment, better salaries, more social rights and a change of direction in European policies, in order to achieve economic and social cohesion.

Mr President, in the debate preceding the Lisbon Summit I said that the preparatory documents seemed to show that, in tackling the new economy, the Heads of States and Government were torn between a centralised, bureaucratic approach and a freer, more simply coordinated approach.

Following this Council meeting, in our view, the scales have tipped in favour of the freer approach, since the Lisbon conclusions declare that there is no question of adding further European regulations to those which exist already but, quite the contrary, of implementing - the expression is used several times - a new open method of coordination.

The knowledge economy which we are moving into is thus already having a retroactive effect on our concept of the European institutions, for this new method of coordination must mean, as we already know, that top-down authoritarian integration and uniformising regulations are to be abandoned and replaced by a system in which the States and national democracies will play a much more important role, and will combine within networks following the specific model of a computer network.

The Union as such must then simply play the role of coordinator and catalyst, to use the precise word used in the Lisbon conclusions.

This new method also entails the European Council rediscovering its fundamental strategic guidance mission, while allowing the various Councils of Ministers to take the practical decisions and the Commission to prepare and execute policy.

This is the way we may finally achieve more balanced and more democratic European institutions.

The Lisbon conclusions, Mr President, may, however, in other respects, give rise to a number of reservations.

Since there is not much time, let me cite just one: the proactive goal of increasing the proportion of women in employment from 51% to 60% by 2010.

This really is the type of authoritarian attitude which should be a thing of the past.

It is not up to the authorities to say how many women must go out to work. This is a matter for the interested parties and civil society.

The authorities must simply ensure that housewives receive fair treatment and that personal choices may be made freely.

Mr President, I decided to speak in this debate when I read the truly excellent analysis of the current situation in Europe produced by the European Commission before the Lisbon Summit.

It is true that the Lisbon Summit also represented something of a sea-change in attitudes towards the global society and in particular towards issues like e-commerce.

At the same time there was a tension in Lisbon between the old world of the international socialists and the new world of those who have a slightly wider perspective.

So the city of Henry the Navigator may become the city of Netscape the navigator, a new approach which I thoroughly welcome.

The summit was variously described as a social summit and an e-summit and so on.

Much was said about the economic and social policies that were supposed to emanate from Lisbon.

The reality is that the European social model is now living in London and she is called Laetitia Casta.

She is Marianne, the symbol of France but taxes in France are now so high that she now has to go and live in London despite the vastly increased taxation under Labour.

Very soon now the government is about to raise GBP 16 billion through the sale of the third generation mobile telephone licences as Mr Suominen reminded us.

There is tension around Europe but at the same time I detect a sea-change.

I rarely speak in debates after summits but this is an important one.

I therefore look forward to some genuine action from the European Commission.

It is action not words that is needed.

When I talk about words, I am thinking about words like "bench-marking" and "peer review" .

I am sure there are not many people in this Chamber who understand what bench-marking or peer review means.

Do not worry, it is meaningless.

What actually matters is a light touch on the e-commerce directive, a light touch on telecommunications.

Give people the freedom to use the Internet to their advantage, to their benefit, for social reasons, for educational reasons, for the disabled - all the benefits the Internet can give us.

We do not need the heavy regulatory touch of the past.

Please Mr Prodi, ignore your friends on the Left and stick with the new world not the old world.

Mr President, let me say to Mr McMillan-Scott that a spectre is haunting Europe, the spectre of economic efficiency and one wonders why it is still so evasive despite all the great efforts that liberalism has put into it.

It is a question of strategy really.

So what is the strategy for making a success of this incredible economic transformation Lisbon is promising us?

It is a strategy which is radically innovative.

All those who have endeavoured to tackle the problem of the European economy so far have done so within the context of the old economy.

Guterres decided that the problem was practically insoluble in this context and, rather than having to contend with the deadlocks of the old economy, he decided to circumvent them altogether.

It is what you might call a great inspirational strategy which proposes that Europe put all its effort into the new economy, into information technology and into telecommunications in the hope that, as this new economy develops, the old economy will take a new direction in its wake.

The most basic example is employment.

Europe currently has 16 million unemployed whom it cannot absorb.

At the same time, there are 800 000 highly-skilled jobs in the new economy which cannot be filled due to a lack of skilled human resources.

Some say these figures are set to reach 1.6 million next year.

If Europe does not learn its electronic lessons fast, these unfilled jobs will multiply and the economy will slump.

And even if we do fill these 800 000 jobs, there will still be a further 15 million unemployed.

We do not appear to have solved any problems whatsoever.

However, the new technologies can, with our support, lead to competitiveness and cost reductions in all sectors.

And as all the other sectors become more productive, thanks to the impact of the new economy, they too will create more jobs.

This is the simple yet great idea of Lisbon.

The question is whether this idea will work in practice.

And whether or not it will work in practice depends on whether or not we are capable of a new financial perspective in Europe.

All these years, Europe has been convinced that investing taxpayers' money into the old-style economy was a waste of time.

This is where all the zero deficits, stability plans and so forth come from.

It is debatable just how much of ECOFIN' s die-hard approach was totally justified, but perhaps we are now in a position to leave this behind us.

Lisbon may well have shown us how to leave this behind us because, if we are to attain its objectives, we need public investment in the new economy.

We need to build information highways, on which private enterprises can of course then create and run their own vehicles.

However, these highways can only be built by the Member States, by the public sector and by the European Union.

Lisbon will be judged on this, i.e. on whether or not we are capable of integrating the public and private economies in an original and enterprising manner.

Mr President, as far as the European Council in Lisbon is concerned, even though it was dedicated to employment, the unemployment of eighteen million women and men in the European Union and the human and social tragedy that this represents are just a grey area in a current economic situation which is more promising than it has been for a generation.

The present situation, which is exceptionally advantageous to employers and the property-owning classes, arises specifically because of the extent of unemployment, the pressure that this exerts on wages and the generalisation of precariousness.

As for the promise to create twenty million jobs in the years to come, this is just as deceitful as it is ridiculous.

The Council presented the so-called new economy as the main provider of jobs for the future, but the stock exchange crisis which occurred a few days after the Summit demonstrated just to what extent the new economy was, more than anything, the basis for old-style speculation, and that the promised jobs in information and communication technologies were, after all, just virtual jobs.

At the same time, the demonstration of Alsthom' s European workers in Brussels reminded us that the real economy, that of big business, is continuing to cut thousands of jobs and to make unemployment worse, while governments back these firms up by cutting support and allowances to the unemployed in order to force them into accepting any old job, at any price, under any conditions.

Mr President, Mr President of the Commission, ladies and gentlemen, on one side of the coin we read that economic growth and employment figures are up, the e-Europe action plan is in the pipeline, unemployment is beginning to drop slightly and the economic and employment forecasts are good.

On the other side of the coin, we read that there are still 15 million unemployed, the telecommunications and Internet services sector is underdeveloped, there is a widening skills gap in information technology, structural long-term unemployment, too many state monopolies and fetters, competitive disadvantages vis-à-vis the USA and shortcomings in the implementation of European innovations.

Lisbon aroused expectations as far as rectifying these shortcomings is concerned.

And anyone who arouses expectations must be measured by his or her actions, must introduce consistent benchmarking, carry out regular follow-ups, formulate ambitious goals, draft a master plan in every country as to how these goals are to be implemented and, above all, quickly follow words with deeds.

We shall measure the Member States, as represented by the Council, by when each school in Europe has Internet access, by when electricity, gas, telecommunications, the postal and transport markets are fully deregulated, by what the charter for small enterprises really says and by when the incorporation offensive is implemented.

We shall measure you by when the financial services internal market is complete and by when the quantity and quality of innovation and its implementation makes Europe the most competitive and dynamic economic area in the world.

Allow me to say in support of Mrs Raschofer that, because of our experience with you, we shall measure you by your conduct vis-à-vis Parliament and the Commission during this process and by when a sustainable reduction in unemployment is actually achieved.

Our eco-social market economy model is the basis for our action and we call for it to be developed further.

Mr President, I welcome the Lisbon conclusions.

In fact, seen from the perspective of employment and social policy and against the long procession of summits which preceded it, Lisbon stands out along with Luxembourg in terms of the potential it offers us.

I stress the word "potential" because, as others have said, we now need to look at the follow-up.

We will be looking very carefully, for example, at how the broad economic guidelines will be prepared, at just how successful the input of the Social Affairs and Employment Council will be in emphasising the need for employment and social cohesion when it formulates the broad economic guidelines.

Also, we are told that each spring the European Council will consider an overall report to be produced by the Commission that will deal with structural indicators to be agreed.

We wonder who will agree those structural indicators and just how strong the synthesis report to be produced by the Commission will be.

What will the role of the Commission and this institution be?

Will it, in fact, be largely intergovernmental?

If so, I think we will be disappointed.

But we are not just concerned about the institutional follow-up.

We are also concerned about the substance.

What proposals, for example, will the Commission come forward with by June this year on social inclusion, as it was challenged to do in the Lisbon conclusions?

Further than that, how quickly will the high-level group on the future of social protection begin to move into the realm of a convergence strategy for social protection that this House has called for?

So we are concerned with the substantive follow-up as well.

One point disappoints me - that is the stance of the EPP in all this.

It is trying to pretend that it welcomes the outcome because it is largely liberal and concentrates upon the liberal market aspects.

It should be honest and say that, like us, it has always supported a social market economy.

We welcome the emphasis upon the smooth and efficient functioning of markets.

But as always we want that to be balanced by solidarity and social inclusion.

I hope the group has the political honesty to accept that it continues to support that point of view.

Mr President-in-Office of the Council, Mr President of the Commission, from amongst the very interesting Lisbon conclusions, please allow me to highlight a declaration which, because it is apparently technical - although I believe it is politically very important - has not yet been mentioned by previous speakers.

I am talking about the request to the Commission that it contemplate, for 2001, a coordinated strategy in the legislative field.

At the moment we have, to name but a few, initiatives such as SLIM, the Business Test Panel, the Regulatory Policy Guidelines and the Better Law-Making Report, not to mention the initiatives relating to codification or the quality of legislation.

Clearly this will all have to be coordinated and we will even have to go further in laying down the new regulations or restructuring the existing legislation.

Improving quality must not only be directed at Community legislation but also at the legislation of the Member States.

In all new legislation we must establish a better balance between 'self regulation' and 'public regulation' , in accordance with what, in the conclusions of the Lisbon Summit, in some initiatives, has been called coregulation.

We must review the 'Best Business Impact' initiative.

Throughout the whole of this exercise, we must take account of the interests of the consumers and the interests of the environment, and these are complicated tasks.

Returning to simplification, the SLIM initiative requires a complete revision.

We need a clear programme. We also need this programme to be applied on a national level, where there is still a lot of 'gold plating' of directives when they are transposed.

We need expiry clauses and we need to improve codification.

Codification is currently too cumbersome an instrument, too ineffective, and therefore we perhaps have to reform the Treaty.

We have to tackle that reform of the Treaty.

Lastly, we have to regulate more quickly and be more effective.

Since we are in the Internet era, we have to take account of the fact that, in Internet terms, a year is equivalent to three months at the most.

Therefore we need to make improvements in that respect as well.

Mr President, congratulations on a particularly focused summit as regards: the clarity of the objectives; the analysis of the tasks needed to meet those objectives; and the built-in progress-chasing system.

There was particular emphasis at this summit on the European area of research and innovation, following the excellent communication from Commissioner Busquin.

This is a domain of severe under-achievement in the European Union.

We need deeper knowledge in science and technology.

We have grasped the need to rectify our lack - by means of patent protection, mapping of areas of excellence, tax incentives for research and development, an electronic network for scientists and enhanced mobility for our researchers.

The sixth framework programme will be another tool.

As well as deeper knowledge, we need wider knowledge.

We need people who have been disenfranchised in the areas of science and technology - women, older people and particularly those suffering disadvantage - to be on board in the quest for this wider knowledge.

We need to use the knowledge in better ways.

Of course, we need new products and we need new processes and we need new ideas about how our society should be run.

We also need new sustainable technologies.

The European Socialists are fully behind the leap forward which is possible given the cogent analysis that took place at the Lisbon Summit.

Mr President, many commentators have drawn adverse comparisons between the European Union and the old Soviet Union.

Both have been profoundly anti-democratic, both have seemed opposed to enterprise and wealth creation.

At the Lisbon Summit it appeared that the EU had rediscovered a commitment to enterprise.

Although I have some reservations about references to the social market in the EPP resolution, I am happy to support it.

Let us hope that it is carried into effect and is more than mere soundbites and press releases.

In direct contrast, the President of our Parliament made a remarkable speech in Lisbon which amounted to a virulent and vituperative attack on multinational companies, on liberal economics, on free markets and on the very heart of western capitalism.

I have no doubt that she was prompted by the best humanitarian intentions.

But we must understand that if her proposals were carried out, they would damage competitiveness and productivity, they would deter investment, they would hurt prosperity and, above all, they would increase unemployment in Europe.

She was attacking nothing less than the foundations of western capitalism, the engine which has delivered wealth and success undreamed of by earlier generations.

She said that Europeans are quite "scandalised by untrammelled capitalism, whose relocations, social dumping, ruthless exploitation ... and remorseless pursuit of profit at the expense of working men and women have a direct and traumatic effect on their lives."

This goes beyond socialism, this is pure Marxism.

It may have been appropriate for the Kremlin in the 1960s but it is totally out of place in 21st century Europe.

It is typical of this Parliament that we call for an end to unemployment yet we promote actions that have the opposite effect.

Her remarks fit this depressing tradition perfectly.

I do not know whether she was speaking for her party, for the Parliament or in a personal capacity but I absolutely reject, repudiate and condemn her remarks and am delighted to have this opportunity of publicly dissociating myself from them.

Mr President, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, Mr President of the Commission, in January and last month, we were able to congratulate the Portuguese Presidency on its initiative to hold this special Council and on the thorough and conscientious way in which the Council had been prepared.

And today, now that the Council has taken place, we would like to offer our congratulations on its conclusions and to congratulate President Prodi on the way in which the Commission, under his leadership, contributed to the Council' s success through the timely presentation of its own paper.

However, Mr Gama, all such conclusions have one drawback in common: they cannot change the world overnight. Today, we have heard several speeches by Members who would like the Portuguese Presidency to come here and say "before the summit we had 15 million people unemployed and today we only have 10 million; before the summit we had 40 million people living in poverty and today there are only 30 million" .

We know how difficult the real world is and how difficult it is to get the European Union to agree on a strategic objective.

I would like to express a deep-felt concern here: whilst the presidency, the 15 Member States, the President of the Commission, the Commission itself, the President of the European Parliament and a substantial part of this European Parliament are agreed on an objective and on a strategic plan, the main group in Parliament is deeply divided over what it wants and over which path it should follow in the European Union.

We confirm once again that we agree with this objective and that we are fully behind it, but we also wish to reiterate that the only part of the American model we are interested in pursuing is that of growth, since we do not want Europe to be a carbon copy of the American model. Nor do we want to copy the social aspects of the American model.

We urge the Portuguese Presidency and the Commission to continue in their determination to fight for us to be able to create our own model from the opportunities offered by globalisation, so that the wealth generated can be used to combat poverty and can be more evenly distributed to ensure that social cohesion, full employment and sustainable development will be the outcome - in ten years' time, but things should steadily improve up to then - of this meeting in Lisbon.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the report to the European Parliament on the results of summits is always an experience.

It is an experience because if only half of what is regularly announced to us really happened, if Europe had already achieved the results which have now been presented to us as the slogan of the European Council - fighting unemployment and putting the European Union in the leading position on the world markets -, this alone would be a success.

Has the Council still not learned how little its political promises are worth when it then fails to implement anything and trivial matters are blocked in the Council for years?

Has the Council still not learned that we never solve any problems in Europe because we keep shifting them to European level?

Can the Council really back out of its responsibility in the individual Member States so easily?

As the European Parliament, we should not accept this.

The right model for successfully meeting the challenges of globalisation is competition for the most successful economic, employment, research, education and social policies, not European dumbing down.

Who, if not Europe with its different traditions and cultures, can find an answer to this, provided that we leave responsibility for problem solving where it belongs, namely with the Member States?

It makes no sense to define European targets for economic growth if we do not remove barriers to growth at Member State level.

It makes no sense to unify education policy at European level if we still have countless problems with arrangements for recognising diplomas.

Even the desire to connect all schools to the Internet is not a question, which should be dealt with at European level.

It needs to be done locally.

As a member of the Committee on Budgets, I warn you against doing this with European funds from the European budget.

Lisbon missed its big chance to really improve things substantially for the citizens of Europe.

Instead, all we heard were pipe dreams which can never be checked and for which the Council is responsible in the Member States, not at European level.

In the end, people will take their leave of such a Europe.

We must not allow that to happen.

Mr President, I believe in a common strategy which must be monitored from within Europe.

I think that the Lisbon Summit has given us a new impulse in this respect.

This is important and these are aspects which one would expect from a Summit.

But it goes without saying that the merit of this Summit, at which so many good intentions were formulated and which is also based on an excellent analysis, will be judged on the action taken subsequently.

Because a number of the matters which were brought together at the Summit - as, in fact, happened - had been formulated previously by the Commission.

The e-commerce document springs to mind, for example.

Another example is the intention to draft a legislative frame for pension funds.

This intention was formulated a long time ago.

In addition to the positive aspects of summits such as these, I would also like to make room for some criticism.

These summits try to build a momentum - and it is important that they do so - but this momentum caves in because so little action is taken subsequently, as a result of which people no longer believe in the next momentum.

The press now writes that the most important element of the Lisbon Summit was that it actually took place, nothing else.

The content of the Summit was not bad, but faith in subsequent action is evidently ebbing and this is a very serious matter indeed.

I would like to list three elements which are lacking in my opinion.

Firstly, fiscal integration, which has been talked about for so long.

In order to take action in the economic field, fiscal integration is required.

There should be a convergence programme, a kind of guideline for social security.

Thirdly, if you want to enhance employment for women, you will need to undertake some action in the care sector and not simply in the new technologies, however important they may be. The care sector will be of key significance in years to come.

Finally, I do not share the view of the British Conservatives and I would like to make this quite clear.

It is important to point out that, within the Group of the European People' s Party and European Democrats, there are also voices other than these.

Mr President, few words are needed to conclude this debate, for the debate itself has been extremely clear and detailed.

I would like to start from the Mr Martinez' s happy fault when he juxtaposed the two debates: I say "happy fault" because the atmosphere of the second debate, which was on Africa, could not have been more tragically different from the Lisbon debate.

The few days - hours even - which separated the two debates revealed a wealth of differences: when we talk of a new Europe, an innovative Europe, we must not forget that, across the water, there is a terrible situation in Africa which is out of control.

To return to Lisbon, the debate was intense and passionate because it touched on tangible subjects of major concern.

However, we must be clear on one point: although we did talk in Lisbon of the new economy, we cannot divide the economy into a new economy and an old economy.

Europe is like a huge seed, and its economic strength lies precisely in its tradition of operating in all sectors, both new and traditional, and excelling in the traditional sectors.

Now, the spread of new technologies, which we call the new economy, acts like fermentation process, completely transforming the old economy. This is its strength.

E-commerce is not a separate end in itself. The Internet and the other new tools cannot be regarded as a separate factor, but they can be translated into an enormous increase in the productivity of other sectors.

When the means of distributing the most basic, simple wealth changes, the entire economy changes as well. This is the boost we were waiting for: we are now in a position to take the leap forwards, thanks to the extensive coordination achieved in Lisbon.

This begs another comment on Lisbon.

I have observed some differences of opinion over the role of Europe and the roles of the individual States.

You must understand that this is a network.

The importance of the Lisbon Summit does not lie in the fact that some areas have to be managed at European level, although a certain amount of large-scale coordination of investments does have to take place at European level.

Most of these innovations are the responsibility of the national, or even local governments. That is clear.

The significance of Lisbon lies in the fact that, when we are united in our action, this boosts the productivity of the system. If the same countries were each to act separately, the effect would not be great enough to boost the European economy.

This is the importance of these Summits: if we unite in our action, we multiply its efficiency.

This is the potential significance of Lisbon.

My final point is, once again, the development of human resources.

This applies to both new and old economies as well.

European investment in human resources is still low, and this is a huge area in which we must make up lost ground.

I feel that the goal of halving the number of 18-24 year olds who attend neither a school nor a training course is both realistic and of paramount importance.

This is clearly the way to overcome the problems experienced even by some of the larger European countries in recent months such as a shortage of young engineers and the need to import Internet engineers from the third world.

This is clear evidence of a development block, which is due precisely to the failure to exploit our human potential.

In Lisbon, our policy-making action was focused mainly on this issue, and certain major horizontal decisions were adopted which engage both public opinion and our own imagination.

Somebody mentioned the fact that the mobility of teachers and researchers was also discussed in Lisbon. This gives me great pleasure for few people remember it.

Well, for this to occur at European level is revolutionary, although our task now is to set regulations in place to make teachers and researchers effectively mobile.

This is such an unprecedented idea to emerge from the fertile European intellectual climate that, if it succeeds, it will genuinely be a great leap forwards for the productivity of Europe and the European way of thinking.

In my opinion, these are the genuinely important horizontal decisions adopted in Lisbon.

Finally, we need a little bit of luck as well, for perception of this recovery is necessary for all these initiatives to be effective.

We have wept and wailed on each other' s shoulders for the last three years. Either we have confidence in ourselves or we do not even attempt such measures, for what we lack is not money but confidence.

There was a meeting of the Commission today on the economic previsions, and I have to say that Europe has acquired a new dimension over the last few months, in terms of employment, commercial orders and company policies.

If we take into account the macroeconomic stabilisation referred to by President Gama, we have the genuine possibility of a sustained period of growth.

In Lisbon, we laid the foundations for exploiting this period of growth: now it is up to us to make sure we build upon them.

Thank you very much, Mr President of the Commission.

I have received eight motions for resolutions pursuant to Article 37(2) of the Rules of Procedure.

The vote will take place on Wednesday at 12 noon.

EU - Africa Summit (Cairo, 3 and 4 April 2000)

The next item is the Council statement on the EU-Africa Summit held in Cairo on 3 and 4 April 2000.

(PT) Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, this Cairo Summit represents the result of four years of diplomatic work which has enabled the countries of the European Union and Africa to come together for this initiative, the first under this framework, overcoming many problems throughout the process, both of substance and of form.

The Cairo Summit instituted a mechanism for global dialogue at the highest political level which will enable us to add a new dimension to EU-Africa relations which have, until now, been limited either to bilateral frameworks or to regional platforms for dialogue, be they the ACP mechanism or the Barcelona Process.

The summit represents a turning point in relations between the two continents and will enable the European Union to make its strategic partnership with Africa as strong as its partnerships with Asia, the Gulf States or with Latin America.

The first sure indication of its success and of its historic importance was the level of representation of European and African countries: 58 countries - 45 from Africa and 13 from Europe - were represented at Head of State or Government level.

This ensured that all issues of common interest to the European Union and Africa were addressed, and on an equal footing, since both sides had the opportunity to express their concerns and also their common objectives.

In this context, all issues covered by these concerns and objectives - economic, political and development issues - were discussed in a frank and straightforward way.

I would like to highlight some significant measures adopted by the summit.

In economic terms, understanding was reached on the need to define policies which will enable African countries to gain maximum benefit from the liberalisation of trade throughout the world, thus reversing the current trend of consistently and progressively marginalising Africa in world trade.

The commitment to reduce world poverty to half its present levels by 2015 was reiterated.

On the important issue of African debt, and despite the fact that at the summit a huge range of countries stated their national policies on this issue, it was stipulated that the bi-regional group of senior officials, which will in the first instance ensure that the summit' s decisions are implemented, will prepare a report on the debt situation in African countries.

This report will then be studied at ministerial level, under the summit' s monitoring mechanism.

On the other hand, the African countries committed themselves to promote and respect human rights, to eliminate patterns of discrimination against women, to fully support the establishment of the International Criminal Court and to combat discrimination and intolerance.

In the area of good governance and the rule of law, both parties demonstrated their commitment to adopting specific measures to prevent and combat bribery, corruption and nepotism.

In this context, they expressed their willingness to adopt the necessary measures to guarantee that illegally obtained public funds deposited in foreign banks should be subject to investigation and returned to their rightful owners in the countries of origin.

Concern was also expressed about the harmful effect on development of military expenditure, which is constantly increasing.

Other important issues such as education, AIDS and the environment were addressed under the theme of development, with the understanding that these are essential elements of the challenge of sustainable development in Africa and of eradicating poverty.

One fundamental area of dispute between Europe and Africa is returning stolen or illegally exported cultural goods.

Some progress was made on this issue too.

The bi-regional group of senior officials will prepare a report for assessment at ministerial level of the viability of taking further action in this area.

The last part of the action plan concerns the monitoring mechanisms.

These mechanisms will guarantee the continuity of this overall dialogue between Europe and Africa at the highest political level, at ministerial and senior official level, and it has already been established that the second summit will be held in Europe in 2003, thus ensuring continuity with this process that has now begun with the first EU-Africa Summit - the Cairo Summit.

Mr President, the holding of the summit was in itself a success achieved after considerable difficulties.

These difficulties - mostly of a political character - remain and need to be tackled by Africa and Europe, both separately and jointly.

The summit was the first encounter at the highest political level between Africa and the countries of the EU.

It will add a new strategic and global dimension to the existing relationship between Africa and Europe and will bring that relationship to the same level as that we already have with Asia and Latin America.

The EU already has a deep and broad relationship with Africa, notably in the field of development, where that relationship is unique and backed up by substantial finance.

We are spending development assistance money at the level of EUR 2.5 bn per year.

For our part, we have done what we should do and more if we look at the HIPC initiative to help the highly-indebted poor countries.

Here the EU is still waiting for a number of G7 countries to play their part.

We want to see the African countries as equal partners in the 21st century - the first century they are entering as independent states.

The EU has a comparative advantage in regional integration that Africa can benefit from, and we will ensure it benefits from it in the coming years, when the organisation of regional economic cooperation will dominate the agenda in Africa.

The summit provided an opportunity for useful discussions on debt and other bilateral problems.

It also provided an opportunity to underline the need for Africans to participate actively in the WTO process and to seek support for the Community's approach.

It was possible for the EU to tackle politically sensitive issues, such as good governance and human rights, with African leaders at the summit.

Other difficult questions, such as the question of the return of cultural goods, were also discussed.

The declaration and plan of action adopted at the summit take account of the sensitivities on both sides.

Internationally recognised principles, in particular human rights, are respected and clearly reflected in the declaration.

This is important to note in view also of the very few statements made during the summit that deviated somewhat from this general consensus about the basic principles that we and others take for granted.

It is regrettable that the civil society forum could not take place in Cairo but representatives of the forum were received in Cairo in the margins of the summit.

The text adopted in Lisbon by the forum was widely distributed by the Algerian and Portuguese presidencies.

The follow-up to the summit should enable the EU to round off its existing relationship with Africa with a high-level relationship covering, in particular, a continental approach to political and security questions as well as economic issues.

The Commission will endeavour to make a success of the meetings of the bi-regional group to be held at senior official level.

The ministerial-level meeting to be held between summits should concentrate on questions which concern the entire continent, meaning a continental approach must be taken to political and security questions and questions which are not covered by the mechanisms set up under the existing ACP-EU, Mediterranean and South Africa agreements.

Our view is that the follow-up to the summit should wherever possible be pursued through existing mechanisms.

The background is that we already have a credible working relationship.

With the new EU-ACP Convention being successfully concluded a few months ago and with the EU-South Africa cooperation agreement now being implemented as planned, we have two very important additions to the MEDA cooperation and the Barcelona process.

This means that we have not only the perspective of this Cairo summit but also a well-established basis to continue, widen and improve our daily work.

Mr President, I welcome the fact that the Cairo EU-African summit took place, but I must stress my disappointment that no one from this democratically elected Parliament had the opportunity to address the summit, nor did NGOs have any input.

At the very least, the two Co-Presidents of the ACP-EU Joint Assembly could have made statements and this would have given an EU-African balance.

Members of this Parliament, through the Committee on Development and Cooperation and the ACP-EU Joint Assembly, have laid the foundation for many of the policies in the developing countries: the Martens report in 1997 pointing to the benefits of the Lomé Agreement; the Rocard report in 1998 strengthening the objectives for the future; my own report in 1999 on regional cooperation and integration which is top of the Cairo plan of action agenda; lastly, Mrs Kinnock's excellent report in 2000 on the future ACP-EU partnership agreement that sets the scene for the next 20 years.

The final Cairo plan of action is an excellent document if we can now turn words and good intentions into concrete actions.

I know debt relief was at the top of the African agenda and everything must be done to alleviate poverty, but we must have some evidence that funds saved go towards better health care, better education and an improved standard of living for people and not into arms and war materials.

For these ideas to come to fruition, African countries themselves have to make the effort towards good governance.

We have already seen some good election results.

Let us hope that we can see the same happening in Zimbabwe, Ivory Coast and Togo in the forthcoming elections.

The top priority of regional cooperation and integration should have strong political benefits as well as trade ones.

With only 6% of African trade being carried out in Africa there is huge potential for an increase in trade if tariff barriers and trade barriers are removed.

Many of these countries will need both time and financial help to compete in the world market, but these countries must understand there is no other option in this new era of globalisation.

This is all unattainable without peace and peace-building; conflict prevention, management and resolution must be top of the African agenda.

The OAU must be given international support to continue its work and the peace initiatives must come from the African countries themselves.

Where peace is achieved, help must be given for demobilisation and reintegration, and the use of child soldiers below the age of 18 must be banned.

Ethnic cleansing has been the horror of the last 25 years, and religious wars destroy the very fabric of a country.

The main thrust of our aim therefore must be better education leading to better health care.

Through AIDS and malaria, Africa is losing the very generation it needs to build its future.

This summit was a start but much has to be done to turn words into reality, and we, Members of this House, must be part of that new world.

Mr President, I appreciate that wide-ranging coverage of the issues by Mr Corrie.

I would like to concentrate on my view that poverty eradication in Africa must begin with children and the realisation of children' s rights.

The Cairo summit will be followed up by another forum in Dakar on basic education.

The need for basic education is the single most important cause of global poverty.

Therefore, we need to ensure that girls in particular have equal access at least to educational advantage.

We can see that education will deliver, it will stimulate the economy, it will offer opportunities to control population and increase health awareness.

Dakar is an opportunity to deliver on internationally agreed targets.

The EU should put its political will behind universal primary education by the year 2015.

Clearly commitments made a decade ago have not materialised.

Africa is falling deeper into mass illiteracy and poverty and being further marginalised from mainstream developments in the economic and democratic fields.

In sub-Saharan Africa more children are out of school now than a decade ago.

40 million African children today are not attending school.

One third of the classrooms in Africa do not even have a blackboard.

70% of their schools do not have any clean water.

Teachers are under-qualified, often unqualified, and they struggle without pencils, exercise books or blackboards, often trying to teach children who are simply too hungry to listen or concentrate.

Julius Nyrere, one of Africa' s most famous teachers, in those post-independence, optimistic days, said education is not a way of escaping poverty, it is a way of fighting it.

Some of you may be aware that Julius Nyrere spent his spare time translating Shakespeare into Swahili.

But that man' s wonderful dreams were lost.

He lived to see one third of African men illiterate and two thirds of African women.

I urge the Commission and the Council to make the link between poverty eradication and basic education.

The benefits for us all will be seen in increased child life expectancy, cuts in population growth and improvements in farm production.

We have the blueprints and I urge all of those with the political will to take action, to deliver for the children of Africa.

Mr President, I should like to thank the Commissioner and the President-in-Office of the Council for their reports on the Cairo summit and say how really surprising I think it is that there has never been a summit of this kind before. When, however, one learns that it took four years to arrange it, then this is not perhaps so extraordinary.

Will anything come out of a meeting of this kind?

Well, that probably depends upon how you look at it.

If you start by considering the disasters, famine, conflicts and problems with AIDS which Africa faces, then, as Mr Prodi says, it is certainly a long way from Lisbon to Cairo, in which case not a lot will come out of the summit. But nor do I think that one could have expected it to.

That was not, of course, the purpose of the summit. The purpose of the summit was to open a dialogue between the EU and African countries.

That dialogue was in fact initiated, and it is safe to say that, at times, it was fairly unrestrained with its demonstrations and its wrangles or, in any case, point-scoring. I believe, moreover, that both Africa and the EU can learn from dialogues of this kind which, I believe, are also a prerequisite of our avoiding the risk of African countries' displaying bitterness about the history they partly share with countries in Europe.

I believe that the final document will prove to be an important reference point in connection with further cooperation between the EU and Africa.

This is due firstly to the fact that the document in itself constitutes an important signal about increased cooperation between the EU and Africa and about the fact that we have not forgotten Africa, and secondly to the document' s emphasis upon the interrelatedness of democracy, politics and economics and upon the fact that Africa' s integration and development should not, therefore, be seen in divided and piecemeal terms but as integral parts of a single whole.

Whether or not concrete results will be achieved in this way will depend, of course, upon the political will we show in the future.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the Cairo Summit gave rise to great expectation among African countries, particularly among those which hoped to see their debt cancelled.

Europe' s response to this was to say that it was too great a call upon its own resources to move towards the complete cancellation of the debt.

On the contrary, we affirm the political need to restore balance in the relations between African and the European Union.

After having plundered the natural resources of Africa very widely, and in fact continuing to do so, we must cancel our historical debt to them by cancelling their current debt to our banks.

This would enable us to pursue relations on a sounder basis.

And the Members of the European Union must stop lying.

We are asking African countries to respect democratic principles, but we are perpetuating antidemocratic practices in order to guarantee our own financial interests, in the style of Elf or Total, in a number of countries.

We order African countries to guarantee the plurality of political parties and allow the NGOs freedom of expression, but we negotiate only with Heads of States, the majority of whom represent only themselves, forgetting to invite the NGOs to the Cairo Summit.

We are asking African countries to accord women a larger place in society, but we ought to begin by establishing parity in our own countries.

Need I remind you that some European Union countries have less than 10% of women members in their national parliaments?

We expect the African countries to observe cease-fires, but we are fanning the flames of conflict with our arms exports to belligerents.

But none of this is the key issue.

As long as the European Union does not provide itself with the resources to ensure that the agreements for the granting of mandatory licences for the production of medicines to combat the AIDS pandemic are applied, expecting any progress in the African economy will remain in the realms of the pious hope.

For how can one expect a country in which a quarter of its young people are dying from AIDS every year to have a booming economy?

Once again, as we have already said, the European Union and the Member States must make their actions consistent with their statements.

For, while we are hesitating, while we are shilly-shallying, while we are discussing, Africa is dying.

Mr President, first of all I would like to emphasise that I consider the fact that this summit has been held to be extremely positive.

It has always been our opinion that every effort should be made to achieve this objective, as we have always felt that it would be a good opportunity to launch a genuine partnership that would be of mutual benefit to both continents.

But we also feel that the results of the summit fell considerably short of what was possible and indeed desirable.

I even think that it was the difficulties along the way that led to the idea that the event should be held in the first place, orthe formal meeting and the group photo, and not what could and should result from it, with a view to establishing a strategy for this partnership on a new footing.

Indeed, the conclusions do not strike me as being adequate to address current needs and opportunities.

It is obvious that economic issues are shaping a genuine rapprochement between the two continents, a fact which cannot be hidden by the individual positions of some Member States, which have a limited but positive influence. I am referring in particular to external debt relief for the LDCs.

This is occurring because the European Union, which has been consistently and mistakenly withdrawing its cooperation, is being affected or guided in its cooperation with Africa by two fundamental ideas.

On the one hand, by the prospect of transferring traditional, preferential relations to the rigid framework of the WTO, a fact that became obvious in negotiations on the post-Lomé agreement. On the other hand, by the priority being given to relations with Eastern Europe, which was clearly demonstrated by the cuts in expenditure on cooperation in the current budget year.

It is obvious that with this kind of outlook and in the light of the enormous problems and shortfalls facing most African countries in terms of the economy, the environment, health, infrastructure, conflict resolution and poverty, amongst others, it is difficult, if not impossible, to cement a genuine partnership which is effective and lasting.

This is the route we must follow in the future.

I say "must" because, contrary to what has just happened, I hope that in future the European Parliament and the NGOs will be part of this process. I also say this because I hope that this summit will at least contribute to a greater awareness of the real problems that exist in the field of cooperation with Africa, and that it will represent a warning call for the need to change tack in this area.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, in the 1960s people used to say Africa was not on the right track, and now, in 2000, Africa has still not arrived.

Where do you expect to get if you do not know where exactly you are heading?

Africa' s initial objective was to achieve independence, with nation states instead of ethnic tribes, and the result was Rwanda, the Hutus and the Tutsis, Nigeria, the Ibos, and Biafra.

The next objective was Socialism, the fair-haired comrades.

Black Africa was supposed to turn red.

The result was famine in Ethiopia, Algeria' s agriculture destroyed, not to mention Guinea under Sékou Touré.

The white man, Mitterand, then offered Africa parliamentary democracy, parties instead of tribes.

The result was a permanent situation of coup d' état, even in the Ivory Coast.

The present objective appears to be liberalism, the market, the IMF, the World Trade Organisation.

The result is rebellion by the poor people of Tunis and the poor people of Casablanca at the rise in prices, European meat destroying the Fulani' s livestock farming in Africa, the Latin American banana destroying the Cameroon or Ivory Coast banana, and fats extracted from GMOs are about to destroy the Ivory Coast' s cocoa.

All in all, from Socialist Africa to ultraliberal Africa, from the European Development Fund to the World Bank, from the summits in Bujumbura, Addis-Ababa, Nairobi, Casablanca, and now, on 3 April, Cairo, it is always the same assessment, the same threesome of poverty, epidemic and massacre.

Even so, on 4 January, the UN found the final solution, or the miracle cure: a proportion of the 800 million Africans would have to emigrate.

They even set a figure: 159 million Africans were to be unloaded on Europe by 2025.

In the same way that the problems of the inner city are not solved by building towns in the countryside, Africa' s problems will not be solved by shifting part of Africa to Europe.

The logical thing to do today is to apply to Africa what has worked elsewhere, what has worked wonders in our countries, in the United States, in Europe, the solution which in our countries created heavy industry, agriculture, the textile industry, the solution which in our countries created growth and sustainable development.

There is one word for this solution - protectionism, and there is one instrument for this solution - customs barriers.

This solution has been worked out in theoretical terms, and called 'self-centred development' . And, what is more, the new Senegalese President is inspired by this, telling the young people that they should get involved rather than waiting for the billions to arrive from Europe.

In practical terms, Africa will achieve the first stage in growth according to the Rostow model if it protects its agriculture, its livestock farming, its self-employed craft industry, and its emergent economy.

Opening up to the world market, on the other hand, will expose it to the law of the jungle and to the plundering of the natural resources of Africa, wood, oil, minerals, the flora and even the fauna, by multinationals.

This is, moreover, what we have seen, ladies and gentlemen, with the privatisation of specific key sectors in Africa.

For the Africans it was a negative outcome.

Africa does not therefore need either the cut-throat world economy or the economy of world charity, with the Holy Father and the Blessed Jacques Chirac, or the cancellation of a government debt of EUR 300 billion.

The watchword of the solution is customs protection on the African side and, on the European side, intelligent intergovernmental cooperation, of which the Lomé Convention was a prime example.

In this respect, the Mediterranean could serve as a test bench for a Euro-African policy which respects identities.

We in the Front National proposed a practical working method which involved dealing with the individual issues - water resources, soil erosion, desertification, the management of fisheries resources, livestock farming, pollution, control of migration flows - in a Marshall plan for the Mediterranean and Africa which would be funded from customs duties, reimbursable to African states in the form of open credit accounts in European banks.

We have proposed an international organisation, with an intergovernmental high-secretariat of the Mediterranean.

This would have its headquarters in Cairo, Tangiers or Tunis.

An interparliamentary assembly, like that of the ACP.

I feel that Athens would be the ideal site, or perhaps even a university in Valencia, Montpellier, Nice or Barcelona.

And there perhaps the words of Raymond Loulle would hold sway.

The practical implementation of these Euro-Mediterranean projects, respecting the identities of both shores, north and south, and involving around twenty Euro-Mediterranean states, would open the way to greater ambitions.

It could then be extended to relations between Europe and sub-Saharan Africa.

This is a great project, Mr President, on the scale of humanity as a whole, and humanity needs both Africans and Europeans.

All the more reason not to flood Africa with the unregulated world economy and not to flood Europe with an influx of people.

Humanity needs Africa where, it is said for the first time, in Kenya, man first stood upright, and humanity needs Europe where, for the first time, in Greece, thought first stood upright.

Mr President, when Mr Solana came to visit our group last week and was questioned about the outcome of the Cairo Summit, his answer was that the atmosphere had been good, which is more important than an outcome.

I disagree with him on this.

Commissioner Nielson also said something to that effect.

I think that the atmosphere is important, but as a basis for reaching sound agreements.

If the agreements are not forthcoming, then a good atmosphere is neither here nor there.

Nonetheless, an EU-Africa Summit is to be welcomed.

I also feel positive about the Portuguese Presidency' s initiative.

This huge continent is still beset with a lack of democracy, war, human rights violations, drought, flooding and chronic poverty affecting large parts of its population.

There are most certainly a number of countries which are better off, which boast sound growth figures and where the first signs of prosperity are visible, but there are also countries where the situation has dramatically changed for the worse.

Mr President, the European Union has over the past 25 years invested a great deal of time and effort in development and cooperation.

It is disappointing to have to state that this aid has not always had the required effect.

In our opinion, we need a new Africa policy, a policy in which democracy and sound management are prerequisites for aid and cooperation.

The Union can then also be expected to adapt its agricultural and trade policy in such a way that it is of more benefit to Africa and not, as is now often the case, a source of further disadvantage.

In return, we can expect African countries to cooperate better at regional level, open up their markets and give their economies a fair chance.

At the same time, Africa needs sound budget management combined with effective social policy, good education policy and sound health care.

Excessive spending on defence or futile projects should be avoided.

Mr President, the African countries have asked us to clear their debts.

This is vital for the poorest countries, especially if these enjoy good leadership and a balanced budget.

But more than anything - as underlined by Commissioner Nielson -we need to treat Africa in an adult manner.

We need to support what works but we also need to dare to speak up if certain things are unsuitable.

We need to support good leaders and good governments, but offer no support to dictators, bad leadership or countries riddled with corruption.

If the Africa Summit in Cairo has led to this kind of realism, then we have created more than just a good atmosphere and we are probably on the right track.

Mr President, the recent Euro-African Summit has given rise to concern, even vexation, but at the same time, it has also given rise to satisfaction and hope.

There was concern about the way the Summit was being managed - it did not even appear in the programme for the current six-month period - with moments of confusion, suspense and abundant rumour-mongering, which were incompatible with the seriousness and rigour which should be expected from the European Union given the importance of this historic meeting, the first to be held at the highest level between European and African leaders.

There was concern and vexation as a result of the way in which the European Parliament remained in the margins of the Summit process, partly due to our indifference.

This marginalisation, and that of the African parliaments, demonstrated a considerable incoherence on the part of the organisers.

It is incoherent to go around preaching good government, democracy and the rule of law while, in practice, ignoring the parliamentary institution which is essential for the realisation of those principles.

There was vexation on discovering that certain NGO meetings - the fora of civil society - which should have taken place in Cairo, sponsored by the European Commission itself, could not take place because of communication problems or the veto, still unclarified, of some part or other of the organisation of the Summit.

However, I said at the beginning that there were also positive aspects to this Cairo Summit which were cause for satisfaction and hope.

There was satisfaction at the fact that the conference was able to take place at all - which in itself is a great thing - and we should therefore congratulate the Portuguese Presidency and Commissioner Nielson, whose efforts helped to overcome the difficulties, intrigues and lazy defeatism of many people who assumed that this summit would be suspended, although it was going to fill an unjustifiable vacuum in the external relations of the European Union.

There was also satisfaction with regard to some of the tangible results of the conference in areas such as the cancellation of debt, the elimination of anti-personnel mines and the return of cultural goods pillaged by colonial powers.

Europe must now also commit itself to the prevention and resolution of armed conflicts, the provision of humanitarian aid for famines and the treatment of illnesses such as Aids or malaria which decimate the African population.

However, a Summit of this type should be an important source of hope, especially if it is not an isolated event but a first step in a process which we must set to work on immediately, in the expectation, furthermore, that relations between the European Union and Africa are going to change shape.

I am not impressed by the current pattern of African partners requesting aid in order to resolve their problems, as a result of which the European partners merely grant a part of that aid and little more.

We must go much further, much further than mere cooperation with development, which, by definition, is an unfair form of cooperation.

We must create platforms for dialogue and cooperation in which Europeans and Africans can discuss common problems and put together joint strategies in order to act in a coordinated fashion within the world order, in which we must all play a principal role, in equality, dignity and responsibility.

Thus, that world order will have to be more egalitarian, shared, cohesive, democratic and compatible with the values which we in the European Union proclaim as our distinguishing marks.

Mr President, taking this approach, we will vote in favour of the good resolution with which this debate will conclude.

Mr President, except for photographs and fine words, the Africa Summit has yielded very little.

Africa asked Europe for more market access and debt repayment, and got vague pledges in return.

Europe asked Africa to respect human rights more, fight corruption and cease violent conflicts, and got vague pledges in return too.

The solemn declaration of Cairo was signed by governments which are anything but generous regarding clearing debts and opening up their own markets.

The document is also signed by countries where human rights are being violated on a massive scale, where women are discriminated against, where the little funding that is available is used to massacre other population groups and where corruption has taken on almost ineradicable proportions.

Wealthy Europe must grant generous aid to Africa in support of democratic institutions, primary education and health care and must substantially lighten the debt burden.

The African countries need to understand that, without proper government, none of their developments will come to fruition, and both continents need to realise that strict population policy is absolutely indispensable.

On the photographs from Cairo, the African and European leaders may be rubbing shoulders with each other but, in reality, there is a yawning chasm separating the two continents.

Mr President, the first EU-Africa summit was an important event and had a great deal of potential for taking meaningful steps to reduce the marginalisation of African countries.

So it is a pity that a number of things prevented that potential from being fully realised.

Firstly, neither the European Parliament nor the EU-ACP Joint Assembly was invited to participate in the summit.

Secondly, it is very sad that civil society was not able to have a greater input into the meeting.

The NGOs from the EU and African countries took this summit very seriously and it was a missed opportunity not to engage in more meaningful dialogue with them.

Civil society has a key role to play in Africa' s development process.

Finally, this meeting could have resulted in a far-reaching action plan of concrete actions.

What we have is a plan full of warm words and good intentions but short on firm commitments, in particular on trade issues.

While it is nice to recall the EU' s important decision to grant duty-free access for essentially all products, it would have been even more significant to have gone beyond the famous "essentially all" to include those products of real importance to the poorest countries, such as agricultural goods.

Finally - sadly - commodity prices were conspicuous by their absence from this agenda.

A majority of African countries are overwhelmingly dependent on just one or two commodities for the bulk of their foreign exchange earnings.

Until action is taken to reverse the fall of commodity prices, poverty in Africa will not be properly addressed.

Mr President, wanting to achieve relations on the basis of partnership between the old continent and Africa means first of all putting a halt to the present system which operates to benefit the great powers and the corrupt elite of the south.

The continent of Africa is ravaged by epidemics such as the AIDS epidemic and by wars that are conspicuous, or sometimes forgotten.

Antipersonnel mines continue to kill innocent people, arms of all kinds proliferate and fall into the hands of child-soldiers.

The number of undernourished people in black Africa rose from 90 million in 1970 to 180 million in 1995.

Time seems to have stood still between the Biafra famine thirty years ago and the one which is once again devastating Ethiopia.

Illiteracy and unemployment affect the vast majority of young people on the African continent.

So it would be a mistake to think, today, that three quarters of the planet, three quarters of the human race, are going to carry on living in this sort of poverty without causing some serious instability at world level.

We must also do away with aid policies, which are equivalent to giving fish to people living on the bank of the river, as the saying goes, instead of helping them to make fishing rods.

The result is there is never enough fish and there are increasing numbers of people fighting over the leftovers.

Moreover, the IMF ordered ultraliberal policies, supposedly for structural adjustment. These are policies that have never worked anywhere.

Quite the opposite. I do not know of a single example of a country which made any progress by applying their directives.

In all its negotiations, the European Union should also demand fighting against corruption, certainly, and for democracy but, in return, African countries can also demand that the friends of Le Pen, Haider and Martinez should stop making regular racist attacks on their populations resident in Europe.

We agree that we cannot carry on supporting dictators in the name of Realpolitik.

We must support democrats unreservedly. From this point of view, what has taken place in Senegal sends out a strong message, proving that Africa is not automatically condemned to conflict, coups d' état or tribal warfare.

There is an imperative need for a new policy, based on codevelopment, conflict prevention, and the rejection of the dictates of the financial markets.

Obviously, this necessitates cancelling the 350 billion dollars of debt which is strangling any development in these States.

Finally, Mr President, Europe too made its wealth from colonialism and slavery.

Europe thus has a moral debt towards Africa.

Part of our wealth came from the colonial plundering inflicted on Africa.

Acknowledging that slavery was a crime against humanity would be an important gesture.

Mr President, after months of endless squabbling about agendas and participants, the Cairo Summit did take place eventually.

Only to establish what all of us have known for a long time, namely that the majority of the African population still live in abject poverty and are weighed down by a heavy burden of debt.

There is no doubt that the many informal contacts which the Summit created have been useful.

But I do wonder in all honesty if there can be talk of a Euro-African Summit if civil society is banished to Lisbon and neither the European Parliament nor the ACP-EU Assembly are in any way involved in the Summit.

The European Council gave in to the demand of African dictators not to admit any parliaments to the Summit.

But how much more credible would words such as democracy and the interest of the people have been if those people had actually been represented.

In that sense, Cairo was not a Euro-African Summit but more like a summit of élites.

With his statement that Africa does not need democracy but water pumps, Colonel Gaddafi has undoubtedly put into words what many of his fellow dictators think.

It is evident that our political models cannot simply be transplanted.

Africa has to find meaning for the notion of democracy itself. But fundamental principles, sound leadership, separation of powers, free and fair elections and respect for human rights are not negotiable.

The European Union' s reaction to violations of these principles is sometimes feeble and often divided.

Take Zimbabwe, for example, where political opponents are being attacked in the run-up to the elections and white farmers are being threatened and illegally evicted from their own land and where Mugabe provokes violence.

What other messages does the Commission need in order to suspend development aid?

In an interview with The Sunday Times last Saturday, Kofi Annan reproached the African leaders with greed, megalomania and failure to create better living conditions in their countries.

Against the background of Kofi Annan' s words, the question arises as to whether the people do not consider the organising of solemn rituals such as those in Cairo as a conspiracy among élites.

The international community should not be tricked into feelings of guilt by the African leaders who do not carry any democratic legitimacy.

It is high time that the European Union told the African dictators where their responsibility lies.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, all too often, Africa is seen by Europe as a lost continent, which is why this EU-Africa summit was long overdue.

This event must not be used as an alibi; it must mark the beginning of a real partnership.

If we are honest, then we must examine our own motives because, the truth is that a sort of Africa summit would also suit the European Parliament, because dealing with this subject usually means extremely topical and highly dramatic incidents, with conceptional discussions and efforts to find the right perspective generally getting the thin edge of the wedge, if you disregard the fact that Africa is a predominant subject at the ACP assembly.

But who notices that here in Europe?

Africa is the continent most seriously affected by the injustices of the international economic and financial system and the consequences of globalisation.

The promise by the German government and by other European countries to write off the debts of the poorest countries in the world will help considerably, because the high level of debt is an obstacle to investments in all forms of infrastructure in the countries in question and is hence one of the biggest obstacles in the fight against poverty.

Governments which have not yet decided to join this move should copy those who have already done so.

Success will only be achieved in the long term by finding points which unite rather than separate us and by endeavouring to reach a mutual understanding and to integrate Africa into the international community of nations.

Nonetheless, it is clear that something may, indeed must be demanded of the governments of Africa when it comes to safeguarding human rights, basic democratic order and the rule of law.

There can be no question of allowing dictatorial rule on the African continent which, as in Zimbabwe now, fosters racism, dispossession and forcible suppression and ousts an operational legal system.

The Lomé Convention offers a suitable framework for consultation, political dialogue and, if necessary, the suspension of cooperation.

Still less can there be any question of allowing financial aid and food aid from the European Union to be misused in order to buy weapons.

Newsreels showing wretched people starving are currently flickering across our television screens from Ethiopia, while the government is siphoning millions into new arms and has even turned down Eritrea' s offer to allow its ports and transport routes to be used for aid for Ethiopia, despite the continuing state of war. That is immoral and an important chance to make a move towards reconciliation may have been wasted.

Banning the NGO meeting from Cairo was a most unpleasant side effect.

The countries of Africa will have to get used to the fact that non-governmental organisations have an important status as part of the civil society and can act as mediators in the development of an autonomous civil society in these vulnerable countries on the path towards stability and peace.

Mr President, the Cairo Summit has been genuinely significant, an historic milestone.

It has been significant in terms of its meaning but also in terms of its lack of achievement.

It is historically significant because it is the first time that Europe, which was the colonising power and is responsible for the under-development and poverty of Africa, has met with the countries which are the consequence of that, the African countries which are seriously under-developed.

It is also significant insofar as its conclusions could not have been more feeble.

It has been noted that it had been prepared hurriedly, as a cosmetic exercise, without taking responsibility for the past and without preparing comprehensive and solid programmes on the future of relations between the European Union and Africa.

It is truly illogical to lament the constant instability and warfare, when there is a real battle for power and control of resources in Africa which, in turn, increases the cycle of poverty and sends waves of immigrants towards Europe.

It is also contradictory for us to lament the problem of Aids when it has been caused by the instability and precariousness created in those countries by the structural adjustment plans imposed by us, the IMF and the World Bank.

Therefore, Europe owes an enormous historical debt, centuries old, to Africa, and should repay it, not only by means of asking forgiveness, but also by forging social, economic, political and cultural links in order to show an indispensable form of solidarity.

Mr President, the EU/Africa summit was reported in the press under the headline: Kiss and make up!

Unfortunately a unique opportunity to reconcile different ways of looking at current problems and find a solution was wasted.

First, it is astonishing and highly unsatisfactory that the European Parliament was not included in this allegedly forward-looking conference.

The members of the European Council appear to have overlooked the fact here that the people of Europe are represented first and foremost by this Parliament.

Obviously no one was particularly interested in apprising the African states of this fact.

So it was certainly not a mobilisation summit, as the press described it.

As far as the content was concerned, it is perfectly understandable that the developing countries are interested in seeing their debt burden wiped out, but there can be no question of complete remission with no conditions attached.

We found out at the last meeting of our ACP/EU assembly in Abuja that in Nigeria, for example, which has restored democracy, one of the last dictators diverted several billion euros to private accounts.

One can only emphatically advise the developing countries to prosecute these offences, which are also punishable in Africa, and confiscate the money.

Then some, and it is a great deal, of the money would again be available to repay debts.

We would be able to recognise the good intentions of the developing countries and could then negotiate writing off and ignoring the rest of their debts.

In my view, this is all part and parcel of the good governance to which the countries of Africa have committed themselves if they are to receive more development aid.

On the other hand, I totally fail to understand why the German chancellor, for example, is treading a path which goes in the opposite direction of the other EU countries, by saying that the poorest of the poor countries should have all their debts written off first.

This rather flashy and, in fact insubstantial gesture contradicts the resolutions of the G8 summit last year and is in keeping with his departure from the conference.

It does not help matters if, instead of attending working meetings, one prefers to talk to Gadaffi for 10 minutes.

What the topic of conversation was, one may only speculate.

The chancellor of the media, as he is called at home, made his entrance and what came out of the final declaration adopted hours later was obviously a matter of indifference to him.

This is not the way, in my view, to formulate development policy nor is it the way to bring about the urgently needed reconciliation of national development policies.

I think that we, the European Parliament, must continue to denounce these national solo efforts and increase the responsibility of Member States' governments.

Mr President, it appears that some MEPs here are trying to attribute the problems in Africa mainly to the Africans, while others seem to attribute the blame mainly to Europe and the former colonists.

This seems to be the pattern for the Summit in Cairo too.

Some think it is a missed opportunity. They are extremely disappointed and can think of all sorts of reasons to support this view, while others deem it a unique and historic event.

The fact that, for the first time in history, such a meeting has taken place between the African and European leaders is, of course, an historic event. The fact that contact has been maintained mainly with Latin America and Asia is indicative of the fact that, evidently, there is something wrong with the normal relations between Africa and Europe.

This is true, of course, because very often it is not the Ministers for Foreign Affairs who travel to Africa but rather the Ministers responsible for emergency aid who then pursue their policy from there.

In connection with the African continent, policy has always been biased towards all kinds of funding for trade, agriculture, foreign affairs and, of course, development cooperation and there has been insufficient room for normal policy.

This is undoubtedly down to our dual approach of pity on the one hand and misericordia on the other, in other words the inability to snap out of the old colonial relations between Europe and Africa.

This is as much our fault as it is Africa' s.

In the light of this, I consider the Summit more as a good opportunity and a new moment to create a new beginning, despite all the attendant misery - inevitably, there are dictators and there is some European policy which is inappropriate.

I would like to praise the Portuguese Presidency, because they could have quite easily opted out, or it could have quite easily dragged on for a while longer, but they took the bull by the horns.

No, I am certainly not expecting tangible, huge successes, but what matters is what happened at a deeper level.

Parliament received a letter from Mr Prodi in which he says, on behalf of the Commission, that he has ordered proposals to be made for granting countless African products access to the European market at a zero rate.

It has been stated that we want to make a large contribution and take part in a much more far-reaching debt burden initiative, provided we can link this in with social development.

Mr Nielson is in favour of a complete overhaul of the development policy in which attention will focus much more on social development and poverty, both within the ACP-EU Treaty and within the EU.

You cannot develop the African people from within Europe.

The African people have their own plans and want to develop themselves, but want help in order to achieve this.

A new framework such as this really creates opportunities.

Within this framework, room must be made for conflict prevention.

Ordinary, regular contacts cannot work miracles. They will not bring about marvellous new results, but they are necessary.

I am pleased to hear from the Portuguese Presidency that it intends to ensure that a Summit like this will take place again in the foreseeable future.

In a normal relationship, we can be tough and businesslike with each other and we can adopt a result-orientated policy.

I would like to add one more point.

I hope that our budget for 2001 - and the Commissioner is only too aware how heavy this weighs on me, because I am the budget rapporteur for that component - will also accommodate some of these promises.

If 45 million children in Africa have never seen a schoolroom before and if we managed to double the education budget next year - not the budget as a whole but if we simply shifted some figures around - then this would be a welcome bonus.

Apart from in this final note, I made my contribution on behalf of the entire Group of the Party of European Socialists.

Mr President, ordinary people in most African countries are poorer today than when their countries became independent.

Poverty, therefore, is a disease inflicted upon innocent populations by evil dictators, greedy and corrupt politicians.

Natural disasters, including climate change, have aggravated the problem.

The Touareg in the desert in northern Niger, the Makonde in Tanzania or Mozambique take their families and put their meagre possessions in a little basket if they wish to move.

They are poor, insecure and exposed to the elements.

They have no water, sanitation, energy, medicine, education or reliable shelter.

Such desperate people cannot think of democracy and human rights in the way we do from our houses and leafy suburbs in the West.

They have no stake in their village, regional or national economies.

Such rootless people, desperate people, are easy prey to evil political manipulation, and that is why we see so much conflict and civil unrest in those countries.

We here in this Assembly offer these people open and free access to our EU markets.

We invite them to be part of the global economy, so that they can come and sit at the tables in Seattle for the WTO discussions.

What does this mean to these poor people, the majority of whom live in the bush, who have no knowledge, no means of efficient cultivation, harvesting, processing, packaging even what little they grow?

They cannot even market it in their own countries let alone sell it abroad.

So I suggest, let us teach them to be self-reliant and independent, by teaching them the means to grow and harvest what there is in those countries.

Let us give them the technology transfer that makes sense, before we say our markets are open to them.

(PT) Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I would like to thank you for your speeches, which will encourage us to pursue this European Union policy on Africa.

I would like to clarify a few points.

Firstly, the question of linking parliamentary bodies, such as the ACP-EU Joint Assembly and the European Parliament. As you will be aware, this summit was negotiated with another party: it was not imposed on them, nor could it be.

It was not a summit involving the European Union alone. We had a partner that had to be respected, because the consequence of not respecting our partner would have been to have had neither a dialogue nor a summit.

Well, let it be said that there were even problems in including references to the ACP group in the final conclusions.

Firstly, because this was seen as the first major rapprochement between Africa and Europe and not all Africa' s countries are ACP countries.

Secondly, the ACP group is not a purely African group. It also covers the Caribbean and Asia.

Therefore, you will understand that incorporating the ACP group into the summit, particularly at Joint Assembly level, would not have been at all easy, especially as the ACP group was not involved at any other level.

Secondly, with regard to the European Parliament, we understand how necessary and important it is for the European Parliament to take part in these initiatives and that is why we, the Presidency, have been involved in extensive dialogue with the European Parliament through the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy and here today, in plenary sitting.

My only regret is that attendance is low, but it is nevertheless of an extremely high calibre.

We have held lengthy discussions on this summit and on the fact that its effectiveness rested on two pillars: one is the European Union, and the other is the OAU.

And the OAU, for its part, does not have a parliament.

There was therefore a problem in accommodating within one summit, which I repeat was a summit of equals, not a summit of parties of a different status, an institution which the other co-sponsoring organisation did not have.

When we prepare the next summit, the 2003 summit, we will certainly look at ways of strengthening the European Parliament' s participation in a framework that must take account of the other party, given that the other party exists.

And nobody can understand anything about relations with Africa unless they grasp the fundamental point that Africa is out there and has its own opinions and ideas on issues.

Let us not try to insist that all our ideas should be automatically accepted and included in the negotiations just because they are ours.

I would not be as sceptical as some of you have been in your speeches and I even think that the reaction of the Africans at the summit and afterwards to the way in which the problem of debt was addressed showed a degree of confidence.

We must not forget that there is a qualitative difference.

I would remind you of the commitment given by Member States in relation to the world' s highly indebted poor countries to reduce and even cancel their debt, not forgetting the Union' s EUR 1 000 million contribution to this programme.

I would also draw your attention to the fact that in 2000, the European Union will clearly commit itself to establishing, by 2005, a programme of access to its economy, free of customs duties, for products from less developed countries. This will make a major contribution to stimulating their economies in the context of uneven trade liberalisation.

This is unprecedented and has never been done by any other group of countries.

It is extremely innovative and is greatly welcomed by these countries.

Confirmation of these principles at the summit was generally well received by the African countries.

The summit is not an international financial organisation. The problem of reducing or cancelling debt could not be solved at the summit.

The summit has helped to confirm values and commitment, and it was also extremely significant that many European Union countries took this opportunity to announce publicly that they were reducing or cancelling the debts of the poorest highly indebted countries. This had an important effect in terms of synergy and precedent.

The most important aspect of what took place was in fact consistently highlighted by the Africans: for the first time the European Union has agreed to address the issue of the indebtedness of African countries with the whole of the African continent through the follow-up mechanisms of a summit. The high-level bi-regional group was charged with preparing a report on African indebtedness which will then be discussed at ministerial level.

This represents a complete U-turn in this area. It is the first time that the European Union has agreed to discuss the problem of their indebtedness with all the African countries, in an institutional framework outside the international financial organisations.

The African countries considered this to be one of the most important milestones of this summit.

I should tell you that the aim of the Portuguese Presidency of the European Union was to do something for Africa, not just because we had done something for other continents or regions, such as Latin America and Asia, but also because other countries or groups of countries, such as the United States, Japan and even China had begun to do so before us.

It was time to put right this delay.

And therefore, with the cooperation of Commissioner Nielson, the Development Council held in Lisbon in January was, for the first time in history, devoted to EU-Africa relations.

It had never been done before.

It was an excellent piece of work, which furthermore was reflected, and rightly so, in the results of the summit.

We also finalised negotiation of the ACP agreements for the second Lomé Convention and we finalised the free trade agreement with South Africa.

We are also working very rapidly on the Barcelona Process and on African participation in the framework of association agreements seeking to create a free trade area by 2010.

We are working to review the Mediterranean strategy, to produce a rigorous draft of the Euro-Mediterranean Charter for Peace and Stability and also to review the MEDA II regulation.

We held the Mediterranean Forum in Funchal and we will be holding an informal ministerial meeting in Lisbon on the Barcelona Process, specifically to determine its good and bad points, on what needs to be improved and to prepare the summit which will be held under the French Presidency.

With regard to the Cairo Summit, it was not included in our initial programme, because when we took over the Presidency, it had not been finalised, but we always said that if the problems could be resolved, we would be prepared to hold the summit.

Later, we proposed the summit, we resolved the diplomatic problems and held a summit whose results were greatly welcomed by the African countries.

Of course, we did not resolve all the problems of the African continent overnight, but a step needed to be taken, a step towards including Africa in the European agenda.

It was necessary to hold a summit with this scope, on this scale and which would target these goals.

We must now continue, but I am sure that with the African agenda more rigorously defined in European policies, we are in a position to continue in a sustained and successful way, because the African continent requires it to be so. The situation of conflict, poverty and disease requires the European Union to boldly accept its responsibility.

It is also essential for the European Union to have an African agenda.

We, that is, Parliament, the Commission and the Council, are all working towards this.

Let me refer to some of the specific points made in the debate.

Mrs Kinnock mentioned the forthcoming meeting in Dakar on basic education.

As part of our preparations for that meeting I have gone through the bulk of what we are doing on primary education in Africa and I am happy to say that I am in a position to express something positive about what I have seen in the Commission.

We are doing much more than I had expected and I would be happy to inform Parliament about the portfolio of primary education activities in which we are involved in Africa.

This is not to say that we could not do more but it is much better than the picture in general.

Secondly, with reference to Mr Rod, who said that the longer we discuss more people will die of AIDS in Africa, I only have five minutes.

I have discussed AIDS in Africa with President Mugabe.

It was quite interesting that he openly admitted to me that they are now pursuing a policy of open, honest information on AIDS and HIV, pretty much parallel to what Uganda has been doing with some success.

This is not to say that the problem is over but I consider it real progress that one of the statesmen in Africa who, in this discussion, was seen for some time as part of the problem rather than the solution, is now openly saying that he knows he has to change his policy.

I am not claiming to portray the whole situation in Zimbabwe but this is an important point.

Mr Miranda reminded us of the indirect effects on the budget for Africa of the concentration on eastern European Balkan problems.

In absolute terms, our focusing on Kosovo and other activities has not meant a reduction in what we actually do in Africa.

In relative terms this is the case, but we have been able to shield Africa from direct reductions in the volume of what we are doing.

I appreciate the support from Parliament to that effect.

Mrs Maij-Weggen mentioned that development aid has progressed over the years.

If we look at total official development assistance, globally it has in fact decreased.

We are now down to 0.23% and many governments should and could do more.

Against that background it is a privilege to represent the European Union internationally in this field because we have not been part of that downward trend.

In total numerical terms, it is foreseeable that we will be increasing what we do in the coming years.

This Parliament, our budget, and our activities stand out as a sort of corrective measure to the global trend.

We should be proud of that and we should make the most of it in political relations also.

Mr van den Bos and others talked about debt relief and these problems certainly need a lot of attention.

I will remind you though that most of the EUR 1 billion, which is the EU' s contribution to the HIPC II initiative, will be directed towards Africa.

The EUR 680 million, which is our contribution as a donor, not as a creditor, will all be directed to the African Development Bank earmarked in the special trust fund in the HIPC initiative in order to bail out Africa and make it possible for the African Development Bank to continue servicing the poor countries in Africa.

We are doing quite a lot and the problem now is to what extent the G7 countries - who started up the HIPC II initiative in Cologne last year - will deliver, not just as donors but in their more narrowly defined role as creditors.

We welcome the cancellation of bilateral debt, which is relatively easy to decide politically, the difficult part is multilateral debt.

This is where the EU, as a donor - not directly involved as a creditor - has been able to lend a strong hand.

This is something that should not be forgotten in the on-going discussions.

It may not be enough but it is certainly more than any other group of donors has done so far.

Mr Zimmerling mentioned the problem of Nigeria and getting money back.

We made some last minute changes to the text in Cairo which strengthened the views expressed and I hope that Europe will be able to give a helping hand in identifying some of this money and getting it back where it belongs.

This should be part of international economic governance.

Money should not be able to disappear as has been the case.

It was of real importance that the Heads of State and Governments spent two days together.

It was very nice to witness this, which is of considerable importance, not only for the mood between Europe and Africa, but also for the kind of partnership we want to create, which also needs these personal relations.

They certainly developed quite well in those two days.

Finally, I would like to take this opportunity to express my thanks for the very good cooperation established with the Portuguese presidency during this substantial effort.

It was very successful and it has been a pleasure working with the presidency.

I have received seven motions for resolutions tabled pursuant to Rule 37 (2) of the Rules of Procedure.

The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.

The next item is the Commission communication on the external relations package.

Mr President, we discussed a number of issues in the Commission today, including the broad economic policy guidelines which have been the subject of a statement by my colleague Commissioner Solbes elsewhere in Parliament during the course of the afternoon.

But I would like to focus on two issues touching on external relations and one of those issues in particular.

Briefly though, I will first of all mention our communication on election observation and assistance, which we will now be publishing and which I will look forward to discussing with Parliament over the coming weeks and months.

I have to say straight away by way of a confession - and since Dr Paisley is not in the House I can probably make a confession - the paper does not represent a radical new approach, but it does attempt to bring order to an activity, which has become a very real growth area in recent years.

We have spent EUR 150 million on this important activity.

It is now clearly a first- pillar activity following the adoption of the regulations, which provide a legal basis for human rights and democratisation activity.

As Members of Parliament will recognise, the communication invites both Parliament and the Council to work with us on a more coordinated approach.

It invites everyone to try to learn the lessons of the past.

It is a very practical document.

It suggests that we need greater coherence in what we are doing and I am looking forward to hearing the views of Members of Parliament on the document, which I hope they will regard as an important and useful contribution to a debate which is going to become more important, not less important, over the coming years.

Let me turn to a subject on which I would like to address the Parliament at rather greater length. It is a subject which is very close to my own heart - imperfect a specimen though that may be.

It is the rapid reaction facility, which we have been discussing for some time and on which we have come to some conclusions.

My colleague, Commissioner Nielson, was talking a moment or two ago about the EU-African summit in Cairo just over a week ago.

It is true that the President of the Commission, my colleagues Pascal Lamy and Poul Nielson and myself were all confronted during that summit with a litany of complaints about the slow delivery of European Union assistance.

The people making those complaints were very often justified in doing so - not always - but very often.

It is not a new problem, as Members of Parliament will know - particularly Members who have been on delegation visits to other countries.

I have been frustrated at our slow and cumbersome procedures ever since I have arrived at the Commission last autumn.

I want to say once again that this is not a problem created by our staff, who work extremely hard, thin on the ground as they are.

It is a problem which they have been labouring under for a number of years.

The problems of slow decision-making and delivery are both structural and cultural.

Our procedures are old fashioned, they are as I said 'cumbersome'.

But the traditional legislative approach to Community business is also sometime ill-suited to the fast changing realities in external relations.

This is particularly true for conflict prevention and it is particularly true for crisis management efforts.

Today we are criticised for being slow, today we are criticised for being overtaken too frequently by events, and I think to borrow a cliché 'history is not going to wait for us any longer', nor will our international partners, nor even will the Council, and they are right.

We have to make sure that we are ready and capable of acting when action is needed, not six weeks later, not six months later.

We have to do better and we can do better.

Now we have embarked on an ambitious reform of our external assistance programmes, designed to bring a serious improvement in their effectiveness and in their speed of delivery.

We will present our proposals in the next few weeks.

Some things we can do relatively quickly, others will take longer if, for example, complex legal changes are required.

The rapid reaction facility is something that in our judgement we can do fairly quickly if we have the support of Parliament and if we have the support of the Council.

I hope that support will be forthcoming because we have time to lose.

The Helsinki European Council called on us, in the context of development of the Union's crisis management structures within the ESDP, to set up a mechanism for rapid reaction.

Inertia is only part of our problem today.

We must also be able to combine different tools more effectively and flexibly into a tailor-made mix to suit the particular situation.

The rapid reaction facility responds to these needs.

It is intended to allow us to draw without delay on existing Community resources and expertise to address specific crisis situations, complementing the valuable work already undertaken by ECHO in the humanitarian field.

I am suggesting a mechanism with the following broad characteristics.

First, there are the urgent time-limited operations in situations of crisis or emerging crisis.

Action should not normally last for more than nine months.

Second, where longer-term intervention is necessary, actions under the rapid reaction facility will anticipate operations under existing instruments, which can take over the action using the normal procedures.

Third, as with ECHO, the procedures must be streamlined.

The Commission should mostly be able to act under its own responsibility and if it has to consult Member States it will be on the simplest possible advisory basis.

Fourth, the management of the rapid reaction facility will be the responsibility of a small team, the crisis coordination unit in the Directorate-General for External Relations.

I do not want to build up large structures where people create work while waiting for a crisis to happen.

The added value of the rapid reaction facility is speed and flexibility in Community intervention in crisis situations.

It will help us to overcome procedural hurdles which have slowed us down in the past and it will allow for the combination of several instruments within a single action and for a single purpose.

Now I have heard concerns expressed that we are taking on new responsibilities when we should be focusing our efforts.

I understand that concern, but the rapid reaction facility does not create new responsibilities, it tries to get better mileage out of what we already have.

It builds on existing Community instruments, putting them to concerted use in a new framework.

It can cover action in areas as diverse as human rights work, election monitoring, mediation, institution building and media support, customs and border management, mine action, support for police operations, civil emergency assistance, resettlement and rehabilitation.

There is an inevitable, indeed necessary, area of overlap with existing instruments.

I repeat: the facility does not create a new instrument.

It provides a mechanism for drawing more effectively on the existing ones and the overlap is limited by the procedural nature of the rapid reaction facility and the time limit to its interventions.

The facility is a kind of quick-start package.

It will allow us to react in time and if necessary, to take the initiative in urgent circumstances.

In doing so, we will be better placed to put the wealth of Community experience and resources to optimal use in the interest of the Union as a whole.

But rapid reaction facility action is not meant to last longer than absolutely necessary.

If it needs to be pursued beyond the immediate time frame of the crisis situation, it should be taken over as soon as practicable by the regular geographic or thematic Community instrument most suited to manage it in the longer term.

That is why the Commission proposes a rather modest budget allocation for the rapid reaction facility: about EUR 30 million for this year and EUR 40 million for subsequent years.

We need to have sufficient funding available to get crisis action started quickly, but we do not want to tie up large resources, which could and should be put to better use in regular programmes. Similarly we do not want to create a large new bureaucracy which would hang around waiting for the next crisis to happen.

I have dealt with that point earlier in my remarks.

In sum, I am convinced that the facility will help us both materially - I would have loved to have had it in hand when we launched the Energy for Democracy scheme last autumn - and institutionally by providing a concrete Commission contribution to the evolving ESDP.

It is not an ideal solution.

My own favourite economist and guru, Jane Jacobs, points out that everything is disappointing in practice.

There are rarely ideal solutions, but I do think that it is a very workable solution and if, when we review the programme in three years, we find we no longer need it because we have integrated similar rapid reaction mechanisms in the regular programmes for external assistance, no one would be happier than me.

Mr President, I would first of all like to extend warm thanks to Commissioner Patten for his extensive clarification.

I have a question pertaining to his first point.

As I understand - and I am delighted to hear it - the European Commission intends to provide more structure to the way third-country elections are observed within the European Union.

My question is: will this be a structure similar to that employed in the United States?

I have always noticed that it is the Carter Institute which is responsible for election observation over there, and it always acquits itself of this task in a very professional and very transparent manner.

The European Union, which may be present on a massive scale, is really lacking such an image.

Could you explain whether you will use this American model as a gauge, because I think this is an excellent example of how things could be done and how they could be done properly?

The honourable Member has, as ever, made an extremely shrewd observation.

There is an image problem. It is one we address in the communication.

We want to ensure that what the Union does is more recognisable: it is not just a question of logos or armbands but of the whole presentation of what we are doing.

I think Members of this House will have sometimes been frustrated to discover that, on the basis of European Union funding, people from other countries, even North America, and some other countries are getting all the credit and none is coming to the European taxpayer who pays for all these things.

There is no such thing as European funds, there are European Union taxpayer funds, and it is an important point to remember.

Image is important and we have addressed it in this document.

I hope that if the honourable Member thinks we have not done so adequately, she will let us know.

Part of the purpose of this document is to try to generate more ideas from Members of this Parliament who, of course, are so familiar with the important activity which we are addressing.

Mr President, Commissioner. I concur with Mrs Maij-Weggen' s question.

I have taken part in several election observation exercises and, according to the principle of "do good and be seen to do good" , we, and I do not mean just I, have often remarked that visibility was often lacking. Now I am all in favour of our continuing to work together with the OSCE and the Council of Europe.

However, it is a poor show that we, the European Union bear all the costs, as is often the case, and yet nobody even notices that the European Parliament is present to observe the elections. I think that we should take reasonable account of visibility in this context.

Secondly, Commissioner, I should like to ask you when you intend to have at least the basic structure of your rapid reaction facility up and running, because it is also important for Parliament' s work?

What sort of timetable should we be working towards?

Thirdly, Commissioner, not all, but many crises to which we must react can be prevented.

Are you satisfied with the state and development of crisis prevention or do you want to couple crisis prevention to the rapid reaction facility?

Firstly, on visibility: there is an early paragraph in this pretty lengthy communication which, in my judgement, sums up the problem rather well.

It states that EU visibility is not as ever-present as one would like because of a number of factors.

The first is the lack of a clear EU policy and the necessary instruments to implement it.

The adoption of a CFSP joint action is no guarantee of increased visibility, as people found in Nigeria last year.

Another factor is the participation of the European Union under the umbrella of other international actors.

That has often been a problem in the Balkans, and one with which the honourable Member will be familiar.

In other cases, like Palestine, the lack of visibility was due to insufficient effort with the media.

Then we finish perhaps a shade provocatively: "Unlike the United States the European Union does not appoint retired high-level politicians for this kind of job."

We have politicians who are actually still in the kitchen feeling the heat.

Maybe we should learn something from that, though I agree that there are some important high-level retired politicians whom one would not want to see necessarily supervising elections. At which point discretion is the better part of valour.

Secondly, as far as the rapid reaction facility is concerned, I want to see this up and running as quickly as possible.

I have enough anecdotes to justify my impatience.

I have no doubt at all that our "energy for democracy" programme, which I mentioned in my remarks, has been an extraordinary success.

The mayor of one of the towns which has benefited wrote last week to his colleagues in the Serbian opposition making that point.

We are now looking at what we can do during the summer, now the winter emergency is over, to build on it.

Nor have I any doubt at all that the tortures of the damned which our officials had to go through to get the scheme launched would have been much easier to cope with had we had a facility like this.

Anybody who thinks that we do not need one should just try talking to our officials who were operating pillar 4 in UNMIK in Kosovo.

Again, there is a legion of almost unbelievable stories which underline the importance of a facility like this - a facility that is not a cop-out, not a way of getting round budgetary procedures but one that allows us within our existing budget to do things more effectively and more flexibly.

Of course, if you can act more rapidly, you make a contribution to crisis prevention.

It is one of the oldest saws in the book that it is incomparably more expensive to fight a war than to keep the peace.

Very often what is required to keep the peace or to prevent a crisis is not just doing things generously but doing them quickly and generously.

We are, as the honourable Member knows because he has been in this business much longer than I, actively involved in trying to develop an intellectually respectable case for preventative diplomacy, trying to pull together all the various non-military capacity headline goals which we think are required.

There are a number of things we will be doing.

I look forward to coming to Parliament with some further ideas over the coming months.

Mr President, Commissioner, you have spoken of the lengthy payment procedures which have an adverse effect on the image of the European Union in the various actions it takes.

We are currently in the middle of a conciliation procedure for the late payment directive, in other words, this is not just a problem in external relations; it is also a problem within Europe.

I think that it would make sense if you as Commissioner supported the view that the late payment directive should also apply to the European institutions, because then payment could be made, if there was a legal basis, within a certain period of time, namely between 21 and 30 days or, we hope, even sooner.

The idea is that the late payment directive could also be applied in these areas.

That is an interesting and important point, which I shall follow up.

It is an extremely valuable contribution.

I am also concerned about an even larger issue, which is the amount of time between our commitments and our contracting.

This is a serious issue and I hope we will be able to offer some helpful thoughts about that in the course of the next few weeks and months.

Mr President, I wish to congratulate the Commissioner on the progress he has made on the rapid reaction unit.

I should like to ask the Commissioner a couple of questions.

Firstly, although I recognise that he wants to keep the budget small and use existing instruments, is he satisfied that the budget in category 4 is sufficient for the special rapid reaction unit to be able to carry out its objectives over the course of a financial year?

Secondly, concerning coordination: what will the relationship be between this unit and the European Union special envoys?

One of the problems we had with Kosovo was not just coordination within the Commission but also coordination among the Member States of the actions they took as individual governments.

What relationship will you be able to have with Member States in order to ensure coordination of their independent activities?

As the honourable Member knows, because a paper which the High Representative and I wrote for the European Council miraculously found its way into the newspapers, the question of better coordination of Member States' activities is one that both Javier Solana and I feel strongly about.

For a start, it would be nice always to know what Member States are doing.

The High Representative and his colleagues in the secretariat are bending their best efforts to try to achieve that at the moment.

They are trying to explain, for example, to the United States the full scale of what Europe is doing in the Balkans.

We have had problems which should not have arisen because we have not always known in sufficient detail exactly what Member States, as well as the European Commission, are up to.

So we need to work more closely and in a more coordinated way.

That is an issue which the High Representative and I are attempting to take on more positively.

I hope that the Stability Pact conference a couple of weeks ago was a help along that road but we will certainly continue to pursue that issue.

On the relationship between the rapid reaction facility and the special envoys who are, of course, responsible to the Council - even though we are responsible for the budget - we will want to work closely with them.

There are some in particular whose activities bear on the sort of things we might find ourselves wanting to support through the rapid reaction facility, like the work being done by one of our special envoys in the Great Lakes region in Africa.

We will keep in touch with them.

I do not think that the sums of money that we are talking about are going to give us budgetary problems.

We can manage EUR 30 or 40 million.

I am sure I shall have other opportunities to come back to Parliament and explain some of the pressures we have with much bigger items of expenditure in category 4.One of my continuing obsessions is the gap between the language of our communiqués and what is agreed when finance ministers meet to discuss these things.

I am looking forward to what is called a full and frank exchange with Parliament on those issues.

I should like to begin by thanking the Commissioner for an excellent exposition of the rapid reaction facility.

I should like to ask him how he envisages disaster relief of the kind that was needed in Mozambique recently - how would this rapid reaction facility liaise and collaborate with Member States' armies and navies?

Would he also consider whether he would extend the call for help - if the need arises - to beyond the European Union countries?

For example, in Mozambique I found it quite extraordinary that the Indian navy was on the other side of the Indian Ocean and could have come to Mozambique very quickly, but nobody ever involved them in disaster relief in Mozambique, while people were hanging on trees.

There are different sorts of crises and different sorts of disaster.

The appalling floods in Mozambique were a classic case for intervention by ECHO as a humanitarian intervention.

The growing food crisis in the Horn of Africa is a classic case for the deployment of traditional food aid, albeit with emergency shipment and emergency on-movement through lorries, etc.

It is very difficult to compartmentalise these crises.

Very often you need to use a number of instruments.

For example, we discovered very early on in the Mozambique crisis the requirement for helicopters and the importance of using some military capacities in support of civil-power operations.

What we have to ensure is that there are not any "Chinese walls" between these various operations.

There need to be "Chinese walls" only in the budgetary sense.

We need to make it absolutely clear that we are not using the rapid reaction facility to cut corners in our budgetary practices, which are not justified by an emergency on the spot.

But the honourable Member is entirely right to say that Mozambique was a demonstration of the extent to which the various forms of intervention are interwoven and that it is very difficult to make precise categories out of different forms of support.

Commissioner, thank you very much for your statement.

I strongly welcome this rapid reaction facility.

It responds to long-held concerns which many of us have had.

You are to be congratulated on the work that you have done.

I should like to elaborate on the point which my colleague Nirj Deva mentioned.

We are not just talking about urgency, we are not just talking about effectiveness of action.

The question of coherence is very important.

You have the overall responsibility for external relations from the Commission's point of view.

I am thinking again of the role of ECHO.

Do you not foresee an opportunity here to bring ECHO under your policy-making umbrella so that we have a more cohesive approach to emergencies when they arise; so that we do not have this problem of different instruments; so that we are addressing the problem with one mind and can then deliver with urgency and efficiency?

I recognise the case for coherence.

It would be challenging politically, to get up and make a speech in favour of incoherence.

The honourable Member is entirely right about that.

But one has to bear in mind two important facts about ECHO.

ECHO is justifiably jealous of its reputation for delivering humanitarian assistance without political strings being attached and without any political infusion.

For example, you can distinguish very well between the humanitarian assistance which ECHO has given in Serbia and the assistance we have given through the Energy through Democracy programme.

They both help to improve people's lives made miserable by Mr Milosevic but they clearly have different triggers and slightly different purposes.

Secondly, it is very often the case that what marketing managers would call the deliverables are different.

Very often with ECHO one is talking about food, medicine and blankets.

With our rapid reaction facility one is very often talking about advisors, mediators, observers, customs officials, police officers, and so on.

But I totally accept that there is a need for more cohesion.

It is a considerable advantage that in this Commission the external relations commissioners work together as a team.

We are about to start sharing all the programming decisions together.

I very much hope that, without breaking down some important distinctions, we can ensure that the Community's various instruments, which involve the expenditure of quite substantial amounts of assistance, are moving together in the same direction.

It has not always been the case in the past.

Mr President, I am sure the Commissioner would agree that writing the report is the easy bit.

The practical implementation is the difficult bit.

When this rapid reaction force actually comes together, will it work in certain cases at a regional basis as well as an individual nation basis?

There are situations, such as that in the Horn of Africa, which cover more than one state.

The problems in the Great Lakes region cover a number of countries.

It would be useful if you could link these problems on a regional basis and act from that point.

Would the Commissioner agree with that?

I agree with the honourable Member on that point.

I believe that we should be looking much more constructively at regional solutions in a lot of other areas as well, not least some of our trade relationships with other countries.

This facility has to be used not just on a bilateral basis but in helping groups of countries with what are often common political problems, as well as environmental and other problems.

I just wish to congratulate the Commissioner on his replies.

I am a little upset and worried about his talk of rapid reaction and the refusal of a political infusion into ECHO.

Quite honestly, ECHO needs more than a political infusion: it needs somebody to see what is going on there.

When Mr Deva asked Commissioner Nielson a question on Mozambique and about the delay in getting helicopters there, it was dismissed out of hand by Commissioner Nielson.

We have a situation in Ethiopia where we knew for the past three years that there was a famine coming.

The stores down there are empty.

Commissioner, why did ECHO not foresee this and foresee that food was needed there when so many people were threatened?

The Committee on Development and Cooperation and myself have time and time again warned ECHO and the Commission that something should be done about this.

If the honourable Member, who has made some serious points, does not have anything else on tomorrow morning, he might come to the debate on Ethiopia in which I shall be taking part myself because my colleague has to be elsewhere.

I shall be setting out the figures for our actual disbursements of food aid in Ethiopia and Eritrea.

I just wish to add two points.

Firstly, I do not share the honourable Member's views on ECHO: it does a very good job in difficult circumstances.

I want to make this point about the Horn of Africa.

I was a development minister from 1986 to 1989 and I spent much of my time trying to deal with the food crisis then in Ethiopia and Eritrea.

I feel rather strongly that we have managed over the years, despite problems from time to time, to increase our ability to get food and other assistance to people in the most appallingly difficult circumstances.

We have managed to increase our ability to deliver humanitarian assistance.

What we have not done is to increase our ability to make that humanitarian assistance unnecessary in the first place.

There is a food crisis in the Horn of Africa.

There are two large armies dug into trenches, buying expensive military equipment from other countries with money which should be going to agricultural extension, to improving water schemes and the life chances of babies and young mothers.

So I hope I catch your eye tomorrow in the debate and make some of these points.

I have great sympathy for the problems being faced by Ethiopia and Eritrea.

However, I have to say that I was dealing with these problems 13 or 14 years ago and, alas, much less has happened to the good than one would have liked.

Mr President, on a point of order.

Could you let us know exactly how Question Time is going to be organised now?

Will questions to the Commission - ostensibly due between 6.30 p.m. and 7 p.m. be taken?

I can inform you that Question Time will last an hour.

Therefore, we will be working from seven until eight.

The first part, Questions to the Commission, will last 30 minutes.

We will dedicate 10 minutes to each Commissioner, instead of the usual 20 minutes.

The next item is Question Time (B5-0216/2000).

We will examine questions to the Commission.

At the request of the Commission, we will begin with the third question so that Mr Patten can answer it.

Subject: Commission participation in the Council's military committee Does the Commission agree that its participation in meetings of the Council and all its bodies is an established part of the acquis communautaire and an essential element of the institutional equilibrium of the European Union?

Can the Commission comment on rumours to the effect that it is not participating in the work of the new military committee?

Can the Commission explain the reasons for this non-participation?

Will the Commission insist on its right to participate?

The Commission shares the view that its participation in meetings of the Council and all its bodies is part of the EU acquis and an essential element of the European Union institutional framework.

Commission participation is expressly provided for in the Council's Rules of Procedure, which state that the Commission takes part in all Council meetings, and in meetings of all its preparatory bodies.

Only in exceptional circumstances and on a case-by-case basis can the Commission be excluded from these meetings.

In Helsinki, it was confirmed that the development of ESDP should take place within the existing institutional framework.

This reflects the Commission's full association with the common, foreign and security policy and its shared responsibility with the Council for ensuring consistency in the Union's external relations.

Excluding the Commission from work in this area would be tantamount to accepting the emergence of a fourth pillar in the Treaty, contrary to the Helsinki conclusions.

But although the Commission has a right to attend all working structures in the Council, it does not have an obligation to do so.

There are instances where the Commission decides not to participate in a particular meeting, usually because it considers that the items to be dealt with are not of direct concern to it or to Community affairs.

We have agreed arrangements without difficulty to take part in all the post-Helsinki structures, such as the interim Political and Security Committee, with one exception.

We are still discussing arrangements for the interim military body.

We would plainly have nothing to contribute to the interim military body when it deals with purely military business but there will equally be occasions from time to time when it discusses issues which straddle civil and military cooperation.

In cases like these, I think that it is not only natural but in everyone's interests that the Commission should participate in the meeting in order to contribute to the overall coherence and effectiveness of European Union policies and actions.

Mr President, may I thank the Commissioner for that excellent and comprehensive answer, which goes a long way to reassuring me.

May I ask him to confirm that the Commission's choice not to participate in certain meetings will be taken, as he put it, on a 'meeting by meeting' basis, not a structure by structure basis, depending on what is being discussed.

To take a decision structure by structure would indeed create an unfortunate precedent, undermining the acquis communautaire, which is that the Commission takes part in all Council meetings and preparatory meetings.

Indeed it would be counter to the Treaty, which states that the Commission is "fully associated", not partially associated, with the CFSP and that it will remain the Commission's choice whether to participate or not.

I realise that the honourable Member is a greater expert on these institutional issues than I am.

It is not therefore surprising that he is holed in one.

The question is whether the choice is meeting by meeting or structure by structure and we have made it gently and courteously but firmly clear what our view is of the matter.

I very much hope that it can be resolved satisfactorily over the coming weeks.

Mr President, if the Council does not agree with the Commission, does that mean the Commission will have to take the Council to the European Court in order to participate in the military committee?

Secondly, has the Commission drawn any conclusions as to the security implications of its participation in the military committee?

On the second point, if I may be slightly irrelevant, the history of the last fifty years does not suggest that it is bodies like the Commission which usually are a problem in that regard.

I certainly do not think that is an issue.

There is a general issue about security, which I know the High Representative is addressing and rightly so.

As for the first point, I very much hope that we can resolve these things amicably, and I am sure that if both honourable gentlemen put the case that they have put to me with equal force to their first cousins in the United Kingdom Government, that will very much help to resolve these issues without it taking too long.

I hope that we do not have to resort to the sort of measures suggested by the honourable gentleman.

I hope that we can solve this in a civilised and sensible way.

I repeat, we do not have - to borrow a phrase - "ideas above our station".

We are trying to follow the terms of the Treaty and to do so only when it is helpful to the overall implementation of a common foreign and security policy.

Thank you very much, Mr Patten.

I believe we have asked you all the questions we were going to ask you today.

We therefore wish you a good afternoon.

Subject: Ability of dialysis-dependent people to travel in the EU The free movement of Member States' citizens in the EU is a fundamental right.

One group of people that cannot make use of that right are those who require regular haemodialysis because of malfunctioning kidneys.

When travelling, they rely on being able to obtain treatment at dialysis units other than those they normally use. This poses a major problem especially during the European holiday period, when virtually all dialysis units scale down their activities and frequently turn away 'guests' who are passing through or visiting their area.

This severely restricts the ability of families with dialysis-dependent members to travel.

Does the Commission intend to take any steps before the next summer holiday period begins to make it easier for dialysis-dependent people to travel within the EU, without having to forego the treatment they need?

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I should first like to refer Mr Arvidsson to Community legislation on the coordination of individual national social security systems.

According to this legislation, persons temporarily resident in a Member State other than that in which they are insured are entitled to health care services if their condition is such that they require emergency treatment.

The persons in question need to obtain an E111 form from their insurance agency and submit it to the institution in the Member States in which they are temporarily resident as proof of insurance.

In order to ease the situation of temporarily resident dialysis patients and rectify the possible lack of clarity in the definition of emergency treatment, the Member States have agreed on special rules which are laid down in Decision No 163 of the Administrative Commission of the European Communities on Social Security for Migrant Workers of 31 May 1996.

According to these rules, dialysis qualifies as emergency treatment, provided that the purpose of the visit is non-medical.

However, as the availability of dialysis treatment may differ from one Member State to another, the patients in question are of course invited to make the necessary arrangements in advance with the hospital which is to supply the service in order to ensure that they can receive dialysis treatment while temporarily resident in the Member State in question.

As to the question of whether the Commission will take any initiatives in order to increase the availability of dialysis during the holiday period, I should like to say that there is no standardised social security system in the Community and that it is up to each individual Member State to configure its own social security system and to decide what services will be supplied, who is entitled to them and to what extent they are to be provided.

It is not therefore up to the Commission to intervene here and to influence national rules on the modus operandi of hospitals and clinics in the Member States.

Many hospitals do not regard chronic dialysis treatment as an emergency form of treatment and may therefore deny dialysis-dependent travellers the opportunity to undergo such treatment at their dialysis units.

Children, parents or young people in families where someone is dialysis-dependent are often very keen to travel.

They work and are given holiday-time, but they are unable to go on ordinary tours.

For such people, going abroad is an international issue and, if the national authorities do not do anything to help, their hopes lie with the EU as an organisation.

Even if it is not possible to intervene on a purely legal level, there may be other options for calling attention to the need to increase the provision of dialysis facilities during holiday periods in the Member States.

For example, more prominence could be given to hospitals which make efforts to provide such facilities, or attractive European prizes could perhaps be announced for those which take the relevant measures.

Perhaps my first explanation struck you as overly legal, Mr Arvidsson, and I should perhaps repeat myself in simpler terms: as far as Community law is concerned, the relevant committee has clarified that dialysis during temporary residence qualifies as emergency treatment.

It has nothing to do with whether someone is chronically ill or an acute case.

The decisive question is whether or not this is emergency treatment and the answer to this question is yes.

On the other hand, the Commission, as I have explained, can only propose or make certain information available here.

The Commission departments have made such information available.

But in individual cases and in relation to a specific holiday resort - and you will probably agree with me here - it would be advisable in that case to check in advance if the hospital or institution in question has dialysis facilities.

Subject: Measures to protect chocolate As part of its policy to ensure the quality of agricultural products and foodstuffs, the Union has set up a system to protect traditional products of specific character, under which chocolate is eligible for recognition.

Council Regulation No 2088/92 provides for the Commission to set up and administer a register of certificates of specific character. Under this regulation, producers of chocolate without the addition of vegetable fats other than cocoa butter can apply for a certificate of specific character (guaranteed traditional speciality) so that it can be recognised as a food product made from traditional raw materials.

Has the Commission already received from the Member States applications by producers for chocolate of this kind to be included in the register of certificates of specific character?

Will the Commission take all necessary steps to give effect to the provisions laid down in the regulation and include chocolate without the addition of vegetable fats among the foodstuffs recognised as guaranteed traditional specialities?

(DE) Mr President, ladies and gentlemen. The Commission has received no applications from producers for a so-called certificate of special character for chocolate without the addition of vegetable fats other than cocoa butter.

However, if such an application is submitted, it will be examined in accordance with the procedure provided for in Regulation No 2082/92 on certificates of special character for agricultural products and foodstuffs.

The name of the special character registered on the certificate allows the words - and I quote - 'guaranteed traditional speciality' , 'gts' for short, to be added, together with a Community symbol reserved for them.

If I am not mistaken, the Commission is not considering this option.

I would like to insist on this point because I feel that there is concern among consumers that the creation of the single market is resulting in less importance being attached to product quality.

We must endeavour to allay this concern, and I therefore feel, should the manufacturers of a Member State so request, of course, that within the White Paper on food safety and in other ways, the Commission should consider protecting chocolate which is produced according to traditional methods without additional vegetable oil as a high quality European product, and refuse to set the lowest level as the standard, for this may be permitted by the market, but it is not acceptable in terms of the quality of the produce and the lives of our consumers.

Mr President, Mr Napoletano, as I said, no chocolate producer has yet demonstrated any interest in this form of protection.

However, in order to clarify matters somewhat as you have requested, I should point out to you that the Regulation which I quoted makes provision for two possible forms of legal protection for names.

One possibility is that a name can only be protected if it is connected with the Community name 'gts' and the corresponding Community symbol, in which case it is possible to find other products on the market which have the same name as the registered product, but which are manufactured using a different process and consequently are not entitled to use the Community name and the Community symbol.

That is the drawback with this variation.

The second possibility is to protect the name per se if it corresponds to a single type of manufacture, namely the type registered, in which case there will be no products with the same name which are manufactured under different conditions on the market.

It would only be possible to register the name "chocolate" and issue a certificate of special character under the first procedure referred to.

Registration using the second procedure would run counter to the future chocolate directive, because chocolate is redefined and may contain a certain proportion of vegetable fats other than cocoa butter.

The Commissioner actually answered my question in the second part of his answer.

As a long-time passionate lover of chocolate for more years than I care to remember, I am sure the Commissioner will agree that, if for sixty years people have been eating a product called "chocolate", they are entitled to continue to eat the product called "chocolate".

I am very glad that we finally put this directive to bed in the last session.

We take note of your statement in favour of good chocolate, Mrs Banotti.

Subject: Children's rights Given the reports of sexual abuse, of child prostitution and the high number of young children living on the streets of the candidate countries from Eastern Europe, what measures are being taken by the Commission to ensure within the framework of the present accession negotiations, that children's rights and child protection are a priority and that the welfare of children is taken into account when preparing these countries for future membership of the European Union?

Mr President, I should like to start by saying that I share the concern behind the honourable Member' s question.

It is particularly depressing to see that, in a number of Central and Eastern European countries, children are suffering from the consequences or, to be more precise, the uncontrolled consequences of social change.

However, before answering your question with the standard legal arguments, I should like to get a political point out of the way first.

This is not a problem specific to the candidate countries of the European Union.

Unfortunately, as you well know, I am sure, the problem encompasses many, perhaps even the majority of countries in the world.

It is quite clearly a development problem, a problem which stems from poverty, a problem which stems from social neglect and, I believe, a problem which stems from the indifference or lack of decisiveness in our societies to really do something to fight this terrible manifestation of child abuse.

Allow me to tell you what we can do within the framework of accession negotiations.

To get straight to the point, it is not much, but the fact remains that countries wishing to join the European Union have of course undertaken to adopt the Community acquis.

That includes the legally binding regulations for the protection of children.

The most important of these is the joint action to fight the trade in human beings and the sexual exploitation of children, on which a decision was reached on 24 February 1997.

The Commission also intends to submit a proposal to the Council in the year 2000, i.e. this year, whereby the trade in human beings and the sexual exploitation of children, taking special account of child pornography on the Internet, will be declared to be punishable offences. If this proposal is accepted, it will become part of the Community acquis which applies in candidate countries.

The Member States and countries seeking to join the European Union are working together comprehensively in the fight against all forms of organised and other serious crime within the framework of the pre-accession agreements on the fight against organised crime concluded by the Member States of the European Union, the Central and Eastern European countries wishing to join the Union and Cyprus on 28 May 1998.

Programmes such as PHARE and MEDA and the relevant specific programmes relating to justice and internal affairs such as GROTIUS, STOP, ODYSSEUS and FALCONE also offer the opportunity to support countries seeking to join the Union in this respect and support is indeed given.

The following programmes are relevant to child protection: first the DAPHNE programme approved on 24 January 2000.

This relates to the period from 2000 to 2003 and includes preventive measures to fight violence against children, young people and women and allows funds to be provided to governmental and non-governmental organisations active in this area.

The countries seeking to join the Union can also join this programme.

Then there is the STOP programme for the period from 1996 to 2000.

This is a promotion and exchange programme for people responsible for measures to fight the trade in human beings and the sexual exploitation of children.

This programme helps to develop coordinated initiatives to fight the trade in human beings and the sexual exploitation of children.

The Commission will draft a proposal for a new edition of the STOP programme during the course of this year, which will then also be open to countries seeking to join the Union.

The Commissioner showed us where his heart was in the opening remarks.

I should like to ask him if he is aware that, notwithstanding the implementation of many of the Community programmes, in a recent BBC television programme Newsnight there was clear evidence that there is a systematic breeding programme in Romania in particular, where children are being bred for export and sale.

It was a totally horrendous programme, although I agree social exclusion is a major factor in these dreadful occurrences.

There were children who were being bred specifically to be put into an institution from which they were subsequently sold to people coming into that country to buy babies.

There is also the question of Internet pornography.

Poland is one of the significant countries from which much of this is being broadcast.

It is not enough that we have these small, under-funded programmes.

What are we actually doing in terms of the accession discussions with these countries to make our opinion abundantly clear that this is unacceptable?

I should like to explain to the honourable Member what my feelings are in this matter, not just the legal aspects.

The whole problem could not have arisen and would not exist were there no demand for this horrendous supply in our rich societies, including in the Member States of the European Union.

The entire problem has only arisen because there are people in our societies who will pay money for it.

In Romania there are no people paying for it.

These people are in this country, the country in which we live, in all the neighbouring countries, in all the countries of the European Union.

I would be most grateful to the honourable Member if, before representing one of the poorest countries of Europe in her question here, she were also to point out that the real responsibility for this terrible crime lies with those who pay for and demand it.

Now let me come to Romania.

The subject of children in Romania is, as you know, one of the subjects on which the Commission is most intensively employed, including me personally.

There is no single topic in the context of accession negotiations, apart perhaps from the safety of nuclear power stations, to which I personally have addressed myself more intensively than the situation of children in Romania, including the problem to which you referred.

I cannot confirm the accuracy of the BBC television report.

The fact that something has been broadcast on the BBC does not automatically mean that it is true.

Not that I am saying that it is untrue.

Simply that we cannot confirm it.

It is therefore difficult for me to answer your specific question as to whether children are being bred in Romania for the purpose of sexual abuse with a clear yes or no.

What I can say is that, as Parliament' s hearing on the subject of children in Romania has demonstrated over recent weeks in Brussels, the Commission is doing absolutely everything in its power to improve the lot of children in Romania.

I assure the honourable Member that we are doing far more than is our duty and, in fact, far more that what is actually politically permissible within the framework of accession negotiations.

I do, however, admit that we are doing so because, in my view, it is also a human rights issue which must be considered in accordance with the political criteria governing accession.

But I must again expressly state that I would guard against representing this problem - although I do not think the honourable Member intended to do so - as a problem specific to the accession or candidate countries.

It is a problem that should be a cause for concern to everyone in Europe.

While we address the question of what we are doing in Romania or in other countries to fight the supply, I would also ask Parliament to address the question of what we are doing to fight the demand.

(PT) Mr President, the Commission is perfectly aware, as it demonstrated exhaustively in the two communications it transmitted to the European Parliament on this matter, the first in November 1997 and the second in December 1998, of the need for coordinated and multidisciplinary action at European level, for both preventing and combating trafficking in women.

The Commission has been supporting and will continue to support various non-governmental organisations involved in this field in various applicant countries, and recently financed two prevention campaigns which we feel were very successful, one in Poland and one in Hungary. At the same time, the same type of campaign has been funded by the American government, as part of the transatlantic agenda, concerning trafficking in women for exploitation in Ukraine and Bulgaria.

In the area of police cooperation, the Commission wishes to remind honourable Members that in 1996 Europol was given a mandate by the Council to combat trafficking in human beings, with the basic aim of ensuring that all networks of traffickers working in Europe would be closed down.

With regard to criminal issues, the Council would like to repeat that it intends to present a set of legislative proposals to the Council and the European Parliament by the end of the current presidency. The aim of these proposals is to go beyond the February 1997 joint action and to comply with the provisions of Paragraph 48 of the Tampere European Summit conclusions, with a view to adopting a framework decision leading to the joint definition of trafficking in human beings and the prosecution and punishment of those involved.

Finally, the Commission also wishes to emphasise that through the STOP and Daphne programmes, it has already funded numerous cooperation and training projects in the area of combating trafficking in human beings, specifically against the trafficking of women for sexual exploitation, and through these programmes has brought together the relevant bodies, namely police and judicial authorities, non-governmental organisations and social services.

The Commission intends in the course of 2000 to present the European Parliament with a new legal basis for the STOP programme for the period 2001-2005.

Under this new legal basis for STOP, we will also be able to fund projects for combating trafficking in human beings submitted by non-governmental organisations and by public authorities from the applicant countries themselves.

Lastly, concerning the specific situation in Albania, the Commission acknowledges that networks trafficking in human beings originating in the Balkans represent a major concern, due to the increasing number of cases being seen in European countries.

We therefore acknowledge the fact that under the Stability Pact for the Balkans, priority must be given to combating trafficking in human beings.

I can even answer the honourable Member by saying that a group of experts is already working on identifying the best actions for combating the networks of traffickers in human beings and that I myself had an opportunity recently, on a mission to Greece, to exchange ideas with the Greek Minister for Home Affairs, in order enlist the cooperation of his government in establishing these actions and priorities, bearing in mind the action that Greece is already developing bilaterally on the trafficking of human beings in the Balkans.

Commissioner, thank you for your answer, which I find partially satisfactory as I am well aware of your personal interest in the matter and of the initiatives you have undertaken to combat prostitution rings.

However, we must admit that we have not been very successful so far, since the number of rings has increased and we have recently received reports of abuse, particularly of Albanian and Kosovar women.

Of course, this issue is bound up with the economic, social and political conditions which prevail in the Balkans and which have resulted in the poverty and overexploitation of vulnerable sections of the population, such as women.

However, Commissioner, we must also admit that the intervention of the EU' s institutions has been both inadequate and ineffective.

Are you aware, Commissioner, that concentration camps still exist where women are raped before being forced into prostitution?

European women are particularly concerned as to whether there is any political will to dismantle these prostitution rings, whether there is any police or judicial cooperation and whether any victim support measures are in place.

I am going to ask you to be brief and I am going to be brief.

This is the Rule in this House.

For your information, in Annex IIB(3) of the Rules of Procedure, there are some recommendations for cases such as this when there is no time for questions.

Therefore, in application of the said recommendations, we will allow just one supplementary question per subject and only 30 seconds, which may extend to 35, but no more, in order to reformulate the questions.

Subject: Agricultural budget for foreign policy activities in Kosovo With regard to the budgetary forecasts, will agricultural funds be used to foot the bill for Kosovo?

Are EUR 300m to be deducted from the items earmarked for agriculture funding to cover the costs of Kosovo?

Mr President, Mrs Izquierdo Rojo, reconstruction in Kosovo and the stabilisation of South-Eastern Europe are among the most important tasks facing the European Union over the next few years.

This has been emphasised in numerous Council and Parliament resolutions, most recently in Lisbon, and for the Commission, this task does, without doubt, have the top priority which it requires.

The funds required for this task need to be anchored in the budget accordingly.

This task was not included in the Council resolution on the financial perspectives for 2000-2006 at the Berlin summit last spring.

The resolution on Agenda 2000 was taken, I would remind you, on the same day that the war in Kosovo broke out.

In the interinstitutional agreement on the financial perspectives concluded between Parliament, the Council and the Commission in May 1999, Parliament and the Council decided to call on the Commission, in view of developments in the Balkans, to submit the necessary budgetary proposals, if necessary in the form of a proposal to revise the financial perspectives.

It is precisely this call that the Commission is addressing.

It has proceeded by taking the following steps: first by estimating the sum in aid needed from the EU budget; secondly, by setting new priorities within foreign policy activities, so that funds can be redeployed for South-Eastern Europe and, thirdly, by proposing a redeployment between categories, i.e. between the various political areas.

One of the reasons for the proposal to redeploy EUR 300 billion from the expenditure budgeted as maximum expenditure for agriculture was as follows: the financial perspectives make provision for an increase of EUR 2.8 billion for agricultural expenditure from 2000 to 2001.

Because the Council reduced the budget estimates by EUR 400 million for the year 2000 in comparison with the maximum amount or ceiling set for 2000, the maximum rate of increase for next year would have been as high as EUR 3.2 billion.

In the external aid area, on the other hand, the figures in the financial perspectives would have resulted in a reduction in expenditure next year in comparison with this year and I think that everyone is agreed that this does not really reflect the actual situation and actual requirements.

The Commission therefore decided to propose a redeployment of EUR 300 billion to the budgetary authority so that the increase in agricultural expenditure would be correspondingly lower.

I hope that, when faced with these realities, Parliament will support the Commission proposal.

The Commissioner confirms our suspicions that Commissioner Fischler is hiding things from us and hiding himself as well. I am not surprised that he left the chamber hardly ten minutes ago because this proposal is shameful.

It takes from agriculture an amount to pay for a United Nations mission in Kosovo, in European Union resources and agricultural policy resources. And then we have a Commissioner who is denying farmers subsidies for nuts, whose production they are going to lose, and who is denying European agriculture the aid to deal with the effects of the drought.

All of this demonstrates that Agenda 2000 has been nothing but a great firework display.

This is a disgrace for European agriculture.

It does not surprise me that given this outrage the Commissioner responsible...

Mr President, I hope I can risk Mrs Izquierdo's wrath by saying that I agree with the Commissioner.

I want to put it to her that it is far better to reduce the rate of growth in agriculture in order to protect the money that is currently going to the very poor in this world, because the alternative would be to squeeze further the budget lines in category 4.

It would be unacceptable to find money for Kosovo - which I support - at the expense of the very poor in the world.

Does the Commissioner agree with that?

I should like to thank the honourable Member for his remarks.

I should also like to clarify that it is really not in the nature of my colleague, Mr Fischler, to run off and hide.

Clearly there are new priorities and new tasks and everyone here in this House must suggest how these new priorities can be funded.

The Commission has taken the step for which provision is made in the interinstitutional agreement, i.e. to examine the extent to which funds can be redeployed in the relevant categories and then make another proposal.

Mr Patten and Mr Nielson have come to the conclusion that a total of EUR 1.6 billion could be redeployed in the external aid area for south-eastern Europe and I think that we really must acknowledge that this step has been taken.

In addition, there is a further funding requirement and I should like to emphasise once again that the growth rate in the agricultural policy area is extraordinarily high for next year and my colleague Mr Fischler has accurately calculated the extent to which a reduction in agricultural expenditure by what is a small amount for the agricultural budget is feasible.

I should like to state clearly at this point that this redeployment will not of course have any effect on income support for farmers.

I should also point out that the Commission will propose that even the expenditure budgeted for promoting and developing the countryside be increased to its ceiling next year.

But I think that it is our common responsibility to find an answer, including a financial answer, as far as the important obligation that the European Union has in south-eastern Europe is concerned.

Mr President, the Commission is doing its utmost to settle proper payment applications within 60 days.

The large majority of invoices can be paid within this period and the number of overdue payments is falling satisfactorily.

However, the honourable Member' s question obviously refers not only to settlements in the narrow sense of the word, but to the question of how many commitments from previous budget years have yet to be paid.

So what we are talking about is the period of time between the first promise of funds for a project and a specific contract and the period of time between the commitment and the actual payment of funds.

The Commission submitted a working paper to the budgetary authority last year in which it made a comprehensive analysis of developments, broken down by sector and underlying factors, and suggested remedies.

The Commission is currently updating this analysis.

In terms of volume, commitments, i.e. sums that will need to be converted to payments in later years, were around EUR 71 billion at the end of 1999.

Developments in these old cases are influenced, de facto, by several factors and I think that it is important to make that clear here. The first factor is the ratio between commitment appropriations and payment appropriations which the budgetary authority applies to the budget every year.

For the year 2000, for example, the budget contained approximately EUR 4 billion more in commitment appropriations than in funds for payments.

The second factor relates to the take-up of these budgetary funds, i.e. both commitment appropriations and payment appropriations.

Finally, the release of commitments for which no more payment applications are expected, so-called sleeping commitments, a somewhat misleading term meaning commitments which obviously will no longer be converted to specific commitments and specific payment commitments, also plays a not inconsiderable role.

However, the Commission is unable to subscribe to the honourable Member' s view that delays in implementing Community projects robs them of any legitimate purpose; on the contrary.

As soon as the Commission comes to the conclusion that no more substantiated payment applications are expected for a project, for example because the project has been suspended or abandoned, it orders the corresponding commitments to be released.

This applied to a sum of around EUR 1 billion in 1999.

I should stress that the time lag between overall commitment appropriations and their conversion to specific projects is a feature of many Union programmes.

This applies, for example, to multiannual programmes and the most important in quantitative terms are the Structural Funds, which are subject to shared administration, with the Commission making commitment appropriations which are then converted into specific projects at Member State level.

In order to reduce the time lag between promises, specific projects and payment, the budgetary authorities need to decide on a balanced ratio between commitment and payment appropriations and there needs to be real pressure to speed up the implementation of programmes.

The Commission has discussed precisely this today as part of the debate on the revision of the financial regulation and I can assure you that we intend to change the rules in order to tighten up the time scale.

I hope that we can count on your support.

I am pleased that the Commission really has taken note of the problem and intends doing what it can to ensure that the payments are made more quickly.

Commissioner Patten pointed out a while ago in the Committee on Budgets that, within category 4, there are eight and a half year-old commitments which have still not been paid out.

This state of affairs indicates either that we have major problems in implementing the budget efficiently or that we ought, in fact, to have some kind of deadline or time limit which would be much tougher when it came to writing off old commitments.

Perhaps both these matters are problems which the Commission ought, in that case, to do something about.

I should like to inform the honourable Member that an analysis has shown that it takes approximately one and a half years to convert commitment appropriations into specific contracts.

That is all well and good, but there are also old, sleeping commitments and you may be interested to know that another 20 posts were recently made available, in addition to the 60 posts decided for the SCR last December, in order to see which commitments no longer apply and can be cleared up.

I should like to offer my warmest thanks for your suggestion.

That is exactly the approach which the Commission will take during the revision of the financial regulation and I am therefore sure of at least one person' s support in Parliament.

Mr President, what I would like to know is, do you think that prompt payment by the European institutions, as set out in the late payment directive currently in the pipeline, might result in a clear improvement to the image of the European Union?

Do you intend to use benchmarking or best practice methods?

The honourable Member is right; it is in fact fundamental if the Union' s reputation is to be enhanced that both the time lag which I mentioned between promises, to call a spade a spade, and specific contracts must be reduced and payments must be made when invoices, i.e. substantiated payment applications are filed.

Of course benchmarking means that no more than 60 days should lapse and, as I said, more and more payments are being settled within this period.

Of course the aim is to have few, if any exceptions.

Thank you very much, Mrs Schreyer.

Since the time allotted to Mrs Schreyer has elapsed, Question No 39 will be replied to in writing.

Subject: Institutional reform In the Action Plan on Reform it is stated that an 'external legal expert' should sit in an advisory capacity on Disciplinary boards.

What is the excact definition of this 'external legal expert' , and what legal expertise will this person be required to have?

The Commission is at present implementing, or preparing legal grounds for implementing, the different actions set out in the White Paper on reforming the Commission.

In his question the honourable Member is probably referring to actions 57 and 58 of the Reform Strategy Action Plan which, amongst other things, specifies commitment to making proposals for the establishment of an interinstitutional disciplinary board.

The Action Plan does not, however, specify that an external legal expert should sit on the board.

The Commission will be presenting detailed proposals for the modernisation of disciplinary procedures and related arrangements in a consultative document which is scheduled for publication in October.

The document will include recommendations for improving administrative procedures and for making relevant amendments to the Staff Regulations.

Consultation on those proposals is a legal requirement and the views of Parliament and Member States, as well as those of the staff, will naturally be taken into account on all relevant matters, including the possible use of external expertise on the interinstitutional disciplinary board.

I thank the Commissioner for his reply.

Following on from the Van Buitenen affair and the Commission's fairly lamentable reaction to it, is there not a case that these disciplinary boards - and especially those called for whistle-blowers - should be independent of the Commission altogether?

I am grateful to the honourable Member for his question.

The affair of Mr van Buitenen was conducted completely in compliance with the existing Staff Regulations and however tested, I am sure that any fair-minded person is bound to come to that conclusion.

So far as whistle-blowing is concerned, and as the honourable Member may know, we will be putting forward very comprehensive proposals for radical change in current arrangements which will, when they are implemented - hopefully with the assistance of this Parliament as a legislature - provide the European Union institutions with the best, fairest and most effective system for ensuring that the duty of officials to report their suspicions of wrong-doing will be fully accessible and made totally effective.

Mr President, the honourable Member's question refers to the Commission's proposals on whistle-blowing in the consultative document on reform adopted by the Commission on 18 January 2000.

Following that, more detailed orientations were set out in the White Paper on reforming the Commission which was adopted, published and presented to this Parliament on 1 March.

In specific response to the honourable Member's question, Articles 12 and 17 of the current Staff Regulations do not prevent members of staff from reporting wrong-doing within the Commission and it is consequently not the case that officials have to breach the regulations in order to properly report suspicions or concerns.

In addition, last June the Commission decision implementing the regulation establishing the anti-fraud office, OLAF, explicitly made the provision that officials and servants of the Commission, and I quote, "who become aware of evidence which gives rise to the presumption of the existence of possible cases of fraud, corruption or any other illegal activities detrimental to the interest of the Communities" are obliged to inform their hierarchy or the Secretary-General or the Director of the European anti-fraud office, OLAF.

That legal text also specifically guarantees that officials and other servants of the Commission shall, and I quote, "in no way suffer inequitable or discriminatory treatment as a result of having communicated such information".

It follows that Articles 12 and 17 of the Staff Regulations do not prevent staff from reporting wrong-doing either within the Commission or to OLAF.

In neither case would disciplinary action result from making such reports.

In the White Paper on reform and elsewhere, the Commission has made direct commitments to reforms which will further improve rules related to the reporting of suspected wrong-doing.

More precise rules on the rights and obligations of officials to report wrong-doing through internal channels and to OLAF are required, and rules defining external channels for the reporting of alleged wrong-doing need to be compiled and proposed, as they will be.

These rules on whistle-blowing will be put forward for introduction into the amended Staff Regulations and officials who follow them would not be subject to disciplinary action.

The Commission will present detailed proposals in a document scheduled for October of this year.

As the law requires, consultations on those proposals will be undertaken with staff and with the other European Union institutions.

Preparatory work on the proposals is progressing under the Director-General for Administration.

One member of my cabinet has specialist responsibility for reform of personnel policy, including whistle-blowing, and others are naturally actively involved in the overall issue.

Further to my question, as the Commissioner has just stated, the Commission is now drawing up its "whistle-blowing" charter to a certain extent.

Will this be framed, for example, along the lines of the Swedish Government's or the British Government's rules on whistle-blowing?

Could the Commissioner inform Parliament as to the exact circumstances in which Paul van Buitenen now finds himself?

Is he still being disciplined by the Commission and has any of his pay which was docked in the past been refunded to him?

I am grateful to the honourable Member for his question.

Firstly, the development of the proposals relating to whistle-blowing will take full account of best practice in several of the Member States.

The Commission is acutely aware of the provision long established in Nordic democracies, recently developed also in the Public Disclosure Act in the United Kingdom, and several other comparable pieces of legislation.

As the honourable Member would expect, this institution will take account of the breadth of provision and seek to ensure that in terms of accessibility, usability and career security we provide the best possible attainable system to ensure effective whistle-blowing because we believe it to be appropriate as a complement to good conduct in an international publicly accountable administration.

As far as Mr van Buitenen is concerned, he took up employment on 1 April in the Directorate-General for Health and Consumer Protection in Luxembourg in a very responsible job, as the House would expect.

He is not currently the subject of any disciplinary procedure and the honourable Member should be aware that immediately after he ended his period of suspension last April Mr van Buitenen's full pay, conditions, status and pension rights were restored, as were his rights in all other respects.

I reported to this House previously that Mr van Buitenen, a short time after ending his period of suspension, was informed that he had a right to seek employment in any of the European Union institutions in a job for which he was qualified.

He made a couple of applications, one of which was for a job in the Commission.

He was successful in that application and I am pleased to say that he was duly appointed.

We thank Vice-President Kinnock for his replies.

Since the time allotted to Mr Kinnock has elapsed, Questions Nos 42 and 43 will be replied to in writing.

As the authors are not present, Questions Nos 44 to 48 lapse.

A first-class Danish Shetland pony stallion named Vivaldi and his progeny were denied entry into the main section of the Swedish Shetland pony stud book.

The dispute between what I might describe as a courageous private breeder from one Member State and a breeding association in another Member State, reflects shortcomings in implementation by Member States of both the spirit and letter of related Community law, in particular Directive 90/427 on zootechnical and genealogical conditions governing intra-Community trade in Equidae.

I wish to remind you that it is the responsibility of the Member States to ensure that any dispute is settled by action to be taken by the competent authorities in cooperation with the organisation maintaining the stud book of the same breed or even the stud book of origin of the breed.

The Commission, following its inquiries, was officially assured that the Swedish stud book rules had been aligned with EC legislation.

However, in the light of new information, the Commission undertakes to take up the case again and to arrange for a zootechnical inspection mission, should this be required.

I should like to thank you for your answer.

I assume that the Commission will take immediate action on this matter, or will it be a case of the Commission having to be approached again before anything is done?

I should like to point out that what we are concerned with here is an individual citizen whose livelihood has been affected.

It is a matter costing an incredible amount of money.

As some of us who have been involved with the equine trade know, there is a great deal of money at stake here.

It has cost an ordinary citizen, who has made a business out of horses, an incredible amount of money because Swedish associations have not been willing to approve his stallion.

I would therefore ask whether it is once again necessary to make an application in connection with this matter. Given all the talk currently of the Commission doing something for citizens, might not, rather, the Commission be expected to take the initiative directly?

I thank the Member for her supplementary question.

As I indicated earlier, this is essentially a matter between two Member States.

The Danish Breeding Association, in my opinion, should have taken up this issue with the Swedish Association.

It is not really the role of the Commission to develop this issue further but it is doing so in the manner I have indicated in an effort to assist the private breeder who - I perfectly agree with you - should not be compelled to have to go through these steps to seek a result in this particular issue.

As I have indicated, in the light of new information, the Commission undertakes to take up this case again and, if necessary, to arrange for a zootechnical inspection mission, should this be required.

The way Question Time is run is not acceptable.

Firstly, it does not start on time.

We had group meetings; I was watching the screen and you jumped from Question 41 to 49.

That makes it impossible for Members to be here.

In addition, Question Time did not start at the time stated on the agenda.

How are we meant to function in this way?

It makes it virtually impossible for us and is not a fair procedure.

Mrs McKenna, today' s Question Time has been ratified by the plenary in this House.

It was explained this morning at the beginning of the sitting, we have accepted certain rules and we have skipped questions when the authors have not been present.

I am therefore very sorry that we now have to conclude Question Time.

We especially thank Mr Byrne who has been here all afternoon so that he could answer questions.

Since the time allotted to questions to the Commission has elapsed, Questions Nos 50 to 93 will be replied to in writing.

That concludes Questions to the Commission.

(The siting was suspended at 8.10 p.m. and resumed at 9.00 p.m.)

The next item is the Council and Commission statements on Turkey.

(PT) Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, today marks a very important step in relations between Turkey and the European Union, particularly in terms of putting the Helsinki conclusions into practice.

There had been no meeting of the Association Council between Turkey and the Union for three years and nor had there been any meeting of this kind after the deliberations and the criteria laid down in Helsinki. This was an important meeting with an agenda that included not only relevant points of political dialogue, but also practical decisions which will translate into a step forward in the negotiating process.

They will do so specifically by establishing eight sub-committees, which will now enable the Commission, in this case represented by Commissioner Verheugen, to rigorously prepare the screening exercise and also to start negotiations on public services and markets. These are negotiations which will increase the present level of trade liberalisation between the Union and Turkey.

By implementing the Helsinki criteria and having made progress in the country itself, Turkey has made significant steps towards these negotiations, which it is important to bear in mind. It has been gradually committing itself to implementing or to adopting a huge range of institutional and legislative changes.

This is progress in the right direction, progress which is still of course experiencing delays and interruptions, and only seeing the process through will ensure that this progress meets with complete success.

Hence the importance of holding the screening procedure that is being prepared and the importance of Turkey' s commitment to incorporating the body of Community legislation and also to respecting the Copenhagen criteria.

In our political dialogue with the Turkish delegation, we were able not only to assess the progress made, but also to comment on what we felt were shortcomings at institutional and judicial level and also in terms of the actual implementation of economic policies.

Today' s meeting will be followed up at the forthcoming meeting of an association committee, which will study these issues in greater detail.

It should also be pointed out that there was a very constructive approach to the preparations for this Association Council with regard to drafting a joint position, which was adopted by the fifteen members of the Association Council.

This meant of course that very thorough work was undertaken with the Greek delegation too, which is following this issue with a sense of importance worthy of Athenian diplomacy. Now, however, the delegation is also guided by the spirit of a diplomatic rapprochement, which has been seen in relation to its neighbouring country since the earthquake that devastated Turkey and the consequent expression of solidarity by Greece.

This progress in the bilateral relationship will have considerable influence on progress on this issue in the future, on the relationship between the two countries and will certainly contribute, as will these negotiations between the European Union and Turkey, to establishing a favourable framework and environment for a solution to the problem of Cyprus.

We are working in the right direction. There are shortcomings, but this right and safe direction is also the only one that will enable the great country that Turkey is to take the appropriate steps for its economic and institutional modernisation and for its complete integration into modern democratic society.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I welcome today' s debate as an opportunity to take stock, four months after the Helsinki summit and in the run up to the Association Council which the President-in-Office has already spoken about.

The Helsinki resolution brought about a net and lasting improvement in relations between the EU and Turkey.

At last, it is again possible to discuss all issues openly and critically.

Stronger political dialogue is again taking place at all levels.

Today' s sitting has been marked by a constructive and open discussion; as a result I am able to say that the overall balance is highly promising even if, as always in such cases, there are both positive and negative aspects.

Above all, Helsinki confirmed that compliance with the political accession criteria was the sine qua non to starting negotiations.

The Copenhagen political criteria concern democracy, the rule of law, human rights and the protection of minorities.

Turkey does not yet meet these criteria, which is why negotiations will not start until they do.

