You talk about greater transparency, but produce proposals which would lead to documents which, at present, are available for public inspection being locked away.

Your Commission consists of the only 20 people in the EU who can propose that the quantity of legislation should be reduced.

Local politicians cannot do that, once legislation has been passed in Brussels.

The legislative programme from the Commission ought at least, therefore, to be accompanied by as long a list of tasks which are to be referred back to the Member States and to the processes of popular democracy.

Otherwise, the number of laws produced in Brussels will just keep on growing.

We have passed 10 000 laws and as many amendments, and the applicant States have had 26 000 documents sent to them which, as debated by the Polish parliament, fill 140 000 sides of paper.

Even by this stage, that is already too many by far.

Brussels should make decisions on fewer matters and hand over more decisions to the people, the regions and the Member States. The only decisions which should remain with Brussels are those concerning cross-border issues which the national parliaments can no longer legislate on effectively.

What is more, the work carried out in Brussels should be of a much higher quality and be completely transparent, so that people might at least have some small sense of owning the process, now that Mr Prodi and his predecessor have taken their autonomy away from them.

I should also just like to draw Mr Dell' Alba' s attention to what the founding fathers of the European Union dreamed of. Take a look at Jean Monet' s memoirs.

What he envisaged was what he called a small, practical secretariat.

That is not what Mr Prodi is President of today.

Madam President, this morning the Commission President, Mr Prodi, has set out ambitious goals for the European Union for the next five years, laudable aims indeed, to make a strong and effective European presence felt in the world: succeeding with enlargement, meeting the challenge of selling e-Europe, introducing better principles of governance.

We accept that Europeans, particularly the younger generation, need to be given a broad perspective of where Europe will be in the years ahead.

But how are we to succeed when the resources available are limited and the credibility of our institutions is not very high?

We need to match this vision with reality.

Here there are three elements I would like to contribute.

Firstly, we need a successful European economy.

We must ensure that unemployment rates continue to go down across Europe, confirm the trend in privatisation and deregulation, encourage the insertion of information technology and knowledge of the Internet, show that e-Europe is a good initiative.

But we must avoid lurching back into the old-style regulation, stifling individual initiative and enterprise.

We must not fear globalisation, but we must also make sure that we understand its political impact in the network society.

Without a successful European economy we cannot meet the challenges ahead, particularly of enlargement.

Secondly, we need to ensure that we legislate only when necessary - subsidiarity.

Doing less but better - a central plank of the last Commission - needs to be the aim of this Commission too.

We will be looking at this closely when we come to the annual programmes of proposed legislation.

Mr Bonde was right to say that there is this image of doing less better and then suddenly we see an annual programme for the year 2000 of 500 proposals and recommendations, which seems to go in a different direction.

We must establish priorities and make sure there is value for money in each of these programmes.

Lastly, we need to ensure that there is proper, genuine reform of the European Commission.

Yes, the Commission - guardian of the Treaties - is meant to be an independent body, but it also has to be accountable to European citizens through our Parliament.

The information problem, which Mr Bonde just referred to, is treated like a straw in the wind, with the Commission seeming to restrict information to us, as citizens and as parliamentarians, although we have the right to it under the Treaties.

The Commission is not in fact today a European government.

The Commission does not reflect the majority in this particular Parliament.

We in Parliament have a major role to play in the shaping of governance in Europe.

This governance therefore needs to be a sensitive governance so that we can actually work together and understand that each of the institutions in the European Union, has its relevant role to play.

Therefore we need to have credibility, coherence and confidence that in working together we can restore the image of the European Union to our citizens.

Madam President, Mr President of the Commission, numerous steps have been taken in the past to strengthen the European Union, from the euro to resolutions on a common security policy; even to the response by the 14, the Commission and Parliament to the new coalition in Austria.

I fully endorse the philosophy and the principles behind these decisions.

Nonetheless, I agree with you, Mr President of the Commission, that many more steps to strengthen the European Union will be needed in the future because the European Union is not strong enough either to master the huge, inevitable task of enlargement or to control current and potential movements which, to put it mildly, have an ambivalent attitude towards European values of democracy and tolerance and the desire to integrate all the people on our continent.

That does not apply to Austria alone.

The Union professes its faith in its fundamental values in the Treaty of Amsterdam and the institutions of the EU confirmed this faith once again when the new coalition was formed in Austria.

However, the full potential of these values will only be realised if they are set out in comprehensive detail in and form part of the Treaty and, in the final analysis, represent legal claims on the part of individual citizens.

When it comes down to it, Articles 6 and 7 of the Treaty are not enough.

In this sense, the Commission must insist, and I should like to endorse and confirm this here, that the new Charter of Fundamental Rights become part of the Treaty and create binding, enforceable rights.

In this sense, the Commission must insist on building up the common area of freedom, security and justice and in this sense I disagree with the last two speakers.

Only reasonable, feasible and humane principles of immigration and asylum law can counter the irrational, misleading and demagogic allegations of the extreme right.

But, and I would like to stress this, this policy must also be accompanied by a coherent and convincing policy to promote employment and prevent social exclusion because unemployment, marginalisation and growing inequality are the best breeding grounds for anti-European, nationalistic actions and reactions.

In this respect, Mr President of the Commission, I too should like to address the issue of globalisation which you speculated on and how it is perceived by large segments of the population.

The feeling of being at the mercy of others, of lacking in influence and of having no protection from the state leads in the best case scenario to a lack of interest in politics and a refusal to vote, as in the European elections and, in the worst case scenario, to extremist voting patterns.

The Union, like everyone else, has not yet understood how to present the EU to the citizens of the EU as a means of protection against the negative effects of globalisation.

We are in the process of building a house but too few of our citizens really feel at home in our house.

What we need are not just reforms of the World Trade Organisation and the economic architecture - and, significantly, the President of the Commission forgot to mention the reform of the financial institutions and international financial architecture; we also need confidence-building measures for our citizens, who rightly expect help and support from and in the EU with the inevitable and painful process of adapting to new global circumstances.

In this respect, what the Commission says about boosting Europe' s voice is important.

You yourself, Mr President, spoke of a model of which, unfortunately, there is little mention in the document.

You said that we must offer our citizens a model of economic, social, cultural and ecological development, both internally and towards the outside world, which differs from other models, including the US model.

In this sense, the USA is not only our partner; it is also our competitor; not our opponent, our competitor and we must fight to see which of us offers our citizens the best model.

I hope that what we have said so clearly and vehemently here today will also be reinforced in the Commission documents.

Madam President, Mr President of the Commission, the greatest legacy which your Commission could pass on to the European Union would be to help resettle and redistribute the increasingly jumbled and confused powers and competences of the Commission, and perhaps of the Union itself.

You have made a bold start by rightly emphasising the need to focus on so-called "core tasks".

That, as you have said yourself today, means that you must also identify tasks, policies and programmes which are peripheral or irrelevant to the Commission's main vocation.

Many existing European Union policies and programmes may simply have passed their sell-by date, or have been proved unwieldy or ineffective when administered at European level.

The challenge now is to have the courage to devolve as many non-core tasks as possible back to lower levels of national, regional and local government.

If we are to succeed in persuading a sceptical European public of the merits of further European integration, we must be able to demonstrate that we are as active in the devolution of unwarranted EU powers as we are in the evolution of new EU powers.

We must not allow the critics of European integration to claim, as they presently do with some justification as we have just heard from Mr Bonde, that the increase in EU responsibilities is a one-way street only.

It must be shown to be a two-way process in which existing EU policies and programmes, which are not clearly justified on the grounds of subsidiarity and proportionality, are devolved and repealed.

If you are able to match these aspirations with actions in the years ahead, you will be making an unprecedented contribution to the future of the European Union as a whole and, as we have heard today, you will enjoy widespread support in this European Parliament.

Madam President, Mr Prodi, I fully support the thinking of the proposals made by my colleague, Mrs Hautala, on the Commission' s strategic objectives for the coming five years.

I myself want to refer to a subject which has not been mentioned but which is on the agenda, namely the Commission' s work programme for 2000.

I am aware of the limitations of the exercise given that we have to work within the current Treaty and are therefore restricted by its operational rules.

I am thinking in this respect of the important issue of taxation which I am not, however, going to talk about.

Rather, I want to start by welcoming certain proposals which you have made in this programme for 2000.

These include all the proposals on food safety which are ambitious and important and those on maritime safety which are particularly important given the two oil slicks which have affected the coast of Brittany and Turkey.

The Commission should react quickly in this respect.

However, on other issues the proposals could be more ambitious and faster acting.

I have some positive suggestions to make, particularly on the social area, the environment and the follow-up to Seattle.

Firstly, you have said that the citizens of Europe must be reconciled with the institutions. This is self-evident and it is therefore essential to find out their main concerns.

For example, in the social area, it is not enough to announce a communication on a programme of social action.

You must submit a new social action programme to us by the end of the year.

The issue of company closures and mass redundancies is one which has been and still is very firmly in the news.

We are working on the basis of a directive whose limitations have been clearly demonstrated. I therefore propose that this should be reviewed in order to produce a directive which is more effective in protecting employment and also in imposing penalties on those who do not comply.

On the environment, you have announced a proposal for a decision on a sixth action programme on the environment.

This is all very well but it seems that the text to be proposed will not contain any specific objectives or a timetable for implementation. Perhaps you can correct me on this.

I personally feel that it is essential to have precise objectives and a proper timetable for implementation.

In terms of civil liability for the environment, it is right that we finally have a White Paper. However, Parliament did ask for a legislative initiative six years ago.

The White Paper clearly foreshadows this legislation but for when? You must realise that this process needs to be accelerated.

Finally, after Kyoto, we should be able to rapidly produce precise proposals.

Finally, on the subject of the WTO, the idea of relaunching a new global round is not necessarily bad. However, in the first place, the Commission should make proposals on changing the operational rules of the WTO.

The Commission has a role both within the EU and throughout the world.

The European Union must therefore instigate a re-evaluation of the WTO' s operation which must lead to precise proposals being made on its rules.

Madam President, you spoke about fundamental political values, and one of the fundamental political values, even more important than democracy, is respect for others.

We therefore feel that you acted correctly in sending a message and that perhaps those who protested about it are still feeling the effects of Bolshevism or Nazism. Democracy means dialogue with others and making others realise when they are wrong, but also listening to their explanations.

Enlargement - and Alleanza Nazionale has been repeating this for ten years in this House - must not mean dilution, that is, it must not entail more risks.

The applicant countries' hopes are at least as important as the hopes of our current fellow citizens, who are beginning to feel bitterly disappointed by the way Europe works, as it is not resolving the most serious problems.

We therefore need to be strict in the enlargement process and respect those agreements which - should it be necessary - need to be redrafted with regard to certain fundamental issues such as the environmental disaster that has occurred in Romania, reaching as far as Belgrade, but above all, the continuing spread of apathy as regards major security issues.

Even today, we do not have definite answers regarding the monitoring of the nuclear power stations in the eastern republics.

We therefore need resources available to spend before proceeding to enlargement, so that we can at last establish a European monitoring body responsible for monitoring quality of life and living conditions, with the aim of creating a new world where such tragedies will no longer occur.

I would also like to say a few words on Africa, Madam President.

The third and fourth worlds have been abandoned: just one dollar, one and a half euro would be enough to save a great many children.

Europe, which is so democratic, so progressive, does not speak out or take these tragic problems on board, while half of Africa is dying of Aids and other diseases.

One final remark regarding the Internet and globalisation.

Globalisation of the economy must not be reduced to product and quality certification, just as the globalisation of politics must not come to mean levelling of values or dampening of hopes and enthusiasm.

The peoples which do not participate and gradually grow more distant will leave the way open for an oligarchy that will take power and leave control in the hands of a few.

As for the Internet, Europe has finally found the courage to say that we need rules.

On a personal note, please allow me at this time to congratulate the pirates who, by acting the way they are, are forcing the world to reflect on the only system which is currently unregulated.

We live in a world of rules and regulations: let us regulate the Internet too and give our fellow citizens rules and hope for the future.

Madam President, as a Padanian taxpayer, I have already experienced the vice-like grip of the taxman and former Prime Minister of Italy, Mr Prodi, since Padania is liable to Italy for its taxes as well.

Listening to him just now, I was concerned when he mentioned new resources, something that readily translates as additional taxation, in view, inter alia, of enlargement, that is the entry of new States into the Union.

But why do they not buy their own entrance ticket?

My Padanian electorate who, thanks to Mr Prodi, have already paid what in Italy is known as the European tax - repaid only in part - have absolutely no intention, thanks once again to Mr Prodi, of paying another tax for someone else.

Madam President, Mr President of the Commission, Members of the Commission, five months after its coming into office, the Commission committed to paper the direction in which it aims to steer the European Union.

The ensuing document is both ambitious and bombastic.

Is it not rather melodramatic to say that "the world looks up to Europe" ?

Moreover, Europe as a continent is a great deal more than just the fifteen EU Member States.

It is not rather ambitious to ensure peace, democracy and human rights in the whole of Europe, no less?

I am particularly intrigued by how the Commission considers bringing this about.

Does "the European integration model as a rich source for global administration" imply the export of a large-scale perspective and concentration of power?

According to the Commission, external policy can succeed, provided everyone knows exactly who is in charge!

The Commission as a whole, its President perhaps, the Council?

You stated that the new European government requires strong institutions, while the Commission wants to focus at the same time on its core tasks.

We could not agree more with the latter.

It is high time that institutions restricted their scope to actual cross-border issues and stopped decking out the European cart with powers which they are taking away from national authorities.

The document mentions common values on different occasions.

Unfortunately, I find the reference to the relevant standards to be lacking.

This raises the question as to what these standards and values are based on.

I am convinced that the Bible, God' s word, is the only pure source of proper standards and real values.

In the tradition of our continent, this realisation is an important one which merits recognition.

Madam President, I would like to congratulate Mr Prodi and the Commission on their government policy statement.

I very much agree with the gist of the document.

I also share the view of Mr Prodi and the Commission that in a number of areas, there is a need for more Europe and more integration, and rightly so.

Areas such as security, the World Trade Conference, food safety, but also the new economy, require more action, therefore, from the European Commission.

It will be a challenge to find a way of bringing the Member States, the Council, the European Parliament, the national parliaments, the Commission and all kinds of other agents into line.

The European Commission will need to play an important director' s role in this, provided that clear and attainable objectives are in place.

Clear priorities, focus, and, above all, communication with society to inform them of what we are up to, are the key goals.

That requires from the Commission, with a view to subsidiarity, concrete plans which we would like to see implemented in the forthcoming programmes.

There is, in itself, nothing wrong with emphasising the core functions, and I applaud the fact that the Commission would like to assume a better, more prominent role in order to develop policy ideas and political initiatives.

But what also matters is the actual implementation of the Commission' s ideas.

Take the Telecom sector, for example. Although we have drafted a large number of directives, at the end of the day, we still have 15 different markets and the 15 Member States still implement the directives differently.

And where implementation is concerned, the Commission needs to ensure that our political wishes are also implemented in practice.

Looking at foreign policy, Madam President, I very much like the ambition that the European Union should have as much political as economic say at world level.

But then I wonder: if there is talk of a real common policy, of a system of crisis prevention and crisis control at Community level, where are the actual proposals then?

Indeed, at the end of the day, we need these in order to verify whether we can realise our objectives in this area.

Mr Prodi was right in devoting a lot of attention to Africa in his speech, but I have to say that I am nonetheless disappointed when I study the work programme for 2000.

I cannot find any reference to Africa in the introduction, nor in the programme itself, and I do hope, therefore, that Mr Prodi will produce a proper file by way of preparation of the Summit in Africa.

Madam President, words are essential, but we can only judge the Commission on its merits.

Madam President, Mr President of the Commission, ladies and gentlemen, I am not sure which to go by: the strategic objectives for 2000 to 2005 or your speech for 2000 to 2010?

Have you already included your second term of office?

But seriously. As it enlarges, the Union needs to be strengthened through streamlining and demarcation.

What you say in your programme about concentrating on the core functions of the Commission is only the beginning.

The activities of the entire Union must be reduced to core areas of policy.

In other words, a social, ecologically-orientated market, a secure currency, guaranteed civil rights internally and representation of common interests externally.

It is not just that we need to speak out in the world with one voice; it is what we want to say with this voice that it is important.

Secondly, the new "in" word is flexibility.

However, increasing flexibility can or quickly threatens to turn into intergovernmentalisation.

We must hold fast to joint decision-making institutions which embrace the Member States.

That also applies to the inclusion of the civil society, which is a welcome step.

Our citizens do not need any new institutions and certainly no new mixing of powers.

Transparency does not mean more access to more paper; to our citizens, transparency means greater clarity at long last as to who takes decisions in Brussels and Strasbourg, when and with what right.

Thirdly, the European Union cannot and should not enlarge endlessly.

Its borders are set not by how may countries want to join, but by how many countries it can accommodate.

If the price of enlargement is the watering-down or even the break-up of the present Union, then it must not be paid.

It is too high a price, not only for the Member States already in the Union but also for the states which want to join the Union.

There is no future for a Union which is merely a geo-strategic concept or for a Union which is merely a free trade zone.

But the Union will only continue to be more than a market and to be accredited by the people of Europe if it sees itself as a community of destinies.

That goes far beyond your new economic and social agenda or a new, better quality of life.

Not only the Commission, not only the European Parliament but also the people and the states in our European Union will have to find new answers to the question of how and why we want to live and work together.

In doing so, we need, no less, to reinvent the European Union, but without destroying the present Union.

Madam President, in the opinion of the Group of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party, the most important task of the Commission and the whole Union in the coming years is the successful realisation of enlargement.

The Commission must carry on negotiations that are a decisive attempt to have each applicant country join the Union as soon as possible.

On the other hand, we have to see to it that none of the achievements or aims of integration that have been stated thus far are watered down.

To avoid this the European Liberal Democrats have expressed the hope that the Intergovernmental Conference will consider the various models of differentiated integration and create a concentric Union, in which there is a federal core and a less integrated outer ring.

It is clear that the subject of the internal differentiation of the Union will be raised at the IGC.

The subject needs to be discussed without prejudice.

A technical improvement in the flexibility system will not be enough: we also have to raise the issue of developing our institutions for the countries in the vanguard as proposed by Jacques Delors, for example.

In this way, a decision-making system can be created that is more effective, clearer, more open and more democratic.

I hope that the Commission will make its own proposal concerning how the expanding Union might implement its institutional and other differentiation.

Madam President, Mr President of the Commission, Commissioners, your inspiring speech, Mr Prodi, has quite won me over.

It raises expectations, but it can also lead to disappointment.

This is connected to what Mr Van Velzen was just saying, about the difference between words and deeds.

The enlargement of the Union is inspired by our wish for peace, security and stability.

You are looking to reassure the acceding countries, as well as European opinion.

But these days, we are witnessing the exact reverse before our very eyes.

We have noted increasing levels of apprehension and disquiet, even within regions where unemployment is quite low and prosperity very high.

We need to make our citizens feel at home, according to Mr Swoboda, and I agree.

This is a place where we share the same values and where each and one of us also have our own task and responsibility.

This is probably linked to the standards mentioned by Mr Van Dam, namely subsidiarity.

It is necessary to have a clear division of responsibility among all levels of authority and to be partners, rather than competitors when it comes to policy.

It is also necessary to exercise authority as closely as possible to the citizens, where it can be exercised with due transparency and can be monitored by the citizens themselves.

That will require a new political culture, not only in words, but also in practice, which will take into consideration the reality of Member States and regions.

Regions which, culturally and economically, sometimes match the interest of some Member States.

The new Europe should not only expand horizontally, but also vertically, by living by our values in practice and by developing a democratic structure of a real community.

This is what the Commission will be judged on.

Madam President, the Commission is today presenting its strategic objectives for 2000-2005. These are contained in an extremely general document in which all the problems have been glossed over to prevent any conflict.

So, in the first part on the new forms of European governance, the words 'federalism' and 'superstate' are not mentioned at all.

Yet these are the main themes in any discussion of strong European institutions in which only day-to-day tasks of execution are decentralised and a collective vision is promoted within an indistinct whole. In this scenario the governments and national parliaments are merged with the regional and even local authorities and with the civil society, all of which are described, with no form of hierarchy, as 'integral elements of European governance' .

These ambiguities mask many misunderstandings, primarily about our values.

It is not enough to claim to adhere to democracy in order to be a democrat.

It must clearly be accepted that the people should be free to make their decisions at the level which best combines the objective conditions of an immediate, fair and transparent democratic debate, namely at national level in the main.

Yet the whole of the Commission communication is based on the opposite theory. In this theory, on the pretext of ensuring the best protection for peoples, their margin of independent choice should be increasingly limited by new regulations, new policies or new, restrictive legal structures such as the draft Charter of Fundamental Rights.

This Charter is really misnamed because it will actually reduce these rights.

In the Union for a Europe of Nations Group our principles are rather different.

Clearly we want to defend the countries of Europe but we also want to respect the autonomy of nations.

We must move away from the outmoded federalist schemes promoted by those whose every idea on European matters comes from the Memoires of Jean Monnet.

Instead, we must open the European institutions to the modern world by creating a flexible dynamic which respects nations.

This is the keynote idea on the new governance which we would have liked to have seen in your communication, Mr Prodi, but which is unfortunately not there.

Madam President, Mr Prodi, you claim to be shaping a new Europe yet you are lacking one basic element: confidence.

The confidence of millions of Europeans cannot be won without being worthy of this.

And how could you be worthy of this after the mad cow scandal and the resignation of the Santer Commission for corruption?

You are responsible for millions of unemployed and for millions living in poverty, insecurity and increasing misery because of your ultra-trade-oriented and ultra-liberal policies and because of the forced march towards the single currency.

You wanted and have obtained the abolition of internal borders. Consequently, you have opened Europe up to an explosion in crime and insecurity and to a flood of uncontrolled immigration.

You are now proposing to give all decision-making power to a handful of officials. The Member States, local authorities and NGOs will simply become enforcers of decisions handed down from above, all on an equal footing in their submission to Brussels.

Not once does your twelve-page document mention the national parliaments even though they comprise the elected representatives of the people.

Clearly, they have no role to play in your strategy.

You dare not even call a spade a spade, but instead hide behind pseudo-trendy language by using the term 'governance' for what is nothing more than federal, autocratic, centralised government.

Having tried for many years to persuade us by talking of shared sovereignty, you are now revealing your ultimate goal. You intend to trade in all European sovereignty, whether national or collective, for a world government in which you do not even expect to obtain a dominant position.

Finally, you are daring to condemn and penalise the free and democratic vote of millions of Austrians, or are allowing this to happen, just because the result does not suit you.

Yet at the same time you are supporting Communist China and trading with countries which have openly violated human rights for decades.

Members of this House are today speaking out against a telegram from Mr Prodi to Chancellor Schüssel which, quite obviously, is not a demonstration of sympathy but rather a political manoeuvre.

Your sabre-rattling fools no one because, as you know perfectly well, whether you like it or not, you need Austria in order to reform the Treaties and harmonise savings tax.

You will cynically and hypocritically use Austria as a convenient threat to further strip the Member States of any real powers in the construction of the European Union.

Your Commissioners are clearly not solely responsible for this.

The governments which, through spinelessness or ideology, support you are also responsible.

Brussels is not all of us, as you claim. It is all of you.

Tell the truth for once. You could not care less what the people of Europe want.

They are free to choose only between your brave new world and denouncement.

It is over ten years since the collapse of the Soviet Union and yet your projects contain a strong hint of the gulags and mollifying moralism.

We were among the small number who denounced the communist dictatorship.

We are and will remain among those fighting against Europeanist dictatorship. We call on all the people of Europe to resist your monstrous projects.

The salvation of European democracies is with nation states. Europe' s salvation lies in the cooperation of the nations of Europe.

President Prodi, today you have presented the Commission' s five-year programme, and it has many objectives that we endorse. It is a programme based on real-life situations and issues, and it is therefore right to put concrete measures aside for the moment and focus on the major issues.

In my view, Mr Prodi, judging from the text and the document that you had sent to us, one subject that is very important to both of us has been given secondary importance, and that is solidarity, not so much at international level as at internal level.

The Archbishop of Milan, Monsignor Carlo Maria Martini, is calling upon all politicians, in particular those like you and me, President Prodi, for whom the cultural and historic principle behind their presence in politics is the principle of the active involvement of Catholics in politics, to reconsider a development process, which, in addition to economic profit, takes the marginalised and those left behind by society very much into account.

It is of the utmost importance to address the issue of those who cannot keep up, one which reminds us of how difficult and complicated it is to establish progress indicators and how inadequate it is to use the parameter of per capita income alone.

It also reminds us of the need for a new growth model, one that is firmly rooted in the culture of the Catholics who are involved in social problems, who see, in the civil community and the social interaction that that must be encouraged and facilitated among the public, the most natural instruments for building solidarity.

The fundamental element for the development of each person - his freedom, which comes before economic gain - is thus enhanced.

This social freedom, which becomes manifest in initiatives favouring the poor, gives excellent results in terms of social justice and stability.

Mr President, public institutions must not accept only the economic criterion.

They must focus on service to people and commitment to achieving freedom for each individual, without forgetting, naturally, that all this cannot and must not conflict with the need to create business, to invest and risk, and in an ordered and focused system, entrepreneurs are able to make a substantial contribution to social growth solidarity.

In the age of globalisation, which we do want to facilitate with a framework of specific rules that will provide guarantees to the economic operators and consumers, the European Commission cannot forget solidarity, and must call for its implementation through the use of all of man' s spiritual resources in his relations with his fellow man.

Our heritage has taught us that politics must have a heart.

We hope that the White Paper and the actions of you and your Commission will put this into practice.

Madam President, Mr President of the Commission, 'Shaping the new Europe' is an ambitious objective both for the Commission and for us all.

Our ambitions and our work will be followed not only by people in our own countries, but also by many people outside Europe and the European Union.

What sort of impression will an interested public, as well as the rest of the world, have of this five-year programme?

My reply would be: a new start, a clear agenda for reform which confirms that the Union in the 2000s will not stop at being an economic community but will become a community that can be trusted and that we take seriously.

The Commission is correct in stating that the Union intends to develop and safeguard the welfare state in an age of globalisation.

It foresees a just and more effective Europe that also recognises its responsibilities beyond its own borders out of solidarity and enlightened self-interest.

Consequently, we see poverty and exclusion as the greatest enemies of peace and freedom.

I concur with what other members of my political group have said and I commend the tone of your document. However, there are two omissions which need to be addressed in our future work.

The first concerns women, gender and women's rights.

You talked about how women can help in increasing production and growth.

That is important, but equality is not only necessary for productivity, but also to make our societies more democratic.

It is therefore noticeable that 'equality', 'gender' and 'women' are barely mentioned in 'Shaping the New Europe'.

You mentioned 'women' in your speech, but they are not referred to in the context of the strategic goals.

Is that because mainstreaming is already so widespread in the Commission that there is no need to mention women?

What other explanation could there be for omitting women?

The EU must not take on a masculine persona.

My other question concerns Africa, which is the only continent not mentioned in 'Shaping the New Europe'.

Africa has the largest number of refugees in the world, the most overall poverty and a debilitating AIDS epidemic.

I know that Commissioner Nielson and some of the other Commissioners are doing a fine job, but the rest of the Commission also needs to focus more clearly on that continent, partly by including it among its strategic goals.

Finally, I welcome the Commission's statement and the fact that this says for the first time that the EU is prepared unilaterally to introduce measures to make it easier for developing countries to gain access to our markets.

I would merely ask when this is likely to take effect.

Madam President, President of the Commission, this is a vital document for the future and fate of Europe.

However, out of all the points, two specifically require our attention, and they are closely linked: peace and stability within Europe and outside Europe.

It is a question of objectives that must be pursued as a priority.

For some time, we have all agreed on this notion, but we must also clearly affirm that these objectives will not be achieved without enlargement, even if this comes at a price.

Today, we have been called on to choose, for the forthcoming decades, between a Europe that might be less prosperous but a beacon of peace and civilisation for the whole planet and a Europe that might be more wealthy, but where there is uncertainty over what the future might bring.

These goals will be more easily obtainable only if the Intergovernmental Conference, which will draw to a close within the year, results in constitutional reform, providing the Commission with real and adequate powers so that it will no longer merely implement Council decisions or Parliament' s codecisions but will have to perform the role of a real European government.

The first supporter of this reform should be Parliament itself, if it really wants to increase its role of interpreting the will of the Europeans and acquire the centrality which is part of a genuinely democratic and firmly integrated Union.

Moreover, it will only be possible to give the Commission responsibility for the tasks it takes on according to the actual powers it will be accorded.

Without these prospects that we have outlined, Europe would, once again, have no future.

Madam President, Mr Prodi, we are pleased about the overall intention of the objectives announced which are in line with the challenges which Europe must overcome.

I note that you consider the fall of the Berlin wall to be the crucial factor of the end of the century.

Rather than using the word 'enlargement' , I want to talk of reunification which has much greater political significance.

Your idea is to concentrate your activities on the core tasks. This is one of the goals of your reform.

In essence this means applying the principle of subsidiarity.

Precise application of this principle can only reinforce the actions taken and give our citizens a clear view of each level of competence.

However, saying is one thing and doing is another!

You must therefore fight against the tendency of all institutions to try and increase their powers.

I will therefore judge you on your deeds.

In the meantime, I approve and encourage this clearly expressed desire in your communication.

However, I must make two essential points. These concern the simplification and application of Community law.

In 1998, 123 referrals were made to the Court of Justice for non-application or non-transposition and 25% of environmental directives were not applied or transposed.

Recent events have shown us that these regulations are essential.

Community law must not go unapplied because it is too complex or too pedantic.

The Union must not make this mistake and I therefore regret the fact that your communication does not go into more detail on this.

You are being realistic when you say that the welfare state can no longer provide adequate responses to the problems facing us, including unemployment.

Nevertheless, I regret that a clear alternative has not been proposed.

The emphasis should have been placed on the rejection of any policy of handouts and instead on the development of initiative and responsibility.

You have not highlighted the ageing of our population which will fundamentally alter the structure of our society, not only economically but also in terms of public health.

This is a silent revolution and in this respect I expected more from your communication.

Finally, you do highlight European research as being at the heart of our future.

Yet you do not indicate the resources you intend to implement to achieve this.

Also, ethical principles are at the heart of this research but your communication says nothing about these.

If you want to better inform the people, you should start by strengthening liaison with this House, as we are the representatives of the citizens.

Madam President, we can only endorse the general guidelines of the five-year programme and of the programme for 2000, set out with so much enthusiasm by President Prodi this morning.

In the two documents, strong emphasis is placed on the need to define new forms of European governance and, to this end, to introduce a new agenda for the Commission, establishing more stringent priorities in the pursuit of the goal of full employment, through more efficient coordination of the economic and social policies of the States, and, primarily - allow me to stress this - of the nations that have joined the monetary union and which must be enabled to become the first example of closer cooperation.

To this end, I shall confine myself to stressing, out of all the choices available, the importance of three priority decisions which should, in the drawing-up of action programmes for the government of the Union, be the basis for both the Commission' s agenda and the actions of the European Union in the coming months.

Firstly, the promotion of and participation in the drafting of joint plans for the creation of an integrated services network in the transport and energy sectors, with the backing of the European Investment Bank.

Secondly, the approval of investments - where the parameters are binding when drawing up action programmes on employment - to be made in individual countries via Community projects in the priority sectors of research, innovation and training.

I feel that these parameters - particularly those of a qualitative nature, resulting from investments in continuous training, refresher courses, adaptability and retraining of older workers - are considerably more significant and binding owing to their lasting effects over the medium term than the simple drawing up of annual quantitative objectives, that are always debatable, regarding new employment or employment cuts.

If, among other things, as the programme of the Portuguese Presidency stresses as well, the Commission could promote a new phase of social dialogue, focusing on an agreed strategy of socialisation and diffusion of knowledge, in other words, a strategy for employability and the definition of its rules, this would allow us to take a step towards having employees participate in the informed and consensual management of the restructuring and reemployment processes.

Thirdly, I do not think that the decrease in the number of the working population, owing to the ageing of the population, is unavoidable and inevitable for the European Union. This is not just because of the existence of margins which would permit an increase in the number of working women and immigration, but because we need to be determined in reversing the widespread trend of early retirements from the job market, and direct the coordinated reform of social welfare systems, certainly not towards large reductions in future pension payments but towards the active use of people' s increased life expectancy and towards a longer working life.

Madam President, Mr President of the Commission, you have come here today, Mr Prodi, in a very reformist and ambitious mood.

I welcome you and your ambition.

Ambition will be needed, given the mammoth task which awaits us.

In order to make these reforms, however, and in order to make progress with the 2001 legislative programme, we must be very sure, not only of the strengths of the reformer himself, but also of the opinions of others.

You say that you will not hesitate to come to this House to request more resources for the Commission, but the Commission must be aware that we are walking on thin financial ice.

We have 1.27% of the Community' s GDP.

Not a euro more or a euro less.

It will not be us who refuse these new resources. You should ask the Council.

These financial perspectives are adjusted to within a millimetre.

In order to finance the stability plan for the Balkans, we will have to negotiate a significant revision of Category 4, and you must remember the enormous difficulties we have had in approving the 2000 budget.

I would remind you that this Group, the PPE-DE, does not like to finance new political initiatives at the expense of existing ones.

The political priorities must be set by this House and the MEPs.

Do not believe for one moment that your proposed reform of the budget will disguise the limitations of the Community financial system.

It is all very well for us, by mutual consensus, to make an effort in terms of budgetary rationalisation, but you must be very aware that the lack of resources, the absence of financial autonomy and the poor execution of the budget, continue to be urgent issues which must be resolved.

We therefore wonder whether the Commission has the political will to resolve them.

Madam President, the Commission communication is well written but sufficiently vague to allow any interpretation whatsoever.

On one hand, there are the words and, on the other, their real political meaning.

We Socialists applaud the Commission for wanting to fight against social exclusion and poverty.

Yet how can the gulf between political rhetoric and reality be filled?

What is meant by the Commission' s declared objective of 'economic reform' in the labour market?

Does this mean more flexibility, insecurity and fixed-term contracts?

Everyone knows that quality of life and full and better employment depend on sustainable economic growth.

The Union is currently restricted to a policy of stability which is certainly necessary but insufficient.

We Socialists desperately want a European pact for growth and employment.

The ingredients of this policy are well known. They are the stimulation of public and private investment, increased investment in research, education and training and the promotion of the spirit of enterprise.

In this respect, the e-Europe initiative is to be welcomed.

In the world of new technologies, the main danger remains that access to information will be easier the richer you are.

The gulfs which are opening up everywhere are the main problem for our era.

On one hand we have the exuberance of the financial markets and the explosion of wealth and, on the other, more widespread exclusion.

We are asking workers to be flexible, innovative and ever more productive, yet the fruits of this productivity increasingly benefit the shareholders alone.

The European Central Bank is keeping very quiet about the staggering rates of return on financial assets, yet it never misses an opportunity to remind us that any wage increase should remain below the rate of increase in productivity.

How do we explain to workers who fall victim to the rationalisations of the worldwide Monopoly game that they must be prepared to change career several times in their working lives when the captains of industry, having lost the gamble of a take-over, leave with compensation of EUR 30 million?

For years we have been told over and over that the economy must be liberalised.

The sectors which have been liberalised are experiencing an avalanche of mergers and acquisitions, leading inevitably to monopoly situations.

All these stock market battles are based solely on forecast increases in profit of 15%, 20% or 25% which are unrealistic in the long term.

The unfettered rise in prices of financial assets and property means that the risks are on the increase.

The main danger awaiting us in the medium term is not inflation but deflation caused by the collapse of the speculative bubbles on the international financial markets.

To conclude, the next five years will be crucial.

We need new rules to regulate globalisation and we need investment in the real economy and in people. We need the Member States and the Commission to ensure the social dimension of the market economy in a visible manner.

Madam President, Mr President of the Commission, Commissioners, in my view, this strategy paper has two clear weaknesses.

There is no point in drawing up a new economic and social agenda if you have not even finished the old one.

I am thinking of transport policy and regional policy.

You have excellent Commissioners for both issues in Mrs Palacio and Mr Barnier, yet still you attach too little importance to these areas.

Just look at transport policy; clearly it is crucial for this policy to be drawn up as a economically and ecologically sensible policy before the accession of other countries.

I would be grateful if the President of the Commission would listen to what I have to say, although of course he has no obligation to do so.

Let me give you three examples.

First: we need reasonable deregulation of the railway sector because we want to shift freight from the roads to the railways.

That makes sense from an economic and an ecological point of view.

Without deregulation we will not make any headway with a reasonable transport policy.

The same applies to European air traffic control.

Our citizens cannot understand that we are deregulating air traffic, but leaving 15 different sectors in the skies which are under national control, which have an adverse economic impact on the airlines and which pollute the environment.

You still have not finished that agenda.

Commissioner, far too little is said in your paper about regional policy.

Economic and social cohesion in the EU is a fundamental task of this Community.

If we fail to complete it, citizens in less favoured regions will dread enlargement.

We must show them that we intend to use the next five years to help them join the rich regions by promoting the less favoured regions using reasonable means.

Then they too will be prepared to really support enlargement and help to achieve it.

Mr President of the Commission, if we do not manage to create true solidarity between the rich and the poor regions, then this Union will be all the poorer and it will not meet with the approval of the people.

Madam President, Mr President of the Commission, Commissioners, the fact that we are formulating new programmes does not mean that we should neglect those older programmes which are at implementation stage.

From that standpoint, it is useful that the Commission' s work programme comes back to the issues of Agenda 2000, the common agricultural policy, which includes fishing, and secondly, the activities of the structural funds.

I hope this reference means that the reorganisation of the Commission currently in progress will not damage the mechanism for monitoring and implementing Agenda 2000.

The Agenda 2000 issues are, of course, ones that relate to your third and fourth strategic objectives, the economic and social Agenda and a better quality of life.

What your texts do not make apparent is the extent to which these major, high-minded objectives are compatible with the resources that the Commission intends to deploy.

I do not necessarily mean financial resources.

The implementation of Agenda 2000 in the agricultural sector does not ultimately require more money. There must also be savings.

But what we need is the analytical resources: these issues require the investment of more intellectual capital.

This is because it is essential to achieve two things: the European model of multifunctionality in agriculture must be secured, and this must be done in a way which facilitates the liberalisation of world trade in agricultural products, mainly to the benefit of developing countries.

It is not easy to combine those aims.

There may well be contradictions between the two objectives and there is nothing to show that the Commission has pointed out those contradictions and how it proposes to deal with them.

As regards the other aspect of Agenda, the aspect of cohesion and regional development, there we do indeed have great achievements to point to, but there are still less developed regions, particularly island regions, to which more attention should be paid.

As for fishing, there is nothing in your programme to tell us that the predatory exploitation of fishing grounds, which has gone as far as to wipe out entire species of fish, will certainly prove fruitful in the future.

Perhaps these issues should be approached with greater attention and a greater esprit de finesse.

Madam President, I want to start by reinforcing the caution that has been expressed by many colleagues here in addressing this five-year plan.

In setting very ambitious long-term goals we must not take our eyes away from the present.

That was a point made very forcibly by the leader of my group, Mr Poettering, in his opening address.

The Union must not take on a whole range of new tasks without the basic foundation for a successful European economy being in place.

That foundation is clearly the single market.

How strongly is the single market established at the moment?

I want to remind Mr Prodi, and his colleagues who are still here, of the findings of the Commission' s own survey among 3000 European businesses.

Nearly 40% of businesses in this survey are still reporting additional costs to render products or services compatible with national specifications.

This is the Commission' s own survey.

These are the classic symptoms of continued obstruction by national governments - bureaucratic red-tape blocking market entry.

The Commission' s programme shows a disturbing complacency about the completion of the internal market.

We have to keep the pressure up in all areas by removing further barriers, intensifying pressure on Member States who fail to implement single market measures and, of course, extending into crucial new areas like financial services.

Only on the strong foundation of the single market will the agenda of enlargement be successfully achieved.

An enlarged Europe must build on the existing strengths of the Union.

The single market extending across that enlarged Union is going to be a colossal achievement.

I conclude by saying, on behalf of all my Conservative colleagues - and we are the second largest national delegation in this Parliament - that we pledge our full support to the Commission and to Mr Prodi in achieving this historic task.

Madam President, Mr Prodi, ladies and gentlemen, at the time of our vote on your appointment we invited you to come here today.

The serious business is therefore now going to start as we are to vote on your programme.

From your speech I will concentrate on what you have called the new governance, which you will use as a tool for reconciliation with our fellow citizens.

Yet this new governance simply means how the institutions and our public authorities operate, if we agree that the European Union must be a public authority.

The interlinking of the EU institutions, the responsibilities of the Member States and the local and regional authorities is all very well.

Yet is this really how we will reconcile the people and European construction?

Is this really how we will answer the fundamental questions which are not so much about 'who does what' but more 'what are we doing together' ? It is these questions which cause concern among our fellow citizens.

In your speech you mentioned the challenges of globalisation and enlargement which await us. I would add to these the future of our social model.

This is why I and my group are so firmly insisting on the Charter of Fundamental Rights.

The reason our timetable includes the drafting of this Charter is because we are at a key point in our history. Our Union needs to redefine the values on which it is based, both within its current borders and also with a view to the imminent enlargements which we earnestly desire, but not under just any conditions.

Our people expect more Europe, but not just any Europe.

They are expecting us not to fall in with globalisation but rather, on the basis of our social model, to be able to organise globalisation.

In this respect I must say that, in terms of your commitment to a political union, to which we are favourable, this cannot be achieved unless it is based on our social model, on our originality and our capacity to better regulate the business of this world.

Madam President, Mr President of the Commission, Commissioners, I should like to start with a quote: "The Commission will continue to work towards establishing a European Charter of Fundamental Rights and draw up proposals to bring about an ambitious programme.

The Commission is planning in particular to develop a genuine European policy on asylum and immigration.

It wishes to boost judicial assistance and cooperation and to develop an effective approach to the fight against all forms of crime" .

That is the entire programme for the next five years on the question of internal security, freedom, citizens' rights and judicial cooperation.

A paper this short is a farce.

A farce because we know and appreciate the work of Commissioner Vitorino and what we have here on paper is a blatant contradiction to how things actually stand.

A paper such as this is no basis for a scoreboard.

It has been extolled and celebrated as a huge achievement and I am all for it; we need a basis for a scoreboard.

We here in Parliament want to hold a serious discussion about the future development in this policy area on the basis of a programme.

What we are looking for are minimum standards in asylum procedures so that refugees can be given help quickly, and those who are not fleeing know where they stand.

We want instruments to prevent abuse.

We want to develop a Community immigration policy which takes account of the Member States' capacity to absorb immigrants and we need to extend the operational powers of EUROPOL, for example, so that specific steps can be taken to combat organised crime.

We debate these issues intensively and seriously and we should be entitled to expect likewise from the Commission, even where it is merely submitting a paper.

Madam President, Mr President of the Commission, Commissioners, I rise to speak on the subject of the World Trade Organisation, on which there is a broad convergence of views between the Commission documents and the positions of the Socialist Group. This is not the case in other areas, as has already been pointed out.

We share these views because we are in favour of world trade, but we want this trade to be conducted according to common standards, common rules which would regulate world trade with one aim in mind. This aim is that trade should benefit development, and particularly harmonious development in which the values of citizenship do not only apply to the world' s most dynamic and competitive regions.

On the other hand, what does this statement tell us about principles?

This regulation and these standards have brought an increased volume of trade for the World Trade Organisation, in other words, increased wealth, but when we look at how this wealth is distributed, we see, unfortunately, that the gulf between the world' s richest countries and blocks and the poorest and least developed countries continues to increase.

It is therefore quite legitimate and even imperative that we ask ourselves, what purpose do the current common standards and rules serve?

What good are the current way in which we negotiate and the way in which the World Trade Organisation works, if they cause trade to increase on the one hand, but on the other, they create problems and above all cause this gulf between rich and poor countries to grow?

That is why we said that we were in favour of the strategy that the Commission outlined here for the Seattle negotiations and for later ones. We are certainly in favour of this strategic vision but we need to be brave and ambitious.

We need to be demanding and ensure that social rights, environmental rights and consumer protection are incorporated into the forthcoming negotiations. Most importantly though, we must have a brave and ambitious long-term vision for reform, not just of the WTO but also of the ILO, the United Nations and above all, of the financial institutions, specifically the IMF and the World Bank.

We must be brave and not only see some aspects of globalisation. We must be brave enough to have more of an overview of this process, so that wealth does not only benefit the most highly-developed blocks and countries, but that there is also harmonious change and development in every region in the world.

Madam President, I would also like to welcome the Commission' s initiative of presenting us with a report on its strategic objectives for the next five years, although I hope that it intends, in subsequent documents, to avoid the excess of generalisations and the vagueness of the text which we are examining today.

Having said this, Madam President, I am prepared, once again, to be a voice crying in the wilderness as a result of the absence of a fishing policy.

It is really surprising that the Commission does not treat the revision of one of its common policies as a strategic objective for the coming years, in view of the reform which must take place in 2002.

There is no doubt whatsoever that this revision process will be the most important thing to affect the fishing industry for many years.

However, it seems that the Commission does not share this view, although it is the Commission which is obliged to present the Council and Parliament with a report on the functioning of the common fisheries policy over the last decade before the end of 2001, and it is on this basis that the Council will have to make the appropriate decisions with regard to its modification.

In fact, the revision process has already begun for many bodies and institutions, such as the European Parliament, which in 1998 already issued and adopted a report pointing out all the current problems and deficiencies of the common fisheries policy.

We have often asked for a basic timetable for this revision and we have received no reply.

Less than two years is not much time if we bear in mind also that the fishing policy is anomalous with regard to the internal market regulations and that such anomalies should be resolved within the framework of this reform process.

Therefore, Madam President, Mr President of the Commission, I would ask that this issue, which is of vital importance to a very significant industry within the European Union, be taken into account in this strategy and these strategic objectives for the next five years.

Madam President, I should like to add my congratulations to Commissioner Prodi's programme.

I particularly welcome his recognition of this virtuous circle of having sustained growth: the information society in an expanding European market with the addition of a fully functioning single currency which will give us the opportunity to genuinely promote prosperity, innovation enterprise, the entrepreneurial spirit and yes - most importantly of all - extra-high value sustainable jobs for our European citizens.

I have one observation, not a criticism, to make regarding Commissioner Prodi's statement this morning and that is that it was a little weak on the actual content of economic policy.

We must not take anything for granted in terms of how we get the European economy restructured.

After all, what is social justice if it is without full employment?

Full employment is the best way to generate social justice for our citizens.

This is a key priority for us to focus on.

I should like to welcome one or two initiatives that have already come from the Commission which will help us: in particular Commissioner Liikanen's commitment to having an innovative knowledge-driven economy.

Yes, e-Europe will be the future for us because it will help us create new prosperity and new jobs.

I welcome the Commission initiatives now and in the past to support our small and medium-sized enterprises and I would like to congratulate our Portuguese Presidency for its initiative on having a charter for micro-businesses.

That is important and something that can be developed through the Lisbon Summit.

I also welcome Commissioner Busquin's idea to have a common research area for the whole of the European Union.

Again, this is a way that we can help create better opportunities for jobs and for prosperity.

You said in your summary, Commissioner Prodi, that liberalisation, competitiveness, keeping inflation low, innovation, science and technology are central for the future success of the European economy and creating jobs.

I very much agree with you on that, but we can take nothing for granted.

There is still more we have to do, and the Lisbon Summit will become part of that.

So with those remarks I would like to congratulate you on the programme and wish it every success.

Madam President, Mr President of the Commission, I should like to focus on two points which are not mentioned in your programme.

To me, this Commission strategy paper for the next five years reads like a scientific paper on the European Union or a declaration of principle. Unfortunately, it does not give the impression of being a real political strategy on the part of the Commission.

As the spokesperson for cultural and training policy for my group, I would have expected more in the way of agenda from an Italian President of the Commission.

The Commission gives no soul to Europe.

Culture and training simply do not exist in this paper, despite the fact that we need to create a real area of training and culture in Europe.

I am talking about the integration of the policies of the culture industry in this area of training and culture; they create jobs.

I am talking about the introduction of cultural mainstreaming in all policy areas, about consolidating and improving the European dimension of training and education syllabuses and about networking training and education policies in Europe especially lifelong learning.

Mr President of the Commission, it is the new millennium and you made no mention whatsoever of the audio-visual area of Europe.

Nor was any mention made of information policy and communications catering to the needs of our citizens.

It seems to me that something is missing from this programme.

Truly European citizenship depends on our creating a real, visible area of training and culture.

Declarations of principle are not enough.

We need an agenda which can be translated into political action by the Commission on an ongoing basis in the way in which I have just described.

Madam President, Mr Prodi, how would you take stock of your policy and work programme, what would your benchmark be, if you had to make direct choices?

You have the fine, charming idea that the outcome and the benchmark for your policy and for your five-year programme will be the result of the elections, or rather the turnout at the next European elections.

When I think that I have to explain your work programme week in, week out to my constituents, not in the rarefied atmosphere of this House, but on the street, then I ask myself, what can I say?

Mr Prodi, what can I say; what is there that is new?

There is nothing new in your work programme.

You have taken 12 pages for five years and 18 pages for one year' s work programme.

Does that give me hope for the year 2000?

In your work programme for 2000 you state something quite clever. You say that environmental considerations must be integrated into all other policy areas.

Have you done so, Mr Prodi; have you even read your work programme for the year?

No, you have not done so.

You have not integrated environmental policy into enlargement, despite the fact that it will be one of the fundamental problems of enlargement.

Nor have you integrated it into economic policy, competition or the internal market.

You have not integrated it anywhere.

You have tacked a few components together but you have no overall structure.

You said earlier in your speech that a disaster such as that of the Danube is an example of the need for an emergency structure; no, Mr Prodi, we need, at long last, to start transposing legislation and ensuring that legislation is monitored.

You say in your five-year programme that the people of the European Union rightly expect food standards to be higher and better foodstuffs legislation.

Mr Prodi, you do not know what you are talking about.

The foodstuffs legislation in the European Union is the most ambitious in the world.

Where it falls short, what is missing, is transposition in the Member States and monitoring.

It is time you took your job seriously, it is time for you, as President of the Commission, to box the Member States on the ears and force them to do their work and fulfil their duties.

It is no good spending time on hobbies when there is a day' s work to be done.

That is what we expect of you in the next five years.

(ES) Madam President, Mr President of the Commission, as chairman of this Parliament' s Committee on Fisheries, Mr Prodi, you are not making things easy for me at all.

I feel duty bound to publicly denounce the fact that fishing is absent from the programme which you have presented to us.

The next five years of the Prodi Commission - as you solemnly announce in the first of your conclusions - will mean great change.

I hope that this change will not mean an even greater marginalisation of fishing, since the silence of your programme, with regard to fishing, is deafening.

Not a single line, nor a single word, refers to fishing or the CFP.

I am not asking for details or specific points, but I believe that a mention was required.

How could you completely ignore a common - I repeat; common - policy with such an economic, social and regional impact, and which therefore affects the economic and social cohesion of Europe?

This is all the more serious, if that is possible - as others have said - bearing in mind that your Commission, Mr Prodi, has to carry out nothing less than a revision or reform of the current common fisheries policy, which you are legally required to do in 2002.

Does the Commission intend to do nothing - at least it has announced nothing - about this reform in 2000 either?

What message can we send to the fishermen of Europe, and their families, and the fishing industries, both the extractive and processing and marketing industries, and the related and secondary industries which depend on fishing in so many European ports, in so many European regions, in most cases peripheral regions, who rightly demand that this problem be dealt with as a priority?

You have made an explicit reference to the CAP for the coming years, but you have not done so for the CFP, with regard to the double adaptation of the internal market which is necessary to prevent exceptions - as has already been said - and in a global context, in the context of globalisation.

This House has expressed its opinion on the first issue and it will also do so on the second.

I would therefore ask you, Mr Prodi, to make an explicit reference to this problem in your reply today.

Our parliamentary Group will table an amendment in this respect and we expect a positive message from you.

Mr President of the Commission, this is indeed an historic moment for Parliament, a five-year programme following the crisis of the Commission.

On behalf of the Socialist Group, I would like to focus on the point of internal reform.

We wholeheartedly support the programme as it is now laid down in a consultative document and which is also included in the programme of Vice-President, Mr Kinnock, on behalf of the Commission.

We consider it to be of utmost importance that, in terms of financial control, personnel management and bureaucratic short-cuts, we can expect swift lines of policy and a more effective bureaucracy, for the benefit of the citizen.

At the same time, we are aware that this is a massive programme and that, during the overhaul in the next couple of years, it will be necessary to keep the actual results coming in, as before.

Much like in the Netherlands, where, at a given point, women woke up to the fact that, by referring to European legislation, they could improve their status in terms of social security, this is now also the case for scores of other citizens.

Democracy, transparency and clarity always lead to results, citizens value results and this is what the Commission is judged on.

This is exactly the point which Mr Swoboda and also other Members made: fear of modernisation, globalisation, and the individual losing his own sense of safety and security.

This can be prevented if a European social model is drawn up and if results are achieved in all these concrete areas.

I would therefore strongly advocate internal reform which delivers fast and concrete results at a social level. This gives the citizen a sense of recognition, here in Europe and elsewhere.

Because this citizen - one in five globally - still has no access to elementary social provisions, such as education and health care.

These are really the people who deserve our solidarity.

Madam President, Mr President of the Commission, I have read and re-read the Commission' s document setting out the strategic objectives for its term in office.

I am delighted that it is being discussed in Parliament, but I also note the compromises and the omissions in it.

The Commission makes only a passing reference to economic and social cohesion, to solidarity between Member States and to the European Union' s regional policy. And this is true even when it addresses the issue of enlargement.

Are reducing the disparities between levels of development and the consequent promotion of real convergence objectives that we have already achieved?

At the same time, it was rightly pointed out that Europe must evaluate its role as a joint partner with developing countries, and strengthen its activities designed for fighting poverty.

This document leaves out issues which clearly should have been included.

I think the fact that the Commission does not address the issue of cohesion is extremely serious.

It plays down one of the Treaties' principles - that of economic and social cohesion - which must inform all of the European institutions' policies and measures. It seems to ignore the fact that various European regions are still considerably less advanced than others.

It also forgets that enlargement means that we must get regional policy right. Unless we achieve real convergence, the cohesion of the European Union itself will be at risk.

We should take into consideration the sixth periodic report on the situation of the regions in the European Union, for which the Commission is responsible.

This report confirms that whereas an average level of development is given a rating of 100, the ten so-called "strongest" regions reached an average of 158, and the ten so-called "weakest" regions reached a figure of around 50.

You may draw your own conclusions.

50 is exactly the level of development of my own region, the Azores, one of the regions defined in the Treaties as ultra-peripheral.

I am waiting for the Commission' s report on the ultra-peripheral regions, which the Council decided should be drawn up by December 1999.

I shall finish by restating my conviction that without economic and social cohesion, there will be no cohesion at all, only disunity.

Madam President, Mr Prodi, Europe needs a strong Commission.

As intended by the Treaties and the will of the people, the Commission is the driving force of European construction which is like a rock of Sisyphus which we have to push back up to the summit again together after each round of enlargement. We therefore need a strong Commission but one which relies on the support of a parliament.

This House is therefore your ally but not one which is too accommodating. You must therefore listen to our opinions, one or two of which I wish to express in my brief speech.

Firstly, Mr President, although your two predecessors concentrated on developing an internal market and establishing the single currency, it has been left to you to develop this whole value of citizenship which is at the heart of European construction.

You must not allow yourself to be distracted by the sole issue of enlargement, however important this may be.

You must go further, towards reconciling the people with Europe, in particular those people who are falling victim to economic, social and, probably, in the future, technological divisions.

The promotion of scientific development and new technologies and access for all to these technologies will not be provided by the market or competition. The latter will also not ensure the social proximity and effectiveness of the main community services of health, education, transport, communications, water and whatever else.

Your action programme and your objectives are reserved, even silent, specifically on the stimulation of public investment which is needed.

This is also the case with the consolidation and financing of the main public and general interest services.

This is an absolute priority if you are to reconcile Europe with the people and ensure that the people choose Europe rather than Jörg Haider.

Madam President, the Commission was correct to make food safety one of its top priorities.

The recent dioxin scare in Belgium, prior to that the BSE crisis in Britain, and the continuing controversy over the safety of genetically-modified foods, have all contributed to undermining consumer confidence in the safety of the food they eat.

If the Commission can indeed restore confidence in the food production chain it will simultaneously restore confidence in the European Union institutions themselves and demonstrate their ability to protect the rights of EU citizens.

I therefore welcome the fact that the issue of food safety, public health and consumer confidence features prominently in the Commission's work programme for 2000.

However, I was disappointed with the nature of the proposal for the establishment of a European food authority in the recent White Paper.

In its present form, what is being proposed is more like an advisory agency to the Commission rather than an independent body that would have decision- and law-making powers more similar to those of the US Food and Drug Administration, which has already established credibility in this particular field.

Furthermore, future legislation must address the modus operandi of the relationship between the European food authority and the authorities of national Member States, for example the food safety authority in Ireland.

This body, for example, alongside the recently established cross-border body in Ireland for food safety, is already doing good work.

It would be a tragedy if their efforts were to be undermined by deficiencies in EU legislation.

My fear is that such deficiencies in EU legislation could lead to turf wars between national and EU bodies, who should be working together rather than against one another.

That is something we must guard against.

Madam President, the presentation by President Prodi today has necessarily been a fairly broad brush affair.

We will be looking for the detail year by year, for example in the social action programme to be unveiled this year.

We will also be looking at this from the perspective of social and employment policy, and will be applying a number of tests.

We will be looking at the extent to which we can create an equilateral policy triangle combining economic policy, employment policy and social policy.

At the moment, social policy is trailing well behind economic and employment policy.

Within the employment strategy we will look for a deepening and broadening of the strategy following the review under the Portuguese presidency and within the framework being proposed by the Portuguese Presidency.

Within the social dimension we will be looking for a deepening of the internal market with a social aspect.

The spate of mergers, takeovers and transfers that we are experiencing with the deepening of the market means that we must act to update the matrix of information and consultation directives that we have adopted in the past; but we must also complement them with the new general framework of information and consultation and an updating of the works council directive.

We also need a code of corporate conduct to make sure that companies in fact work in partnership with their workers in the management of change.

That is the successful way to manage change, and I hope the Commission will act to make sure that is put into place.

Finally, with the emergence, the resurgence, of the xenophobic Right within the European Union I hope that our institutions together will do their utmost to give reality to Article 6 by using Article 13 to combat discrimination, and Article 137 to combat exclusion.

We need to move that agenda forward with great urgency now.

The aspirations are fine, President Prodi, we want those aspirations to be matched by action.

Madam President, I hope that it is a good omen that there are still a few i's left for me to dot.

Mr Prodi, you set great store in your reform efforts on introducing a forward-looking employment policy throughout Europe.

However, for the economic sector which I represent, i.e. fisheries, this means change.

We need to break away from planned economy subsidies in favour of a liberal policy which fosters personal responsibility.

We must reduce protective tariffs in order to safeguard effective capacity utilisation in undertakings in the processing industry.

What it comes down to is the competitiveness of the European economy on the world market and the existence of thousands of jobs in the processing industry and offshore fishing.

However, I am sure that I do not need to remind you of the importance of a branch of the economy which is both an economic and a social factor, which affects not only Germany but all the coastal regions of Europe.

Plus, this branch of the economy is one of the few sectors in which Europe has fully integrated powers to decide and act, which is why we expect to be given a right of codecision here too.

This has since been unanimously approved.

The fisheries policy is due for review in a few months' time, i.e. at the beginning of the year 2000.

So it is somewhat upsetting that there is not so much as a mention of this branch of the economy is this paper.

I hope that this is a misunderstanding.

Please, Mr Prodi, stand by your word and implement your promises.

Madam President, many of the speakers from the Socialist Group have already identified key areas where there are gaps in the Commission' s statement.

However, we have acknowledged that this is an innovative and very welcome initiative by the Commission.

One area that I want to focus on, in addition to those already identified, is that of cultural diversity in Europe.

The introduction to this statement acknowledges under the quality of life section that it is important.

But there is nothing in the statement which indicates that the Commission intends to take any steps to deal with the issue of cultural diversity.

If we are to ensure that we defeat the fear-mongers amongst us - those seeking power on the backs of anxious citizens - then we must seriously address the question of how we can live together and how we can dismantle the negative stereotypes that we have of each other, both within the present European Union and among those who seek to join us and, indeed, among those in other parts of Europe and the world who want to come and live and work in Europe.

Unless we address these issues, unless we dismantle these negative stereotypes, unless we take what is best from our various cultures and languages and protect and expand it and ensure that we are serious about having a diverse Europe, we will fail. Those who are currently coming to the fore in Europe based on fear will win the day.

I am seriously concerned that unless the Commission recognises that this is an important aspect of how we will create a cohesive Europe, we will make progress on the economic front, on the employment front and even on the issue of foreign and security policy, but our citizens will still remain fearful because they will fear the unknown and they will fear those they do not understand.

If we do not take steps to deal with that, we will fail ultimately.

Before giving the floor again to the President of the Commission, I must tell you that I have received, pursuant to Rule 37, seven motions for resolutions to conclude the debate.

I would like to inform you that there is a delegation from Kuwait, led by His Excellency, Sheikh Salem Al-Sabah, Vice-Prime Minister and Defence Minister, here in the official gallery. On behalf of the House, I would like to welcome you to the European Parliament.

Mr President, I should like to raise a point of order in relation to the activities organised today by the Association of Parliamentary Assistants in support of their call for a statute for assistants to be adopted as soon as possible.

I understand that on 26 January the association wrote to the College of Quaestors requesting permission to set up a table outside the Hemicycle today to publicise their initiative.

On the same day, I understand, Mr Balfe gave permission for the assistants to go ahead.

The Parliament services asked to meet with the assistants yesterday to make the necessary physical arrangements. However, the appointment was cancelled at the last minute.

Parliament has not yet indicated why permission was withdrawn.

Mrs Banotti apparently promised to write a letter explaining why permission was withdrawn but so far no letter has been received.

Can you explain why the approval given to the assistants was withdrawn at the last minute?

Do you agree that the assistants have a legitimate case which must be heard?

Will you do everything in your power to ensure that such last-minute cancellations do not happen again?

Will you do everything in your power to ensure that a statute for assistants is adopted as soon as possible?

Finally, will you make sure that in the meantime Parliament's rules are properly implemented and that assistants are paid, as they should be, on the basis of all the work they do for us?

Without them we would not be able to function.

Mr President, I also rise on a point of order.

Are there any rules or regulations that govern demonstrations within the building of this Parliament, outside the doors of the Hemicycle, to ensure that MEPs are free to come into this Hemicycle to discharge their mandate?

If there are such rules, who has the responsibility for enforcing them and what are they doing to discharge that responsibility?

Mr President, I would like to take up the matter of the statute for assistants, which we have always considered to be a priority, and inform you that - as the Italian delegation of the group - in response to the invitation from the group leader, Mr Barón Crespo, we have forwarded the contracts that we drew up with the assistants to the Quaestors.

I think that we need to make a tangible gesture in order to get a solution to this problem underway.

I would therefore like to call on the Presidency of Parliament to consider that it might be appropriate for the Presidency itself to invite the Members to do likewise.

Mr President, first of all let me say that I am in full support of a statute for assistants.

Yesterday when I arrived in Parliament I was handed a document relating to a proposed demonstration by the assistants outside the doors of Parliament.

As all colleagues will know - and many of you have approached me over the last six months - all exhibitions and such like are filtered first of all through the Comart committee of Parliament.

To give a non-contentious example, no commercial exhibitions can be held here in Parliament for obvious reasons.

Following a letter I received yesterday, I immediately informed the assistants that we would propose that they be allowed to hold a meeting or demonstration, probably in the near future and possibly in the next month.

But all exhibitions must be carried out in a way that do not interfere with the orderly running of Parliament.

I signed a letter yesterday afternoon, in the meeting of the Bureau of Parliament, in which the assistants were informed of this.

But I am also told that they were informed verbally of this decision by the Committee of Chairmen of Groups last Thursday, so they were fully aware of the decision.

There is no problem with them telling us the way they feel, there is no problem with a possible meeting during Parliament's next part-session.

But there was some misunderstanding, for they did receive a letter from somebody else that they felt gave them permission.

But all exhibitions are in fact looked at first by the so-called Comart committee.

As you can see we have many exhibitions around Parliament, whether they be about different countries or whatever.

This is not an attempt to either censor or go against the very real and justifiable principle that we should have a statute for assistants.

I think your intervention may clarify various points that were raised.

Mr President, I wanted to point out an important matter of principle.

I personally believe that it is nothing short of scandalous that we hear Members of this Parliament attacking the demonstration rather than looking at the solution to the problem, which is fair conditions, fair pay and fair hours.

We shall now proceed to the vote.1

(Parliament rejected the motion for a resolution)

Motion for a resolution (B5-0119/2000) "Area of freedom, security and justice"

Report (A5-0026/2000) by Mr McCarthy, on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism, on the draft communication from the Commission to the Member States laying down guidelines for a Community Initiative concerning economic and social regeneration of cities and of neighbourhoods in crisis in order to promote sustainable urban development (URBAN) [COM(1999) 477 - C5-0242/1999 - 1999/2177 (COS)]

Report (A5-0028/2000) by Mr Decourrière, on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism, on the draft communication from the Commission to the Member States laying down guidelines for a Community Initiative concerning trans-European cooperation intended to encourage harmonious and balanced development of the European territory (INTERREG) [COM(1999) 479 - C5-0243/1999 - 1999/2178 (COS)]

Report (A5-0024/2000) by Mr Procacci, on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development, on the draft communication from the Commission to the Member States laying down guidelines for the Community initiative for rural development (LEADER+) [COM(1999) 475 - C5-0259/1999 - 1999/2185 (COS)]

EXPLANATIONS OF VOTE - Resolution "Area of freedom, security and justice"

(FR) The resolution which the European Parliament has just adopted on immigration policy, despite the Union for a Europe of Nations Group voting against this, retroactively justifies all the fears which we expressed when the Treaty of Amsterdam was ratified.

This House has been utterly lax on the substance and yet, at the same time, is asking for ever greater decision-making power to the detriment of the national parliaments.

The combination of these two positions makes for a mixture which could be disastrous for the future for Europe.

I counted no less than seven calls in the resolution, at different points, for equal rights for European citizens and legal immigrants.

This has become a real obsession.

As for the fight against illegal immigration, this House is hardly interested.

There is absolutely nothing in the resolution on border controls. Even when the question of Eurodac or readmission clauses is briefly mentioned, it is only to deplore the over-strictness of the Council on these subjects.

Yet the standard call for a fund for refugees, financed from the Community budget, is there.

Finally, the European Parliament calls for a review of immigration policy in view of the population situation.

It is clear what this means.

At the same time, the resolution calls for new codecision powers for the European Parliament on immigration.

You can imagine what would come of this.

As was to be expected, the Commission has just lent its support in the opinion tabled for the Intergovernmental Conference.

Our group believes that it would be dangerous to go down this road. Instead, on these matters, we should stick with the people and national sovereignty.

This is why the procedures of the first pillar on the single market must not be transposed exactly as they are for the areas of security, justice or foreign policy.

For these areas, the Intergovernmental Conference must devise new cooperation procedures based on the political role of the Council and interparliamentary control exercised by the national parliaments.

Mr President, I am speaking on behalf of the Spanish delegation of the European People' s Party, the delegation of the Spanish People' s Party, with regard to Mrs Terrón i Cusí' s resolution on the area of freedom, security and justice.

There have been some votes where we have not followed the guidelines of the Group of the European People' s Party, and we have voted in favour of the Terrón i Cusí resolution, which we consider on the whole to be excellent.

However, we have voted against paragraphs 2 and 6, because they seem to us to be legally incorrect.

On the other hand, we have voted in favour of Recital J which, in fact, is in line with what I, as draftsperson of the opinion of the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms, proposed to that Committee, with a view to the Intergovernmental Conference.

We have also voted in favour of paragraph 13.

An appropriate statute and the right of movement and settlement for residents of non-EU countries is something which the Spanish People' s Party has been advocating for some time.

For similar reasons, we have voted in favour of paragraph 14 which, with the oral amendment, dealt with certain very justifiable concerns about the question of subsidiarity, since political rights, not just voting in local elections, but political rights in general terms, form part of the sovereignty of Member States.

Given the oral amendment, we felt we could vote in favour and that is what we have done.

(DA) The Danish Social Democratic Members of the European Parliament have chosen to vote in favour of the proposed resolution, but are at the same time aware of the fact that certain areas clash with the reservation Denmark has in the legal sphere - a reservation which the Danish delegation in the Group of the Party of European Socialists naturally wishes to respect.

This report which I voted against is less concerned with human rights than with 'communitisation' or the consolidation of Fortress Europe.

The supposed progress achieved in 1999 and mentioned by the report only occurred in the Dublin Conventions and Schengen Agreements and a further action plan from Tampere which all restrict the rights of immigrants. In terms of human rights, this is a backward step.

Europe is continuing to expel nationals arriving from countries regarded as dangerous by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. Yet some applicant countries in central and eastern Europe are taking in gypsy refugees expelled en masse from Belgium.

Kosovo Albanians and Serb deserters are being refused refugee status, whereas Pinochet is calmly escaping prosecution.

The Europe of Schengen clearly finds it much easier to hound the persecuted from the south than dictators, even though the UN estimates that we will need 159 million immigrants to maintain a stable population between now and the year 2025.

Europe should regularise the situation of all its illegal immigrants and grant them right of asylum and the right to vote in all elections. Only then can we talk in this House about an area of freedom and justice.

Mr President, I would firstly like to point out that I was Mayor of Bilbao during the nineties, which gave me the opportunity to present one of the first urban pilot projects to be subsidised by the Commission.

Our experience with that pilot project in Bilbao led us to four conclusions: firstly, that Europe must maintain an urban policy and therefore, far from reducing the EUR 900 million for the last five year period to EUR 700 million for this five year period, the funding of this project should be increased. This should be done, for example - and the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance has proposed this - by reinvesting, in URBAN projects, that portion of the Structural Funds which each Member State has not spent within the time scales laid down for that purpose.

Secondly, when deciding which areas must be subsidised, we must concentrate efforts on integrated projects.

We have to select locations by prioritising those which are most impoverished and needy, in accordance with the objectives set, that is to say, the social, economic, environmental and democratic management dimensions, as well as the relationship between them.

Thirdly, we have to bear in mind the synergies generated by other Community programmes, as well as the opportunities for sustainable development in the location or region in question.

Finally, we have to put our trust in, and support, the institutions which are closest to the citizens, that is, the local councils and bodies.

They have more first-hand knowledge of social needs. They have more involvement in the problems and, furthermore, they know how to conceive projects and implement them effectively without weighing them down with bureaucracy, and thereby achieve better results.

Lastly, in today' s vote on our four amendments, two have been approved and the other two rejected.

This has obliged us to abstain from the final vote, because we do not understand how we can ignore the environmental question when deciding which projects must be financed and we do not understand how we can reject the idea that each Member State can dedicate, to URBAN projects, that portion of the Structural Funds which it has not spent in accordance with Community programmes.

Mr President, the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism had an in-depth discussion on the URBAN initiative which produced many ideas.

As the smallest Community initiative in existence, we therefore proposed an increase in its funding through an amendment which was rejected.

We regret this as there was actually money left over from the Structural Funds in some countries which could really have helped with pilot projects. We should remember that it is these URBAN projects which specifically allow a truly urban policy to be established.

The Commission should also pay attention to coherence between the various policies which are in place. It should make URBAN projects coherent with future projects in budget lines entitled 'sustainable urban policy' .

Finally, there is currently still no European urban policy within the European Union. Perhaps this point could be developed in the context of reorganisation and the Intergovernmental Conference so that the European Union finally has a true urban policy.

Mr President, I would like to point out that I voted for this report on sustainable urban development, known as URBAN.

As with all other Community initiatives, this is very positive.

Europe is making its presence felt at a time when we are doing something for all the citizens of Europe and not simply for the development of an individual State, whichever one it may be.

URBAN is designed to find solutions to urban decay, and this is something of great concern to the elderly and therefore of great concern to the Pensioners' Party.

There can be no worse situation than that of an elderly person living in a city.

I hope that this Community initiative will help serve as an example on how to resolve the problems faced by the elderly in cities.

(DA) The Left' s five Members of the European Parliament have chosen to support LEADER+, the EQUAL initiative and INTERREG, but not URBAN.

At a forthcoming review of these programmes, it ought to be established that the EU' s efforts are to be concentrated upon cross-border tasks and adapted to the possible enlargement of the EU.

(DA) We have voted in favour of the report on the communication from the Commission concerning the guidelines for a Community initiative relating to the economic and social regeneration of cities and neighbourhoods in crisis and designed to promote sustainable development (URBAN).

Basically, we are opposed to programmes and structural funds of this type but, since the vote only concerns how - and not to what extent - these resources are to be used, we have confined ourselves to assessing the contents and think, in general, that the proposal for regenerating neighbourhoods in crisis contains some sensible observations, as well as some good suggestions and criteria for the relevant projects.

This report contains general points on what is referred to as the urban regeneration strategy for town centres and neighbourhoods affected by the crisis in the capitalist economy and its consequences, i.e. increasing unemployment, exclusion and delinquency.

It underlines the fact that, in order to ensure sustainable urban development, an urban policy must be implemented which does not leave out the main victims of the economic crisis, namely the unemployed, immigrants, refugees, women and the socially excluded.

However, nothing is said about the causes of this crisis and those responsible for it.

At best this report simply corrects certain aspects and effects of the crisis. Yet only scandalously limited resources are available for this work.

As the report itself indicates, the funds allocated to the URBAN II programme for the 2000-2006 period are approximately 30% less than those in the previous period, which were already low, at EUR 900 million. Added to this is the fact that only about fifty projects are considered for the whole of Europe which is pathetic when practically all European city districts, both suburban and inner city, are affected.

This is why we will vote individually in favour of the specific measures planned to help certain social categories which are most disadvantaged but will abstain on the report itself in order to denounce the fact that in the main it consists of pious hopes financed on the cheap.

- (FR) Mrs McCarthy, ladies and gentlemen, I am very pleased that the URBAN Community Initiative is being continued as this aims to support the social and economic conversion of cities and neighbourhoods in crisis, all with a view to achieving sustainable urban development.

With some 80% of the population of Europe living in an urban area, cities are at the forefront of economic, social and cultural change in Europe.

At the same time, the social and economic problems facing European society are more pronounced in urban areas.

Many European cities are divided into neighbourhoods characterised by high-added-value activities and high-income residents and other districts characterised by low incomes, high unemployment, substandard and overcrowded housing and high levels of welfare dependency.

The concentration of economic and social problems in certain urban areas calls for targeted intervention taking full account of the complexity of the problems involved.

This is why the European Parliament successfully called for the URBAN Community Initiative or CIP to be extended during the reform of the Structural Funds.

The success of URBAN during the 1994-1999 programming period is indisputable.

The results are clear in terms of the improvement of the quality of life in the target areas.

This CIP has encouraged the development of best practice models in the economic, social and environmental sectors.

It has also had the distinction of strengthening the role of local authorities, the non-governmental sector and local communities and of supporting new partnership approaches to urban regeneration.

The new initiative will continue to pursue these goals by reinforcing them, while particularly promoting equal opportunities between men and women and integrating socially marginalised and disadvantaged groups.

We can therefore welcome its adoption.

We must, however, admit that in financial terms we cannot proclaim a victory!

The total appropriation allocated is not up to the challenge.

The amount for the 1994-1999 period was EUR 900 million and will be EUR 700 million for the 2000-2006 period. This represents a drop of 30%!

This reduction in funding has led to a reduction in the number of programmes in the new URBAN initiative.

The chosen threshold of 50 projects seems too low.

It needs to be increased to reflect regional and local factors whilst maintaining financial awards to the Member States.

In view of this concentration on a limited number of projects, the publication and dissemination of the results of the new URBAN Community Initiative will perhaps be particularly important to achieve a multiplier effect.

The McCarthy report on the URBAN Community Initiative gives us an opportunity to reflect on the appropriateness of Community intervention in urban matters.

The situation of certain urban areas is alarming, with the social distress taking the form of unemployment, misery and crime.

Drug dealing in particular fuels insecurity and delinquency.

Faced with these social challenges, the effectiveness of the Structural Funds is still in doubt.

Subsidiarity should make us realise that the state, exercising its governing functions, and local authorities are the bodies most able to intervene appropriately. The state can ensure public safety and the local authorities can help disadvantaged people.

Although we welcome the determination to create a system of exchanges between successful enterprises, the problems specific to each urban area cannot be dealt with in the same way.

The URBAN Community Initiative is helping to achieve the European Union' s desire to communitise urban policy.

It would be more appropriate for the EU to concentrate its financial efforts on pre-existing European policies.

Clearly some people are profiting from the opportunity to indulge in another budget bidding race which is particularly mistimed when the convergence criteria for EMU are imposing a very strict slimming regime on the national budgets.

Mrs McCarthy is therefore suggesting an increase in the funds allocated to URBAN and the promotion of this Community initiative through a costly communication campaign extolling the benefits of a federal Europe.

We should remember that the effectiveness of expenditure is not measured by the volume of funding allocated to the project.

In fact, the beneficiaries of too many and too high subsidies will eventually just take these for granted.

The aim must not be to help the people but to make them take responsibility.

Finally, the report specifically highlights actions in favour of ethnic or sociological minorities.

We can only condemn a policy on minorities which is inevitably dangerous for social cohesion.

On one hand, this policy encourages the integration of immigrants where it should favour their assimilation into the culture of the host country. This would prevent the development of ethnic ghettos which are nothing more than urban powder kegs.

On the other hand, it manipulates the principle of positive discrimination. This is a politically correct fancy which can be just as harmful, as shown by the US precedent.

For all these reasons, the French delegation of the UEN Group could not approve the McCarthy report.

Mr President, the INTERREG programme is particularly close to our hearts.

Like many of my colleagues, I am pleased that the European Parliament was able to safeguard this initiative.

As I live in the Sarre-Lor-Lux Sud region of Belgium, I am well aware that the regions are where Europe is being created. They are where we live the European experience on a daily basis and where the people make European construction come alive.

These projects must therefore be properly taken into account and must integrate sustainable development.

Why am I stressing this point?

The answer is quite simply because the projects currently being submitted are still too often damaging to the environment due to the way they are submitted.

For example, to accept new roads is to accept new pollution within the European Union. This goes totally against the policies which we are proposing to fight greenhouse gas emissions, for example.

I would also ask the Commission to ensure that the environmental pillar of the EU' s policy is integrated into the projects submitted and that the goal of reducing CO2 for example forms an experimental added value in the projects proposed.

I am particularly thinking in this respect of certain infrastructures which are under construction.

We know that some Member States are still wavering, for example, between rail and road for routes through vulnerable areas such as the Pyrenees, as in the Aspe valley.

However, I am also thinking of my own region where my government is still debating whether to route the railway or to build a second motorway, the A32.

In this respect too, I would ask the Commission to be particularly attentive about ensuring that there is real cohesion between the various policies, specifically in the INTERREG programmes which are being submitted.

Mr President, I voted for the Decourrière report on the Community initiative INTERREG, mainly because of the reply Commissioner Barnier gave to some Members who took the floor and asked for this programme to make greater reference to border regions with maritime frontiers. I voted for it, not just because I was born in a coastal town, Genoa, but above all because the frontiers of regions bordered by the sea are frontiers too.

These frontiers stretch as far as African states and the Middle East: we must take greater account of the fact that it is also important to develop coastal regions in every part of Europe.

As an MEP from a border region, I welcome this third INTERREG initiative with great interest.

We can never talk enough about the difficulties experienced in the past by maritime and landlocked border regions which have been cut off economically, socially and culturally.

Due to the existence of these borders, they have become peripheral areas within the countries to which they belong. This has too often led the national authorities to neglect these regions in national policy.

This is why the INTERREG Community Initiative was launched in 1990.

This programme was designed to encourage cross-border, transnational and interregional cooperation and to promote balanced development of the Community territory in order to enhance economic and social cohesion in the Union.

INTERREG serves principally to fund Community schemes to develop SMEs, education and training, cultural exchanges, action to combat health problems, the protection and improvement of the environment, energy, transport and telecommunications networks.

I must stress that interregional cooperation significantly encourages the involvement of local and regional authorities in the process of European integration.

More active participation by these authorities in Community initiatives should be promoted, bearing in mind that in many cases they have a very limited capacity for cooperation because of the different legal frameworks and different levels of development on either side of the border.

In cross-border cooperation, greater emphasis must be placed on improving the conditions for the economic activity of the small and medium-sized undertakings which are the job creators.

In the same respect, given that structural unemployment is responsible for 50% of all unemployment, the INTERREG funds made available must be sufficient to supplement national measures promoting employment.

Obstacles too often caused by double taxation and social protection are preventing, braking or hindering cross-border mobility.

I hope that the projects included within the programmes can help to provide solutions to these problems and to implement in practical terms the principle of free movement of workers which is in a bad way in my region!

INTERREG resources must also contribute to the development of a European research area.

Finally, and in particular, expectations in the regions about this initiative are high given that small towns not eligible for Objective 2 funding are hoping to obtain compensation through INTERREG!

The challenges are therefore immense. The integration of the border regions will be an essential element in the development of a future European regional development policy!

I hope everyone, like Mr Decourrière, whom I congratulate, will realise this!

- (FR) The INTERREG Community Initiative is just one element of an ill-fated European regional policy.

This apparently generous policy, officially intended to help problem regions, is a fool' s bargain for French taxpayers.

France contributes 17% of the European budget yet will receive only 8% of the regional Structural Funds.

Between 1994 and 1999, our regions annually received an average of FF 15.4 billion but will receive only FF 14.7 billion between 2000 and 2006.

My region of Nord-Pas-de-Calais will be particularly affected with French Hainaut losing the aid paid to Objective 1 regions.

This loss is unjustified in a region whose main activities have been ruined by free-trade Europe.

The European regional policy also reinforces the centralism of Brussels with which the regional authorities are invited to negotiate directly on the use of the Structural Funds.

This is a Europe of regions in which the regions, which are weaker than the nation states, will easily submit to Brussels.

The INTERREG initiative, launched in 1990 to prepare the border regions for a Europe without borders and therefore without nations, sits comfortably within this philosophy.

However, Mr Decourrière does show some common sense by denouncing the failings of the Brussels technocrats.

These failings will result in particular in the late implementation of INTERREG III and therefore in financial losses for the regions in receipt of aid.

We also agree with the rapporteur about asking for more attention to be paid to small and medium-sized undertakings and, of course, about refusing to use outside service providers.

These are the procedures which caused the corruption scandal in the previous Commission.

However, these isolated elements which make sense and for which we voted, in no way remedy the Eurofederalist philosophy which characterises the Community initiatives, particularly INTERREG.

This is why the National Front voted against the report.

The European Parliament has delivered an opinion on the Commission guidelines for the INTERREG Community Initiative concerning cross-border, transnational and interregional cooperation.

I want to defend an amendment tabled by my group on the maritime aspect of this Community initiative.

This does not involve the concerns about the future of the Atlantic Arc but rather the need to integrate the principle of maritime borders into strand A on cross-border cooperation.

In the Commission guidelines, few maritime areas are eligible for INTERREG IIIA. The amendments to the Decourrière report aim to make INTERREG more maritime-oriented.

This is an important development which must be supported as it is the future of the EU which is at stake.

I am aware of the Commission' s reluctance on this subject as it announced during the symposium on the presentation of INTERREG III last November.

However, I must point out that preventing the recognition of maritime borders amounts to denying the existence of an area which has great potential for projects and innovation.

One example of this is the 'Celtic' area which encompasses the territories of Brittany in France, Cornwall and Devon in the United Kingdom and Cork and Waterford in Ireland. This is an area whose locally-based economy is characterised by dependence on the fishing industry and the importance of the agri-foodstuffs sector.

It also has excellent cultural and relational links, through twinnings for example. INTERREG III, strand A, would allow the regions in this area to advance a number of structural projects needed to develop small and medium-sized undertakings and to promote research and technical development through knowledge transfer.

The European Commission should therefore be able to participate in the construction of port and airport infrastructure to provide links between regions.

This policy would have important economic consequences for the fishing industry in Brittany in that catches could be unloaded at Irish advance bases in order to then be transported to the Breton agri-foodstuffs industry.

The integration of the maritime border into strand A would finally allow the western periphery to be recognised as a unique and important economic area which is confronted by the 'continentalisation' of the European Union.

This would show respect for these peripheral areas which are rather concerned about enlargement to the east.

The maritime world has great potential.

We therefore must not leave it out of innovative and pilot Community programmes which will allow the new geographical and economic map of Europe to be defined.

(DA) The European project began as a partnership between States.

This partnership has ensured peace and stability in our part of Europe for over 50 years.

As a result of the economic and political success in our part of the world, of which the EU is just one proof, and in view of the ever greater proliferation of our Western values, competition on the world market has grown considerably within the last few decades.

The EU should be prepared to meet that competition.

We can only do that by intensifying co-operation within the Community.

It should not be about greater integration of the EU countries in the form of a federation but about using our economic potential across national borders.

It is about co-operating on joint projects and about unifying forces on all sides.

A programme such as INTERREG is there precisely to support regional development projects across national borders, projects which make it possible to build centres of economic growth at European level which will be able to take up the challenge from our competitors on a global scale.

I therefore welcome the continuation of the programme.

. (FR) Mr Decourrière' s report is not without merit: at the end of a clear and comprehensive presentation of the INTERREG initiative and its role in opening up border regions, it comes out in favour of SMEs in paragraph 16.

I and my colleague Dominique Souchet, who is well versed in this matter, have tabled five amendments highlighting the role of SMEs and craft trades within the framework of INTERREG, the importance of cooperation between undertakings and the need to involve economic and social partners in the design and implementation of the programmes and I welcome the fact that these amendments were adopted unanimously.

Nonetheless, the French delegation in our group was unable to accept the fact that the Commission and the federalist faction have diverted the INTERREG initiative from its original purpose in order to detract still further from the political role of the nations.

We have no intention of giving Brussels the job of regulating regional planning in the Member States, as suggested in recital of the report.

We only ask one thing of the Commission: that it confine itself to ensuring that the implementation of joint policies does not upset the balance of regional planning in our territories.

The destructive effects of the CAP and EMU on the balance between regions, especially on the vitality of the more rural, the more remote and the least populated regions, is proof positive of the fact that such ambitions are not a sinecure, far from it.

We are therefore unable to approve the development of strand IIIC of the Community initiative encouraging interregional cooperation under the responsibility of the Commission and sidelining the Member States.

This infatuation with strand IIIC is all the stranger in that the rapporteur himself acknowledges in his explanatory statement that 'the draft guidelines do not provide any indication of possible fields of co-operation' (p.17) and that 'the responsibilities are diffuse and vague' (p.18).

Calling under these circumstances, as he does in paragraph 20, for the budget for this strand to be increased is another example of the irresponsible and ideological outbidding tactics which are customary in this House.

Lastly, there is the desire expressed both in the Commission document and Mr Decourrière' s report of using INTERREG for peace and reconstruction in the Balkans: I do not think that the Structural Funds should be used to repair the damage which the Americans inflicted on Serbia during bombardments which were as criminal as they were ineffectual.

It is up to Washington, not us, to assume responsibility for a conflict which was triggered merely to serve its interests.

The French delegation in our group is therefore unable to support the Decourrière report and will choose to abstain during the final vote.

Mr President, I voted for the Procacci report on rural development, not only because I endorse the major policy lines of the LEADER programme, but also because it complements the URBAN programme, which I spoke about earlier.

Just as elderly people in cities are very isolated, so the elderly are fast becoming the sole inhabitants of rural areas because young people are moving to the cities: they are drawn by the bright lights, and the pubs, and the countryside and rural areas are being emptied.

I therefore believe that it is very important for everyone to back this European Union plan and for it to be further developed.

- (PT) Although this Community initiative, LEADER +, follows on from previous initiatives, it has some unique features. One of these of course is the reduction by around one half in appropriations made available even though they will cover a longer period.

Nevertheless, new objectives have been included, specifically the financing of the Nature Network 2000, for which all rural regions will be eligible.

In spite of the fact that this Community initiative is aimed at rural development, it does not address the issues of agriculture and agricultural production in a consistent way, and this is unacceptable.

Without agriculture, the rural world will disappear. This means that any strategy for rural development must be based on agriculture' s internal potential while at the same time developing as many other activities as possible in order to prevent the desertification of the rural world.

This is why we considered it essential to improve the report by means of our proposals deliberately to include agricultural activity and farmers in the strategy for rural development and to request more appropriations in order not to threaten the survival of the programme in those rural regions which were covered before. We also want to ensure that the new programme continues to prioritise the less-favoured regions.

Our position on LEADER is a product of our more general assessment of the EU' s overall agricultural policy.

Both LEADER 1 and LEADER 2, which were implemented in the 1990s, were ingredients of the new CAP that emerged after its review in 1992 and, along with other respective measures, they constituted the so-termed second pillar of the EU' s rural development policy.

Their real aim was to moderate and disguise the new CAP' s disastrous consequences and the disorientation of small and medium-scale farmers, and not to develop the rural areas or retain the agricultural population therein as was hypocritically declared in their objectives.

This is proved by the fact that in the areas where those initiatives were implemented, farming incomes and employment decreased rapidly, which resulted in their depopulation.

A characteristic example is Greece, which as an Objective 1 country was included as a whole in the LEADER Community initiatives, and where the average annual reduction in employment in the farming sector reached approximately 2.3%, while between 1994 and 1999 farming incomes decreased by 15.2%.

We think LEADER + will be even more ineffectual than LEADER 1 and LEADER 2, for the following reasons.

The real aims of LEADER + are the same as those of LEADERs 1 and 2, in other words to moderate and disguise the negative consequences of the CAP to be implemented in the context of Agenda 2000 and the WTO.

The present CAP, however, is worse than its predecessor and it also starts from a worse basis, granted that the 1992 CAP review and the GATT agreement in 1995 have created serious problems and impasses for the agricultural economy.

The selection criteria and the activities that are subsidised under LEADER do, in the best case, moderate some partial problems of the countryside, which are of secondary importance, but in the worst case they degenerate into expenditure for the sake of public relations and pandering to conscience.

In no case, however, are they programmes for the integrated development of the selected areas and they do not create permanent jobs in the countryside because most of the activities there are not productive in nature.

The actual appropriations available for LEADER + compared with LEADER 2 are smaller despite their increase by 15% (from EUR 1 775 million for LEADER 2 to EUR 2 020 million for LEADER +).

This is because the 15% increase is nominal and not real, granted that average yearly inflation in the Community during those years was approximately 2%.

LEADER + will last a year longer than LEADER 2.

LEADER + can cover all the regions of the EU, while LEADER 2 covered only the Objective 1 regions and some Objective 5b and 6 regions.

We must point out, however, that even if the actual appropriations available for LEADER + were increased, the Community initiative would still be ineffectual because such programmes cannot compensate for or blunt the anti-farming nature of the CAP that will be implemented in the context of 'Agenda 2000' and the WTO. The real outcome of such programmes is to act as a cover-up, to lead people off the scent and to salve consciences.

We disagree with many of the report' s views.

Once more, we point to the negative changes of the CAP (1992 - Agenda 2000).

We do not think LEADER + will contribute substantively towards solving the countryside' s problems, which are characterised by the decline of farming, which was and should remain the countryside' s basic social and economic branch.

For our part, we will tell the farmers about the expediency of these programmes.

We will make every effort to improve them as much as possible and prevent them from being wasted, and most important of all, we will try to foster the struggle of farmers against the disastrous CAP which is disinheriting them and leading them towards economic decline and the desertion of the countryside.

Unless this CAP is overthrown, no programme can ensure the survival of small and medium-scale farmers and the social and economic regeneration of the countryside.

All the Members in the Union for a Europe of Nations Group voted in favour of almost the whole of the Procacci report on the LEADER + Community Initiative.

However, we amended the draft report adopted by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development in order to clarify certain points which will make this Community initiative more effective.

In particular we felt it was necessary to simplify the administrative and financial procedures which proved to be too cumbersome and slow in the LEADER II initiative.

It was also essential to ensure that better account is taken of the development priorities of local operators and that the benefit of LEADER + funds is not limited solely to agricultural regions with a low population density.

Amendment No 10 which I tabled on behalf of my group refers to the concept of 'economic and social cohesion' rather than 'regional development' as the European Union does not have any recognised competence in this area.

Amendment No 11 replaces 'government or municipal officials' with 'government officials' .

Although local action groups should consist of a balanced and representative selection of partners drawn from the different socio-economic sectors of the territory concerned, government officials must be involved at decision-making level, whether they come from the municipalities, departments, regions or national governments.

The rapporteur' s phrasing was therefore too limiting.

Amendment No 12 responds to the expectations of the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism of this House.

It specifies the necessary coordination between LEADER + and Community cooperation and partnership programmes such as INTERREG, PHARE, Sapard or MEDA.

In the territory of Member States of the European Union, applicant countries or Member States of EFTA, there may be interrelations between the various Community initiatives.

The real priority for the European continent is to establish an operational level within a European framework and not a global framework as proposed by the rapporteur.

The creation of organisations similar to the LAGs may be usefully encouraged by the European Union, provided that the corresponding costs are borne by the various partners.

In essence, we are, of course, in favour of this LEADER + Community Initiative.

The conference on rural development held in Cork from 7 to 9 November 1996 set rural development as one of the European Union' s priorities since it is essential to preserve the integrity of our agriculture and the whole rural fabric, including infrastructure, public and private services and so on.

In this context, in committee we regretted the paltry funding allotted to rural development and supported the amendments calling for an increased budget for this Community initiative so that it matches the previous LEADER I and LEADER II initiatives.

The budget allocated to LEADER + for a period of seven years is half that allocated to LEADER II for a period of six years.

This is unacceptable given the importance of rural development and the consequences for farmers of the fall in prices and aid specified in the reform of the CAP following the Berlin agreements.

Finally, among the priority parameters to be introduced at European level to enable local involvement, particular attention must be paid to the quality and originality of projects which have already been implemented by LAGs within the LEADER II initiative, but which could not be concluded due to the timetable and weight of the management mechanisms specified.

(The sitting was suspended at 1.40 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m.)

The next item is the report (A5-0015/2000) by Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf, on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development, on the proposal for a Council directive amending Directive 70/524/EEC concerning additives in feedingstuffs (COM(1999) 388 - C5-0134/1999 - 1999/0168(CNS)).

Mr President, Commissioner Byrne, under Directive 70/524, high-technology additives are treated differently, depending on the date of authorisation.

The Commission has proposed harmonising the authorisation procedure so that substances licensed before 1988 are put on an equal footing with substances authorised now.

As far as we in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development are concerned, so far so good.

However, the directive also encompasses the authorisation of antibiotics, drugs, growth-promoters and genetically-modified organisms.

That makes it a question of health, not just approximating laws, which is why we in the Committee on Agriculture take the view that the legal base - Article 37 - is not admissible here and that the Commission should submit its proposal to us on the basis of Article 152, that is to say with codecision by Parliament.

We asked the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market, which pointed out that, as far as approximating laws is concerned, Article 37 is adequate in this case.

However, we in the Committee on Agriculture have not confined ourselves to approximating laws; because this proposal also encompasses genetically-modified organisms, we have tabled a further proposed amendment which affects the content and hence public health.

We negotiated with the Commission for two years on the seed directive and came to a compromise regulating the release of genetically-modified organisms in the directive, taking the text on which Directive 70/524 is based as a starting point.

Mr Byrne, we fail to understand why the Commission is not approximating the text on genetically-modified organisms as part of its harmonisation work.

We have now tabled a proposed amendment on precisely this compromise with the Commission on the text.

Moreover, this text has also been adopted in the forest directive on the use of forest reproductive material and we feel that this text urgently needs to be adopted in this directive as well.

The Commission pointed out in committee that it plans to present a novel feed directive in the future.

However, that should not prevent us from harmonising the text in order to ensure that there is no legal uncertainty between the various directives.

We are therefore assuming that you will accept our proposed amendment with regard to genetically-modified organisms.

Directive 70/524 still contains the old text because the seed directive was submitted to Parliament in 1986 and we then negotiated with the Commission until 1988, while the report on this directive was dealt with in 1994 and Parliament obviously did not accord genetically-modified organisms the same importance then as it did later when I was rapporteur.

We therefore assume, Commissioner Byrne, that you too will accept our proposed amendment of the legal base.

If you do not, we must reserve the right to refer this report back to committee and then negotiate this sensitive point with you, exactly as we did with the seed directive.

I should point out that the text which we have now worked out is a valid compromise, both for your legal service and ours.

In other words, we do not need to re-negotiate the text; we merely need to adopt this text in the directive.

I can hardly wait, Commissioner Byrne, to hear what you have to say to our proposals.

Mr President, Commissioner, does regulating additives in feedingstuffs come under competition or consumer policy?

As far the Commission and the Legal Affairs Committee are concerned, it comes under competition.

Of course we have to take account of the competitiveness of the feedingstuffs industry by harmonising provisions for substances authorised before and after 1988.

We want to prevent the prices of feedingstuffs from rising and Mr Doyle' s proposed Amendments Nos 4 and 5 therefore deserve our support.

However, as Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf has said in his report, this is first and foremost a consumer policy matter.

Food safety must take absolute priority over feedingstuffs in all our discussions.

When we talk of transparency in the food chain, that applies from the hayfork to the table fork and consumer protection therefore logically starts with feedingstuffs.

The antibiotics, growth promoters and genetically-modified organisms mixed in with feedingstuffs end up in the human food chain.

The dioxin scandal brought home to us that we have to get out of this mess once and for all and regulating additives in feedingstuffs is a step in the right direction.

According to Article 152 of the EC Treaty, we are obliged to obviate sources of danger to human health, whereby the accent is clearly on sources.

Consequently, we must cut off the supply of the original source of danger, i.e. harmful additives in feedingstuffs.

Otherwise, in my view, we are beavering away at the symptoms, but not the causes.

People are especially wary of GMOs.

We must confront increasing public awareness of GMOs by regulating their use in feedingstuffs accordingly.

First, if an additive consists of or contains genetically-modified organisms, then it should only be authorised if it poses no risk to human health or the environment.

Secondly, it makes sense to issue provisions for genetically-modified feedingstuff additives similar to the regulations in seed marketing legislation, as the rapporteur has said.

And thirdly, if we are to have a transparent consumer policy, we need to label genetically-modified feedingstuffs.

A clear declaration on feedingstuffs will allow double freedom of choice, both for the party using the feedingstuff and the subsequent consumer.

Responsible citizens should, in my view, have a choice.

We all talk of scandalised citizens who have lost confidence in food safety.

By regulating additives in feedingstuffs consistently, we can help significantly to restore confidence.

I too, therefore, can hardly wait to hear what you have to say to our proposed amendments.

Consequently, we too shall also vote to reserve our right to refer the proposal back to committee if need be.

Mr President, this proposal to amend the 1970 directive on additives in feedingstuffs is the first in a whole series of proposals on the subject of feedingstuffs.

In other words, we shall be discussing other proposals here in Parliament over the next few months.

That this subject is of paramount importance is borne out by the huge public attention which the dioxin, antibiotic, sludge and other scandals have attracted.

In other words, this is an important facet of public health protection, which is why we believe that Article 152 should be taken as the legal base, not Article 37, as proposed by the Commission.

The amendment which the Commission has proposed, namely equal treatment for additives authorised before or after 31 December 1987, is uncontested and has our full support.

However, the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development has voted unanimously on some important amendments to the Commission proposal.

The regulation proposed by the Commission conceals the danger of creating a marketing monopoly for certain additives.

Only companies which obtained the original authorisation will have the right to apply and companies which obtained authorisation at a later date will be excluded.

This sort of monopoly, which could lead, for example, to an increase in the price of feedingstuffs, should be prevented by granting provisional authorisation to all companies which had marketed a specific substance by 1 April 1998.

This would then apply until the re-assessment procedure has been completed.

The most important amendment to the Commission proposal is the inclusion, as recommended by the rapporteur, of genetically-modified organisms in the directive on additives, taking the compromise negotiated between Parliament and the Commission on authorisation for GMOs outside the scope of the release directive as the starting point.

This already gives us a basis for the authorisation of GMOs.

It is therefore only logical that we make provision for genetically modified feedingstuff additives in this case, just as we have in regulations already passed in other areas, such as forest reproductive material, to mention just one example.

The labelling of genetically-modified additives is particularly important in this respect.

On the one hand, it enables farmers to make an informed decision as to whether or not they wish to use such feedingstuffs and, on the other hand, it enables consumers to avoid foodstuffs produced using GMOs.

Finally, our group should like once again to thank the rapporteur, who has gone to a great deal of trouble.

I think that we can all hardly wait to hear Mr Byrne' s reply.

Mr President, the report deals mainly with formalities, in other words, the manner in which additives will be authorised. It is less concerned with the types of additives and how they work.

I should like to take this opportunity to stress how important it is that, in future, all the directives are dealt with under Article 152, since both food safety and environmental issues require a coherent policy and a comprehensive overview.

We cannot carry on as we have done up until now, that is to say dealing with each detail on its own, often only after the harm has already been done.

The rapporteur places the emphasis on the testing and labelling of GMOs in feed additives.

However, I should like once again to raise the issue of antibiotics.

Certainly, five of the nine antibiotics that were originally permitted in animal feed have now been banned. It is nevertheless extremely important to ban the remaining four, both in the interests of human health and for the sake of the animals themselves.

We now know that resistance to antibiotics poses a very serious threat to people's health, particularly in the case of small children.

A number of Member States are already able to show conclusively that improper practices in connection with the keeping of livestock are totally unnecessary.

Several countries phased out antibiotics in animal feedingstuffs a long time ago and others are in the process of successfully doing the same.

We talk a great deal about the precautionary principle but, in the case of antibiotics, it has long since been forgotten.

However, there is another environmental principle at stake, namely the exchange principle.

I should like to say a few words about coccidiostats.

They are a zootechnical product which is not totally necessary.

There is a substitute, which is used to vaccinate chickens.

Although it is a little more expensive, it does not harm the environment.

Coccidiostats now accompany the manure that is spread on the fields.

In that way, they end up in our water supplies which, as we all know, are our most vital resource.

Mr President, because of the availability of high-technology additives in the feedingstuffs industry, detailed information on their use is needed from the actors, and as we know there are a lot of them, so that we can put a stop to practices which infringe Community law.

This directive on additives in feedingstuffs cannot achieve this on its own.

Other directives will follow and I believe that the Committee on Agriculture is well placed to deal with them.

Up the point at which meat, milk, bread and other products are sold over the shop counter, feedingstuffs and additives are structured, mixed, blended, cut and transported several times.

The fight by feedingstuff manufacturers to gain maximum market shares causes a lot of problems, just as it does in the foodstuffs industry.

The negative consequences are well known, the positive ones less so.

I am firmly convinced that the most sensible way of protecting the health of European citizens in the ecological chain is through the production of feedingstuffs in the region for the region.

However, more work is needed on this.

Mr President, may I commence by congratulating the rapporteur, Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf, on his report.

It reflects the views and concerns of all EU citizens in the area of food safety and quality.

The events of the past couple of years have certainly created an awareness and concern about the real threat to food safety and public health.

The swift action taken by this Parliament must be seen by all citizens as their greatest guarantee for the future, for you have set an agenda on food quality to which Member States must conform.

But even in this crucial area of administration, Parliament reflects its commitment to subsidiarity by encouraging Member States to take on and to face up to their responsibility.

In Agenda 2000, we have in my view prioritised policies that are of direct concern to citizens: food safety, water quality, environmental protection and rural development.

If we pursue this agenda with commitment and diligence, the early years of the new millennium will be a milestone in the implementation of policies that are people-focused and very much reflect community needs.

I welcome in particular the proposed new and strict authorisation procedures for additives in animal feeds.

Those found in breach of them must be dealt with severely.

I compliment the new Commissioner responsible for food safety, Mr Byrne.

He has an onerous undertaking but he has responded quickly and effectively to the requirements of this House, as well as to the concern of consumers.

I am particularly pleased that my own country, Ireland, is to the forefront in the implementation of new food regulations based on the principle of traceability.

This will make the island of Ireland the centre of excellence in the future for food production.

Mr President, Commissioner, I too congratulate the rapporteur on his excellent work. I am particularly pleased about the unanimity shown on this issue within the group.

It is therefore specified that, through the adoption of a regulation, the Commission will replace the existing authorisations with authorisations linked to the person responsible for putting the additives into circulation. This will occur at the same time for all the additives in question.

A coherent legal framework must be re-established.

As of October 1999 the Commission proposed introducing a legal basis into Directive 70/524/EEC for the replacement of the authorisations.

However, we must ensure that competition distortions are not created, as highlighted by Mr Kindermann and Mrs Auroi.

Genetically modified additives must also be clearly identified in feedingstuffs in order to allow the end-consumer to choose food without GMO components or based on GMO components and to guarantee this.

The consumer must remain free to make a fully informed decision.

This proposal has no financial consequences for the Community budget.

There must therefore be total transparency for producers and consumers in the area of food safety.

I am sure that the Commission can accept the report which, as you know, was approved unanimously in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development.

Mr President, we have said in this House time and again since the BSE crisis that feedingstuffs are one of the first and most important factors in safe food production and in consumer health and protection.

We therefore welcome the Commission' s proposal on additives in feedingstuffs.

The Committee on behalf of which I am speaking, namely the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Protection, decided in December, on the assumption that the chairman of the Committee on Agriculture would draft such a good report, that we could waive our opinion.

Nevertheless, I should like to say a few words on the report and express a view on a number of points.

First, perhaps, I should say something on the question of the legal base.

Even if we have new Rules of Procedure in Parliament, and it may well be that, with such an ambitious chairman in the Committee on Agriculture, problems of legislative competence will arise more and more frequently between the Committee on Agriculture and the Committee on the Environment, one thing is always crystal clear for me in this sort of conflict: cohesion in this Parliament is crucial and the legal basis of a question is crucial as far as I am concerned.

Therefore, and I must address this comment to you Mr Byrne, I reject your choice of legal basis.

If it is merely a hand-me-down legal basis taken over from previous directives, then it is a mistake to keep it.

The Treaty of Amsterdam states quite clearly that, where people' s health is concerned, Article 152 is the correct legal base, and may I say to our own Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market that it is simply not good enough to look at the Commission' s proposal and say, there is nothing in it about health and consumer protection, so it has nothing to do with health and consumer protection.

My group, as Mr Kindermann has already said, will therefore vote tomorrow to change the legal base and I hope that other groups in this House will do likewise.

Mr Byrne, I ask you to accept and agree to the change of legal basis for the sake of transparency and good cooperation.

If we do not change it and we follow the Legal Affairs Committee, we shall be opening the floodgates to manipulation.

The Commission would be able to determine the choice of legal basis by excluding any reference to health policy and we would suddenly find ourselves up against an Article 37.

Allow me to comment briefly on two other points. First, genetically modified micro-organisms in feedingstuffs.

We cannot just refer to vertical legislation and say that at some point we will need another law.

We do not have another law at the moment, and until we do, we must deal with genetically-modified micro-organisms as and when we pass legislation; we must include them as an add-on and insist that they be labelled.

The rapporteur has done just that and that is a good sign.

I say now, as I have said on numerous occasions in the past: yes, I too would like the Commission to propose a positive list which we can then debate and deal with in this House, but we do at least need a starting point for a positive list of additives in feedingstuffs.

It is equally important to have strict hygiene requirements for the manufacture of additives and for proper controls to be carried out in the Member States.

There are serious shortcomings in both areas and we have a great deal of work to do yet.

Mr President, I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on his report.

This is an issue that we will no doubt be reconsidering on a number of occasions in the future.

What has happened in recent years has brought to our attention the tremendous problems facing not only to the producers of food but also the consumers.

We must strike a balance between them.

We must resolve this issue, because it is important that consumers should regain confidence in the food they eat.

One way to achieve this is to have total transparency as far as food labelling is concerned.

GMOs are the new challenge facing us.

This is something that people are very worried about and quite rightly so: I myself share these concerns.

But I think we should not allow our concerns about GMOs to overshadow our concerns about growth promoters used in animal feed or antibiotics used in compound feed.

Indeed, we should not allow GMOs to obscure the fact that meat and bonemeal are still included in animal feeds in many countries in Europe.

One factor behind these developments that has been referred to in this debate is competition - competition between Member States on the cost of the production of food.

These are all areas in which we have to ensure a level playing field: food must be of the same standard in all Member States.

We have had the dioxin scare, BSE and many other problems.

The main problem is a financial one, namely who bears the cost?

The problem is that the cost is not shared equally between the consumer and the producer: the producer has been forced to bear all the cost.

We need an equitable distribution of the extra cost that has been incurred.

We must also ensure that the food that is imported into the European Union meets the standards within the European Union.

If we do not maintain those standards for imported food then we are going to encounter greater difficulties in the future.

I should first like to thank the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development and its rapporteur, the committee chairman, Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf, for examining the Commission's proposal.

The Commission proposal is, as some of you have said, rather technical.

Nonetheless it has a relatively simple objective: to harmonise procedures governing the authorisation of feed additives.

At present there is a difference in treatment between authorisations, depending on whether applications were submitted before or after 1 January 1988.

The purpose of the Commission's proposal is to harmonise procedures to ensure that no such difference exists.

The scope of the proposed amendment is therefore very limited.

Five amendments have been presented by Parliament.

I regret that the Commission is not in a position to accept these amendments, despite the fact that I am fully aware of the views and commitment of Parliament, the Agricultural Committee and, in particular, the rapporteur, Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf, on these issues.

I shall deal with each of the individual amendments separately.

The first amendment proposes to change the legal base of the proposal by replacing Article 37 with Article 152.

I would simply point out that the Commission proposal makes no reference to health or consumer protection.

The proposed amendment is technical and cannot be interpreted as having as its primary objective the protection of public health.

I note that Parliament's Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market also accepts that Article 37 is the appropriate legal base.

I remind Parliament that in Article 152 the primary objective is the protection of health.

I commend to you the arguments set out in the letter from the Legal Affairs Committee which sets out the position, in my view, with precision, clarity and commendable brevity.

Amendments Nos 2 and 3 go much further than the Commission proposal since they aim to introduce additional provisions on genetically modified additives.

I am the first to accept that GMOs are a very important issue.

I also accept and acknowledge that a number of initiatives to update EU legislation in the field of GMOs are necessary.

However, this technical amendment is not the correct instrument to introduce such initiatives.

The Commission is of the view that it is premature to amend the rules currently laid down by Directive 70/524 on genetically modified additives at this stage.

Instead it is appropriate to await developments in relation to the common position on the amendment to Directive 90/220, which is currently in second reading in Parliament.

The Commission envisages going much further than is currently proposed by Parliament in its amendments.

I can also assure Parliament that I will ensure that the pertinent provisions of Directive 90/220 are included in the proposal for a recasting of Directive 70/524 that the Commission has proposed in the White Paper on food safety to present to Parliament before July 2001.

I can also assure Parliament that all observations made here today will be fully taken into account.

Amendments Nos 4 and 5 are also unacceptable because they give undue preference to copy products by granting them authorisation to be placed into circulation even before an application for authorisation has been submitted.

The Commission insists on first evaluating such applications as to their safety and efficacy before giving authorisations.

I can only ask you again to bear in mind the technical nature of the Commission proposal and to wait for the substantive proposal for a new directive on additives in feedingstuffs to address wider issues.

I should just like to deal with some of the specific issues that were raised during the debate.

First of all, regarding the observations made by Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf, I wish to assure him that we will change the procedure for authorisation of GMO additives in the Additives Directive 70/524, and not in the Novel Feed Directive.

This is a directive that deals more specifically with raw materials rather than with additives.

The text taken by Parliament is from the Directive which was adopted in 1998.

But the vertical legislation in Directive 90/220 on how to carry out the environmental risk assessment of GMOs has changed since then and is still changing.

It is before Parliament for second reading.

It is my belief that we should await the final outcome of Directive 90/220 and in particular, Article 11.

Reference was also made to the question of whether this proposal could give rise to the risk of the establishment of monopolies.

Mr Kindermann and Mrs Auroi made reference to this.

There are just a few points I should like to make on that issue.

First of all, this matter has been in the pipeline since 1993, so it has not really been sprung on any other commodity producers.

Indeed any such applicants can still apply in respect of their particular product.

I should also stress that the Commission has never approved any application for an authorisation for GMOs to be included in additives.

Mrs Roth-Behrendt made reference to the question of the appropriate legal base, whether it should be Article 37 or Article 152.

I again refer to what I said earlier in relation to this and assure her and the House that it would be entirely inappropriate for the Commission to seek to justify any measure based on Article 37 merely by excluding from the provision any reference to public health.

This is an issue that has been looked at on at least two separate occasions by the European Court of Justice, which has laid down the legal criteria for situations such as this where the appropriate legal base has to be properly taken into account when putting forward legislation.

The jurisprudence of the Court appears to be quite clear in relation to this.

As an overall comment to the suggested amendments here, particularly in relation to the legal base issue, it would be inappropriate, in my opinion, to change the legal base to Article 152 in these circumstances, as it would be very likely to fall foul of the objective criteria that have been laid down by the Court.

A number of you made reference - Mr Nicholson in particular - to the issue surrounding labelling.

Directive 70/524 foresees the issue of labelling in the genetic modification of additives.

It is already included now: "indication of the particular characteristics due to the manufacturing products".

So this issue will be addressed.

That formula enabled us to oblige applicants to put on the label the fact that genetic modification techniques have been used in the product, the subject matter of the application.

Mr President, allow me to ask the Commissioner one more question.

First allow me to point out, Commissioner Byrne, that the European Parliament has no right of legislative initiative.

But we do reserve the right, when you propose to amend a directive or a regulation, to look at the whole regulation and not just the part which you have singled out.

Nonetheless, we have confined ourselves in our proposed amendments to bringing the text into line with that of other directives and we have disregarded the question of content.

For example, you did not go into antibiotics.

We are therefore talking about harmonising the legal provisions in the individual directives.

My question, Commissioner Byrne is this: the UN conference in Montreal decided that genetically-modified organisms must be labelled for international trade.

Do you really believe that, if we could, Parliament would permit labelling to be left off feedingstuff additives within the European Union?

Commissioner Byrne, it appears that you want to engage in a test of strength with Parliament.

We negotiated the seed marketing legislation for two years.

I look forward to the next round.

I would stress that no GMOs have been approved under this directive; it applies only to additives.

I would also say in relation to the questions surrounding labelling that this is a complex issue.

It is being addressed and will be addressed in a comprehensive way, particularly in Directive 90/220.

This issue is before Parliament at the moment and there will be other directives dealing it, which will also come under the legal base of Article 152 which gives Parliament full competence in the areas of codecision.

I would assure Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf that it is by no means my intention or wish to have any clash or test of strength with Parliament on this issue.

It is my intention, as it has always been, to work in cooperation with Parliament, to ensure that the results we achieve are the very best results.

The best way of dealing with this issue is through the draft legislation before Parliament at the moment, as well as the legislation in the pipeline, rather than in this technical document and in circumstances where the questions that are set out and to be debated in Directive 90/220 may not be fully taken into account.

It is best to wait for that debate which, I understand, will take place fairly soon.

All of these matters will be addressed in that legislation.

Parliament has taken due note of your comments.

The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.

The next item is the report (A5-0023/2000) by Mr Böge, on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development, on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive amending Council Directive 91/68/EC as regards scrapie (COM(1998) 623 - C4-0026/1999 - 1998/0324(COD)).

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, it was and always will be one of life' s mysteries, one of the unsolved riddles of the follow-up to the BSE crisis, that we still have no Community rules for the control of scrapie in sheep.

In this respect, the Commission' s proposals to amend directive 91/68 and delete the reference to scrapie and the report by Mrs Roth-Behrendt on the detection and control of TSE infections in general, comply with Parliament' s demands in the wake of the follow-up report by the BSE committee of inquiry and we expressly welcome this.

I should, however, like to add that no new scientific knowledge was needed which proved that the experimental infection of sheep by feeding them BSE-infected feed produced a clinical expression of the disease which is indistinguishable from the symptoms of scrapie.

No new knowledge was needed, because the theory from the beginning was that BSE and scrapie must be related and this theory has increasingly taken hold.

From this point of view we are slightly behind the times.

I am therefore in complete agreement with the Commission' s proposal on scrapie.

I should, however, like to add that it only makes sense if we ensure that the new TSE regulation allows a reasonable symbiosis between consumer protection and practicable suggestions.

We therefore need to take consistent account of six or seven points in the coming debate on the TSE proposal, and that of course includes scrapie.

When we discuss the TSE regulation, Commissioner, we must also clarify that we shortly intend to discuss separate proposals under Article 152 as the corresponding legal base for products excluded from this regulation, such as cosmetics, medicinal products or animal feed.

As far as I am concerned, that means that fundamental core provisions in this proposed regulation must not be relegated yet again to the Annex but included in the body of the proposed regulation because we here in Parliament want to and will assume joint responsibility here.

It also means that, when we are fighting these diseases, the problem of destroying whole herds in the event of an outbreak of scrapie or BSE and the question of defining geographical areas are items which also remain on the agenda.

Although I welcome the fact that the fight against scrapie is included in the TSE regulation, I feel that the Commission' s proposals for fighting scrapie are still not consistent enough and I shall submit amendments on behalf of the Committee for Agriculture and Rural Development to tighten up the proposals when the Roth-Behrendt report is debated.

I should also like to address two other points.

We expressly welcome the regional classification of the status of Member States as regards outbreaks of scrapie or TSEs.

Here again the Commission is increasing its response to the work carried out by and the demands made by Parliament.

Finally, in discussing the question of the future application of tests, we should of course bear in mind that we have still not reached the point where tests are generally applicable.

But the tests available now are perfectly able to guarantee security in consumer health policy, albeit not for every individual animal.

But when we need to consider if a region can move from a negative epidemiological status to a better category, an epidemiological inspection of the situation in a region in the form of suitable sampling in abattoirs using such tests can provide useful pointers in the political and scientific debate as to where there is a need for preventive consumer protection and, basically, where such tests can be used to help us settle disputes on a proper basis.

I would be grateful, Commissioner, if you would take these passing comments on board in the report on scrapie and in the general report on the fight against TSEs and bear in mind that we shall be calling you to account on these points.

Mr President, over the years, the following situation has arisen: one subject has developed into a subject of many facets.

Many of us here in this House have spent years, whether we intended to or not, dealing solely with the consequences of the BSE scandal right down to the last detail.

And it is still on the agenda today.

It is therefore hardly surprising that I and Mr Böge are talking about it and that Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf has just mentioned it in his report.

The cast is always the same.

Although the cause was unfortunate, it was certainly not the worst experience of this Parliament.

My task as draftsman of the opinion of the Environment Committee is a very simple one.

I agree with the rapporteur and am able to say that the Environment Committee has asked the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development to agree to the Commission proposal.

That saves a great deal of time which I would like to use for other things and which I shall use now somewhat in anticipation, as Mr Böge has just done.

I have yet to submit my report on TSEs to the House.

At first we were somewhat irresolute and we regret that now.

But I have come to the conclusion that it was in fact quite clever timing.

This debate does in fact give us an excellent opportunity, Mr Byrne, to give the Commission a few things to think about.

Although we did not have a very positive exchange on Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf' s report earlier on and will certainly have to agree to disagree, things may be different with this report.

Allow me to say from the outset that the part of the complex report which Mr Böge dealt with - and this form of collaboration between two committees, with one leading committee and the other giving an opinion and vice versa, worked very well and could perhaps be used as a model for the future - is relatively simple.

It will become more difficult once we see the TSE proposal, Mr Byrne.

When we have the chance to ask direct questions, the questions which Mr Böge referred to will be asked.

Questions will be asked - questions which I shall have to put to you and the Commission representatives in committee - on how things stand with the BSE status of the Member States and other third countries.

How will BSE status in fact be defined then?

Do you envisage circumstances under which the BSE status will depend on the willingness to apply a BSE test?

And then there is my standing question to you Mr Byrne, a question you certainly already know and which will not surprise you.

When will you make it compulsory?

Perhaps you will do so before Parliament debates the TSE report.

Not that I want to put it off, but it would be a gesture, as it were, if you could say: here is the proposed legislation on the BSE test.

I know that I am a thorn in your side on this, but sometimes that is my job.

I say quite emphatically, even after the report by Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf, who is completely involved in the whole idea, that animal feeding, animal rearing, animal production must be suited to the species and must also, above all, cause no harm or danger to human beings.

Cosmetic, medical and other products cannot be excluded on the grounds that they cause no harm or are not dangerous.

That is, without doubt, too short, too sweet and too little.

You are lucky that Mr Böge' s report only deals with this on the sidelines; with my report you will have to justify yourself more thoroughly and you will have more trouble doing so.

Finally, just one more brief comment, Mr Byrne.

Whether or not we will agree with the work carried out by this Commission and the President of the Commission, only time will tell.

But there is one thing we certainly will not let you get away with and I am sure that, as a lawyer and politician you will understand this.

Important issues cannot be regulated in annexes.

They belong in the legislative text.

I might do the same if I were a Commissioner, because I could simply change an annex under a comitology procedure and I would not always need to work with Parliament, which takes so long and is so difficult.

But you must understand that we cannot let you get away with this.

In other words, whenever I get the chance, I shall take everything out of the annexes and cram it into the legislative text.

And you would be well advised to do likewise from the outset.

Mr President, Commissioner, I should like to remind you of the composition of our food chain and how important it is for this chain to provide us with safe, healthy food which is produced, as a matter of principle, without any questionable or risky interim or end products.

Over recent years, these basic principles have often been neglected in animal husbandry and in epidemiological matters because of shoddy practice or greed.

The European Parliament has already taken a clear stand on BSE and I think that we should do likewise on all epidemics in animals.

We should not allow food safety to be compromised because, in the final analysis, it is our health which is at stake.

The Commission' s proposal encompasses both the transportation and the placing on the market of sheep and goats and a Community regulation to fight scrapie.

This is even more important given that there is no clear proof that BSE and scrapie are unrelated.

Animals are bought throughout Europe and transported over the entire continent.

The spread of an epidemic as the result of bringing in one sick animal can have huge consequences for farmers.

And I should point out that, for the first time in history, a case of scrapie was detected in Austria about four weeks ago.

Scrapie is a particularly insidious disease because the pathogen can remain active in dust for years and is then ingested in food.

As there is no vaccination, farmers can only protect themselves by not buying animals from countries in which there are cases of scrapie.

Even if scrapie cannot be passed on to human beings, the connection with BSE has still not been clarified, as I have already said.

As a farmer myself, I am most concerned that consumer health should not be put at risk.

I am in favour of preventive measures, starting with feeding which is suitable for the species, rather than measures to combat an epidemic once it has broken out.

I therefore welcome the Commission' s initiative to create a new legal base for combating scrapie.

Mr President, Commissioner, Mr Böge' s report on measures to prevent TSE diseases is based on the proposals of the European Parliament' s temporary BSE Committee.

Mr Böge was responsible for some invaluable work on this committee, and it is a relief to see that the job of monitoring the work of the BSE Committee in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development has fallen to him: he is the one with the experience.

I would have liked my speech to be part of a discussion that would have also treated the second part of the Commission' s proposal.

I do not think it appropriate to have to conduct in part the same discussion when Mrs Roth-Behrendt' s report from the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy is featured in the plenary session.

In the previous speech Mrs Schierhuber said that scrapies is an insidious disease.

For me as a Finn, and a member who has been active in matters concerning agriculture and the health and transportation of animals, it is most important that those EU states where TSEs do not occur at all will in the future too be guaranteed the right to inspect as fully as is necessary the transportation of live animals.

I wish to stress how important it is for us to remain free of disease.

The possibility, if necessary, of having additional inspections of animals in these areas is not a question of artificial protectionism or the restriction of freedom of movement, as there really is justification for it.

The inspections must be seen as being fair and cost-effective action to promote the wellbeing of animals and prevent increased expenditure for the EU.

On behalf of the European Liberal Democrats, we can support the Commission' s proposal on Mr Böge' s report, but in the forthcoming debate on Mrs Roth-Behrendt' s report we must look again at the position of those countries where TSEs do not occur.

Mr President, I too would like to offer my congratulations to the rapporteur.

There is no doubt that Mr Böge and the rapporteur for the Committee on the Environment are now tremendous experts in this field.

It is very good that they are continuing to monitor this issue on behalf of Parliament because it is extremely important.

Regardless of the many other concerns we may have, BSE has given us a terrible legacy that has to be dealt with and resolved.

It is quite clear that the incidence of scrapie in sheep has been a contributing factor to the overall problem.

I welcome the legal base being set and the comprehensive way the new rules will, I hope, address this situation.

We must ensure that nothing can enter the food chain or the animal compound feed to allow what we have experienced in the past to happen again in the future.

No-one would want to see what happened to farmers with BSE happen ever again.

We have to bring in the most stringent rules and we have to make them work.

It is extremely important both for the producer and the consumer that we restore confidence and the only way we can do it is by rigorously tackling the problem and resolving it.

BSE has certainly not gone away.

You can see it in different countries.

I do not want to point the finger at any particular country, but many countries are now facing similar problems to those we have had in the United Kingdom.

It will be there for some time to come.

We have to ensure that the whole system of traceability, of following the animal from birth until slaughter and right through the whole food chain, is part of that confidence-building mechanism.

If we are not able to achieve that then we will have tremendous trouble in the future.

Finally, I have certainly believed for a long time, coming from an agricultural background myself, that if we had fed the animals the proper food and if the animal feedstuffs had been made up of the proper compounds we would never have had BSE in the first place.

It was never the responsibility of the farmer, it was the food compounders who caused this problem and we have to ensure that it never happens again.

Mr President, I am pleased to have been given this opportunity to discuss a subject where there is good cooperation between Parliament and the Commission, namely combating TSEs.

I should also like to thank Mr Böge for his work on this issue.

Considerable progress has been made on our proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation under Article 152 of the Treaty on the prevention and control of TSEs.

This proposal addresses all TSE risk in all animals at all stages of the production chain.

I am here today to listen to your opinions on the first step in this process of establishing a truly comprehensive Community system for the control of these diseases.

I have proposed in the proposal at hand to delete all currently existing Community rules on scrapie in sheep and goats and to transpose them to the framework proposal for a regulation.

The detailed rules would then follow in that framework proposal.

I have been informed that you welcome this initiative, as appears from your contributions this afternoon, to formulate a single text.

I am looking forward to discussing any further improvements you might wish to suggest under the framework proposal for the legislation, especially after the reference made by Mrs Roth-Behrendt to her own report and opinion on this issue.

I look forward to receipt of that document, which will be taken into account in all further considerations in relation to this issue.

Finally, I would say this in relation to the observation about including legislation in annexes and the observation that we must achieve an effective balance between Parliament having a full say and yet at the same time our having speedy resolutions, speedy legislation and speedy amendments to existing legislation.

In the months I have been Commissioner and observed the way legislation goes through the system, I can see that much work needs to be done on this issue so that we can all achieve what we seek to achieve, that is, the translation of policy into legislation.

The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.

Community policy in the field of water

The next item is the recommendation for second reading (A5-0027/2000) on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to the adoption of a European Parliament and Council directive on establishing a framework for Community action in the field of water policy (9085/3/1999 - C5-0209/1999 - 1997/0067(COD)) (Rapporteur: Mrs Lienemann).

- (FR) Mr President, Commissioners, ladies and gentlemen, water will be one of the main environmental and world issues of the twenty-first century.

Climate change, global resources, river quality and groundwater aquifer quality are major challenges which threaten our common future.

We will either be able to restore water quality to suit the planet' s ecosystem or we will experience a whole range of adverse events which will threaten the development of certain regions, the living conditions of the inhabitants of other regions and even, more fundamentally, the global balance.

To support this statement, I would point to an excellent report drafted by our colleague, Mário Soares, in the international bodies on the state of the seas and oceans.

When talking about climate change, we have rightly referred to the greenhouse effect and the state of the atmosphere.

Yet we also know that the deterioration of the oceans will significantly destabilise whole areas of our planet.

Europe must therefore lead by example to some extent, both because it must promote a certain development model and because it is itself facing serious problems of pollution and deterioration of its waters, including its groundwater, surface waters and seas.

Furthermore, Europe has signed international conventions, in particular the OSPAR Convention in which it made certain commitments.

In this it said that in a few years' time we must have stopped dumping pollution and halted the increase of pollution and we must have reached a near zero level of toxic and dangerous substances.

Despite having signed these international agreements, this directive and the specific policies in the field reveal that Europe cannot achieve the objectives set or must defer these for so long that the very credibility of its signature of these international conventions is threatened.

This is why in the debate on the framework directive on water policy, the European Parliament has since the first reading demanded coherence between the framework directive and the international objectives, particularly with regard to respect for OSPAR. This convergence must be effective and specific and must commit us to action.

The European Union' s water policy is not starting from zero.

Many directives have already been adopted. Furthermore, the Commission wants to make these directives more understandable and more compatible with each other and to give them clearer objectives.

The preparation of this framework directive is therefore prompted by a desire for rationalisation.

However, at first reading this House insisted that the current directive should not only be compatible with the commitments made, like OSPAR, but should allow us to reverse the course of affairs.

For despite these directives and frequent declarations about the effort which must be made in terms of water protection, when we look at the state of the environment in Europe we can see that the objectives have not been achieved.

In many cases the situation has deteriorated and we therefore cannot settle for just rationalisation of the texts.

We must set objectives which are equal to the challenges facing us.

Yet we do not have much time.

We could, as the Commission has proposed, accept these overlong deadlines which the Commission and the Council have extended even further. Yet if we do, we will not only have a credibility problem with the general public, but these efforts will be postponed until tomorrow and then tomorrow they will be deferred again.

It is clear that in this event the objectives will never be achieved.

I am stressing this point because, when disasters are being reported daily in the news, we cannot just keep on saying for the umpteenth time that Europe did not act when it should have done.

Then, in our haste, we act as if we will solve the problems which we refused to tackle properly at the appropriate time.

The current example of the Danube and the pollution from Rumania shows very clearly that if we fail to establish a new method of economic development, clear requirements, controls and precise measures concerning the state of our rivers, this type of incident will not only occur again but will do so increasingly over time.

It is also clear that if we do nothing, our agriculture will continue to develop in a very unbalanced manner.

Even now, the rivers in Brittany are eutrophying and this is damaging tourism.

To conclude, the issues are clear at this second reading.

Do we or do we not want standards compatible with OSPAR, in other words to get dangerous substances down to zero?

Do we want to shorten the deadlines proposed by the Council for this directive?

Do we want to have a pricing policy which enables all public and private participants to clean up and save water?

Do we seriously want to respond to the hopes of our peoples?

The majority of the amendments approved by the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Protection meet these objectives. I hope they will be supported by this House.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, Mrs Lienemann has just painted a very drastic picture of how important water and air are to us, especially as the very source of life for human beings.

The problem is one of both water quality and water resources, of which there is not a plentiful supply everywhere in Europe, especially in very dry regions.

I am sorry that Commissioner Wallström, who is responsible in this area, cannot be here now because this is, after all, a very, very important directive on which the Commission has been working for a long time, and water protection legislation, which we are debating now at second reading, affects all the citizens of the European Union as well as all the people in countries wishing to join, who will have to comply with EU legislation once they accede.

We have been working on this subject for ten years and a comprehensive approach was only made possible as the result of a hearing arranged and held by the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy in 1994.

A great deal of work has been carried out between then and this second reading by numerous Members of the European Parliament, the European Commission and the Council of Ministers.

We reduced the 243 proposed amendments in the Environment Committee to 77, but another 30 have been added.

You see, there are numerous matters of concern here and they are all very different.

Some want tighter legislation, some want more clarification, others want to serve national interests.

Even within my group, the Group of the European People' s Party (Christian Democrats) and European Democrats, there were, of course, differences of opinion.

Our line is to work towards realistic objectives and practicable solutions.

In this sense, the proposed amendments tabled by me and other members on behalf of the group represent an improvement on the demands set out in the common position.

Some proposed amendments which we support should strengthen the European Parliament' s negotiating position in the forthcoming conciliation with the Council of Ministers.

We obviously reject all unrealistic demands which affect the European Parliament' s credibility.

For me, that includes the zero demand, i.e. the demand for zero inputs up to 2020.

That would sound the death knell for every agricultural and many industrial undertakings.

I should like to stress quite particularly here that we have already made considerable progress under current national and European water protection laws, however imperfect they are and however little they are complied with in the Member States.

I only need to remind you that we again have salmon in the Rhine, which would have been unthinkable 20 years ago and that salmon are due to be released this spring in the Elbe, which was particularly polluted.

That does not mean that we do not still have huge efforts to make in order to improve water protection yet further and maintain the quality of water and ground water and this will doubtless cost a great deal of money.

Farmers have voiced a number of concerns over the past few days.

You can only farm if you have an adequate supply of clean water.

The line followed by our group for the negotiations with the Council of Ministers will allow an acceptable solution to be found for farmers too.

I am horrified that both Members of Parliament and the public have been misled by false arguments in this difficult and sometimes highly technical matter.

I therefore extend my special thanks to my colleagues in the group who helped us find compromises.

I also extend my special thanks to our rapporteur, Mrs Lienemann, for all her work and her cooperative attitude, even if we have agreed to differ on certain points.

And I also thank the representatives of the European Commission, who stood by with advice and expert help at all times.

If the representatives of the Council of Ministers take an equally constructive approach, then I have no doubt that together we shall find an even better solution to the problem of water protection in Europe under the conciliation procedure.

Mr President, I would firstly like to congratulate Mrs Lienemann on the excellent work which she has presented and on her efforts in terms of overcoming the differences between us with regard to water.

The framework directive on water is a necessary initiative.

Nevertheless, given that the idea of solidarity is central to the process of European construction, this directive must take into account the fact that water resources should be seen as a factor in social cohesion.

Nobody doubts that water is a resource of interest to all of us.

However, in Spain and the other southern countries, which have an unusual climate, the management of water resources require political action in order to rationalise their use and other cooperative measures.

Therefore, we believe that this framework directive should advocate a use of water which allows us to overcome territorial imbalances and, to this end, I ask that you support Amendment No 95, which has been presented by our group.

We wish to ensure that Article 1 of the directive promotes the sustainable, efficient, fair and considerate use of water.

I am now going to briefly discuss the main issues on which the Spanish Socialist delegation differs somewhat from certain positions which have been expressed here.

We would prefer the future framework directive not to subject the implementation of transfers to Community supervision.

We consider that, given the hydrological characteristics of Spain, where transfers of a structural nature are carried out, the authorities of the country should make decisions with regard to its own resources, and these decisions should, of course, always be taken in accordance with the quest for cohesion and the rational use of water.

With regard to one of the most controversial points of our debate, the application of tariffs, the Spanish Socialists have been arguing, in accordance with the principle that the polluter should pay, that the directive should propose policies on accessible prices for all levels of consumption.

In Spain, a policy of full recuperation of water costs would clearly not have the same effect as in the countries of the centre and north of Europe.

The Spanish would see an increase in the price of water for its different uses, owing to the scarcity of water resources and the internalisation of the environmental costs which will have to be met within the framework of the provisions of the directive.

We have therefore always argued for a progressive system of recuperation of costs. This system should take good account of social, environmental and economic effects, and its implementation should be modulated in accordance with differing geographical and climatic conditions.

We want to build a Europe with a sustainable and healthy environment.

However, an environmental Europe cannot, in any circumstances, be built at different speeds, but must be built from a point of view of solidarity.

Mr President, the ecological disaster in the Danube reminds us of how closely linked all the countries of Europe are and how important water is to us all.

Discharges from chemical factories in my own constituency in the north-west of England will end up on the beaches of mainland Europe.

This brings home the connections which bind us together.

This framework directive is intended to paint the broad brushstrokes of the policy for the next decades and there has been much panic over the details.

It is important for us to remember that this is a framework.

These brushstrokes are indeed very broad.

It is easy for individual countries, for individual sectors of industry, to escape the effects which have been painted to us in recent days.

There are many opportunities to hide.

The reality is that the details of this legislation will be set out in daughter directives in months and years to come.

That is the time to debate some of these problems of detail.

The broad principles are surely ones we should be able to accept - the broad principles that we wish to reduce hazardous waste leaking into the groundwater, the broad principles that we should be aiming to ensure that chemicals, which we all need in society in all circumstances, should not be finding their way into our water system.

There is a chemical factory in the north-west which wrote to me to say that we must vote against this legislation.

I would have to ask them what chemicals they are putting into the water supply at the moment and why they are not broadcasting to all the residents in that area exactly what they are doing.

This is something that they prefer to avoid doing.

The principle also concerns water charging.

The basic understanding which many of us now share is that we need to introduce environmental taxation to encourage conservation, to use the carrot-and-stick approach to make best use of our assets so that we do not add to the pollution or loss of a valuable resource like water.

I want to refer to the political position here.

The common position has weakened the stand taken by Parliament at first reading.

Some of the NGOs would say that the directive as now framed is worse than useless.

This is an opportunity for us to improve the situation.

We need to get ourselves into a position of conciliation.

We have seen vote after vote lost.

Measure after measure has come out of the Environment Committee.

We have failed to achieve a qualified majority.

Our attempt to improve the environment of Europe has failed.

We need to get into that conciliation position.

We need, at the end of the day, to ensure that we end up with a sensible, balanced policy of real improvements at a reasonable cost.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, as long as nearly thirty years ago, the European Commission made attempts to draw up a European water policy.

A hundred and twenty-nine chemical substances had to be regulated.

Eventually, standards were drawn up for only a dozen or so substances.

The unanimity principle was at the root of this debacle.

Some seven years ago, it still looked like the European water policy was going to be sacrificed on the altar of subsidiarity.

The conservative government leaders Messrs Major and Kohl decided in a cosy fireside chat at the Edinburgh Summit that it was totally unnecessary for the Spanish to receive drinking water supplies which were as good as those of the Germans or English.

This sentiment is partly reflected in the common position which came about under British Socialist Presidency.

That position is like holey cheese, or to keep it the sphere of water, as leaky as a sieve.

It explains the ground swell of amendments which were tabled by the Committee on the Environment: nearly one hundred amendments for the second reading.

This is unusual, but most of these amendments are desperately needed to plug the holes.

The dangerous chemical substances constitute a big leak.

The chemical industry and, unfortunately, the European Commission and the Council of Ministers too want to draft a separate risk analysis for each dangerous substance.

This is very time-consuming, and, more importantly, there is no acceptable level of pollution for dangerous chemical substances.

Only the background level of the ocean is acceptable.

This is what is meant by the term "close-to-zero" .

The Commission already has a list of 32 priority substances, many of which have a hormone-deregulating effect. These are so-called endocrine disrupters and cause, even in extremely minimal quantities, changes in the gender of animals and even humans, as is more and more being ascertained by scientists.

This is why it is so important that the European Parliament declares itself openly in favour of the OSPAR objective of close-to-zero by the year 2020.

I would like to mention two substances from the Commission' s list: mercury and tributyl, abbreviated to TBT.

On the bottom of the Wadden Sea, the values of mercury and TBT are higher than the OSPAR value, to wit, ten and one thousand times, respectively.

The chemical industry and society as a whole have to learn to replace these dangerous chemical substances by harmless substitutes, and if this is impossible, to apply them in closed systems.

For the substance TBT, this means that it can no longer be used as an anti-fouling substance.

A sound alternative would be to clean the ship' s sides mechanically.

I would like to finish off by expressing the hope that the European Parliament will pick up once again its green image and will argue in favour of the close-to-zero option for dangerous chemical and hormone-deregulating substances by the year 2020.

Mr President, the European Parliament has a crucial role to play in the development of the Water Directive.

The Council's common position is totally inadequate in a number of areas.

Therefore, our task is to make the requirements in the directive tighter and more concrete.

As members of the Confederal Group of the European United Left/Nordic Green Left, we regarded certain principles as particularly important when we adopted a position on the different proposals.

Firstly, we think that the time-frame for implementing the proposed measures should be shorter than that proposed by the Council.

We therefore support the proposal to reduce the time allotted for implementing different parts of the directive.

Secondly, I should like the phasing out of noxious materials to be carried out consistently.

There should be no initial delay to allow new evaluation criteria to be developed before the measures are implemented.

The legislation should also have written into it the fact that the international conventions, such as the OSPAR Convention must be respected.

Thirdly, we should like a clear statement regarding the pricing policy.

This means that the basic principle must be that the price should represent the real cost of the water used.

Nowadays, taxpayers often have to subsidise industry and farming.

The obvious point of departure for legislation should be that polluters or consumers pay, although exemptions would be permitted in extreme cases.

Fourthly, we should like exemptions from the rules on water status to be kept to a minimum and clearly defined.

Fifthly, the protection of groundwater status and measures against persistent pollution of the groundwater should be transparent and clear.

Against that background, our group is able to vote in favour of most of the amendments tabled by Mrs Lienemann, the rapporteur, as adopted in committee.

We should like to see the scope of a couple of points extended.

We will therefore vote for the Greens' Amendments Nos 102, 103 and 104, which we consider to be improvements on the present position.

As regards pricing policy, there are sometimes extreme cases which may require derogations from the principles laid down in the report.

My own view is that the options for allowing derogations had already been given proper attention in Amendment No 43, tabled by the committee and been even more clearly set out in the Greens' Amendment No 105.

I cannot see any need for other derogations besides those specified in the two amendments just mentioned.

However, some people in our political group think otherwise.

Consequently, Amendment No 107, on the same question, has been tabled by one section of our group only.

On the whole, I welcome the committee's proposals set out in Mrs Lienemann's report and think they could provide a good basis for a hard-won compromise.

Mr President, every satellite photo proves that we do indeed live on the blue planet, yet the abundance of water is an illusion.

The recent disaster on the Danube serves as a reminder that our rivers are the lifelines of our planet and that pollution does not respect borders.

Water is a renewable but limited natural resource.

It becomes scarcer when it is mismanaged and when the geographical and climatic conditions are unfavourable.

In the EU, this is a crucial issue in the Mediterranean region and also in other European countries where we are witnessing the gradual drying of wet areas.

The increase in vulnerable areas, both wet and dry, inequalities between countries, inequalities between different regions within countries and unusual climatic, economic, geographical and geological events are all the evidence we need. However, these must not lead to competition distortions within the Community.

We have therefore tabled amendments to highlight the importance of the special relationship between agriculture and water, given that water is an essential factor in the occupation and development of the land.

Agricultural needs are clearly much greater in the south and this specific point must be taken into account in the framework directive.

It is not only in the Member States that solutions to these problems are being sought. Last October in Turin, the countries in the Euro-Mediterranean Partnership bluntly demanded a Marshall plan for water for the south coast of the Mediterranean.

We are not, fortunately, at this point.

However, we are in Europe experiencing droughts and desertification in certain regions and also floods, which the directive underlines.

For example, France, the Rhine valley and central Europe recently suffered flooding.

We need this framework directive as an essential element of a sustainable development policy which must make the various uses of water compatible with each other.

Yet we also need to integrate the protection and conservation of biodiversity into this new management of water.

The water issue will definitely not be settled today.

In fact, the problems of enlargement and climate change will offer new prospects.

Mr President, it is very likely that, during this century, good-quality water will be of even more strategic importance than oil.

This is enough reason to thank Mrs Lienemann for the efforts she has made to obtain sound surface water.

It seems rather complicated to attain a proper European legislative framework.

With the framework directive on water policy, we are hoping to end the fragmentation of the EU' s water legislation.

But that has not dismissed us from the task of drawing up an extensive and complicated directive which will require great care in its implementation from the executive bodies.

More specifically, the possibilities for adopting a specific policy by Member States and water boards, which have been set up thanks to the catchment basin approach, need to be maximised.

The key goals remain the prevention from further pollution of ground and surface water, the protection of eco systems, the promotion of the sustainable use of water, the control of floods and droughts and the termination of discharging dangerous substances into surface water.

As far as the discharge of these dangerous substances is concerned, I am of the opinion that the Councils' objectives lack both commitment and ambition.

The Committee on the Environment' s present proposal to reduce discharges to close-to-zero is, in my view, to be welcomed and worthy of emulation.

However, a great deal of attention must be paid to its viability.

Consideration must then be given to natural background emissions which cannot be influenced, as well as diffused emissions which are difficult to control, and which pollute the water quite substantially.

Mr President, we need to get used to the idea in the 21st century that we have to show water a completely new respect.

In the 20th century, water was merely a free evacuation and disposal system for poisonous substances, special waste, chemicals and so on.

And we can already see the consequences!

We need to rethink and recognise that water is our most important asset and that our responsibility towards it goes far beyond the present generation.

The directive must be negotiated accordingly and our citizens must be able to understand what we or rather what the Commission is planning here.

In the final analysis, water protection is not just a social question, it is a decisive social question, which is why the polluter pays principle must be applied more rigorously as otherwise we all bear the consequences.

Given the advanced state of pollution of water resources, it is important not just to maintain the status quo but to ensure during the vote tomorrow that we achieve genuine quality improvements.

Mr President, it must be some six years ago now that Mr Karl-Heinz Florenz, assisted by Mrs Ursula Schleicher, put in a request and managed to overhaul the water policy in its entirety.

It is not an easy topic and, in my opinion, the efforts made by Mrs Lienemann are very laudable indeed.

The decision-making process concerning this framework directive on water has reached a crucial stage.

The topic has been brought under the codecision procedure and as a result, we have been able to draft important, more stringent legislation as early on as at first reading.

In fact, the common position which was issued at the end of last year was already a major improvement on the original proposal.

It is also very hard to adopt policy in this respect because the discrepancies are so huge.

I would also address the Spanish Member in this respect: in the North of Europe, we often face floods, but also polluted water, from industry, whilst the problem facing the Members in the South is often related to transporting water over long distances, simply to supply drinking water or water for agriculture.

I would like to enter into the two elements of this topic in more detail.

I would first of all like to focus on quality.

The Netherlands is significantly affected by the European water policy.

A very important component, to wit, one third of our drinking water, is extracted from surface water in the Netherlands.

The Netherlands is located downstream, in a delta, which means that the quality of the surface water which heads our way is of key importance.

Another important point of discussion is the standardisation of water quality.

In a number of amendments, the proposed standards and especially the OSPAR standard for 2020 are called into question.

Although I understand that, according to some, this standard is unclear or that it cannot be defended judicially, I do believe that we have to support it because we could then provide more precise standards in a conciliation procedure.

I would now like to say a few words on quantity management.

In his poem "Herinneringen aan Holland" [ "Reminiscing about Holland" ], a famous Dutch poet mentioned water too, which, with its never-ending trail of destruction, was feared and respected.

In 1953, we suffered an enormous flood at a time when we were able to play a pioneering role in terms of dam technology.

When our rivers flooded in 1990, we established that installing artificial works upstream affects the water-storage capacity downstream and can cause a great deal of damage.

This means that in terms of quantity management too, we need to put in considerable effort to ensure that life upstream and downstream is not affected by it.

Mr President, I too would like to start by congratulating Mrs Lienemann on her excellent work.

Water is a basic necessity of life and a fundamental right.

Everyone should have clean water at their disposal but the availability and good quality of water is not so self-evident, as many have experienced in Southern Europe and are experiencing now in the Danube countries too.

Water is often a source of conflict between countries and peoples.

This is why it is important that water becomes subject to international coordination.

We need to recognise that water is a joint liability.

Cooperation within a catchment basin must be self-evident.

Too little operational capacity upstream or, in fact, excessive use, can cause problems downstream.

Coordination is the key word here.

The problem of water is becoming increasingly topical.

Changes in the climate and minor rises in temperature have a direct impact on precipitation.

Some areas are becoming drier, whilst many are becoming wetter.

In March, the Second World Water Forum will be held in The Hague.

This Forum stands for a worldwide vision.

This vision must translate into regional action plans for sustainable water management and water control.

The time for action is upon us.

The European Parliament must now opt for a sustainable water policy as a starting point and remain realistic at the same time.

But we should not lower our standards too much either.

The common position is not ambitious enough.

This is why it is necessary to refer to previous international agreements, or the OSPAR objectives.

We need to aim for dangerous substances to be phased out by 2020.

This has been agreed for the marine environment and it is obvious that this agreement will also apply to other waters too.

The OSPAR objectives are now being drawn up.

A list has been compiled, containing 400 substances which produce clear risks for the environment.

It is both technically and economically possible to reduce the emission of these substances to virtually zero and we need to opt for this once again.

Needless to say, the directive also needs to be binding.

Countries downstream must be able to count on the fact that countries upstream meet the quality objectives.

Quality has a price, but pollution could well have a much higher price tag in future.

Mr President, Commissioner, my compliments to Mrs Lienemann on her excellent work on the Water Directive.

I should like to remind you that the very serious environmental problems facing us today in the shape of climate change, the depletion of primeval forests and overfishing, constantly affect our common and vital but, in some ways, unowned resources.

We should also recognise that, in Europe, our fresh water sources may be said to be on the borderline between being owned by everyone and by no-one.

It is therefore strategically important that responsibility for water is established.

It is also important for the different watercourses to be kept together and managed as the totality they in fact are, irrespective of who owns one section or another of a common watercourse.

Ladies and gentlemen, the proposal for a directive does indeed, as many speakers have already said, represent an historic chance to simplify and improve the jumble of piecemeal EU regulations and directives and achieve a high level of environmental protection in Europe.

However, I have the impression that the policy in the water framework directive is geared towards deregulation and renationalisation.

I also hope that the vote will not be a washout and that will depend on what I see as two quite fundamental points.

We know that the Commission proposal does not go far enough; unfortunately this also applies to the proposal by the Committee on the Environment.

Merely pulling proposals out of the air is not enough.

What we need is a completely legally binding objective for OSPAR.

Only then will we manage to achieve legal clarity and, more importantly, objectives which are enforceable under the law.

Anything else will fall short of the mark and will not help to prevent ecological disasters, such as those which have just come to light in Romania and Hungary, from happening to us.

I find it unfortunate that national governments are not prepared to stand up for legally binding protection, despite having agreed internationally on OSPAR.

But I think that this is exactly what we have to make up for here in Parliament, in order to demonstrate that we will not allow the credibility of our policy to be lost or compromised.

It is also important to reinforce the polluter pays principle because prices must speak the ecological truth.

We must not bow down before the agricultural or chemical industry lobbyists; on the contrary, we must use our vote to promote and express that fact that we want the polluter pays principle and, hence, cost-covering prices.

Water is our most important resource and we must use our vote to ensure that the incentives and pressure are there to really comply with the OSPAR convention.

With closed production circuits this is possible; anything else would water down the directive.

Mr President, in the small amount of time allotted to me, I would like to welcome the Mrs Lienemann' s report and remind the House of three principles, to which all other principles must be subordinate, which are clearly expressed in the rapporteur' s amendments: water is not a commercial product, but the property of all the peoples of the Union; the ultimate objective is to eliminate all pollutants in surface water and groundwater, and to inform the public so that it can participate in the recuperation of water and not use water excessively given that it is such a precious commodity.

I know that this directive may have problems, given the differing situations of the various countries of the Union, as has already been mentioned.

The situation in the north is different from that in the south, and different from the situation in those countries which have the problem of desert areas.

However, there are some amendments which attempt to help the countries of the south, specifically Amendment No 43 which, with regard to the recuperation of costs, also indicates that Member States must take into account the social and environmental conditions of the countries when it comes to decision making.

There are also difficulties with the issue of transfers.

In my country - I live in the north of Spain -, there is a considerable difference between the north and the south, and difficulties arise when we have to transfer water from one place to another.

However, Mrs Lienemann' s report also says that the river basins receiving the transferred water must save and protect their water.

I know that this is a difficult report and that the differing situations of countries cause difficulties, but we must move forward with a framework directive which will prevent a repetition of what is happening on the Danube and what happened in Doñana.

We cannot allow our European water to be polluted, Mr President, and we must produce a directive which will strengthen the political will of governments to preserve the resource of water, which is so precious to all of us.

Mr President, my compliments to the rapporteur on a splendid report.

As an Irish Member of the European Parliament, coming from a country which has large reserves of rich water, I support the vast majority of the proposals included in this directive.

However, I would now like to look at the areas of difference between Parliament's Committee on the Environment and the Council.

The latter has already brought forward its common position on this matter.

According to the Council the objective of achieving good surface water status should be secured no later than 16 years after the directive enters into force, whereas Parliament's Committee on the Environment would like to see this deadline shortened to ten years.

I see no reason why European Union Member States cannot work to implement the key provisions of this directive in as short a time as possible.

I now turn to the amendments to be tabled before Parliament tomorrow concerning the principle of the recovery of cost of water usage.

The Council in its common position states that the European Union governments must take account of the principle of recovery of the cost of water usage.

No specific target date for the implementation of this principle was included in the common position.

Amendment No 43 seeks to ensure that by the year 2010 water pricing policies in Europe must provide adequate incentives to use water efficiently.

Moreover, an adequate contribution from different economic sectors, broken down into industrial, household and agricultural sectors, must ensure that this policy is implemented.

Unless these amendments are supported tomorrow a strong message will be sent out that metering and water rates should be implemented for households right across the European Union states.

This is politically impractical from an Irish perspective, as indeed it would be from the perspective of other EU Member States such as Portugal, Greece and Spain.

Mr President, I want first of all to say thank you to Mrs Lienemann for her report.

It is here and now that we decide to what extent the EU countries are to work effectively for a cleaner aquatic environment in the years to come.

We can do this by, as a Parliament, amending the Council' s common position and showing the way forward in working for a cleaner environment.

In its unaltered form, the present directive could, in fact, have very unfortunate and long-term consequences for the environment and for our drinking water.

It would be to send out the wrong signals both to European industry and to the European people.

It is crucial to adhere to a limit upon total discharges of chemicals into our waters.

The directive quite obviously provides too extended a time frame within which time is to be spent measuring every single one of the approximately 100,000 chemicals in circulation.

In this connection, I would ask Parliament to support Amendment No 108, in which the words "water pollution caused by individual pollutants" are replaced by "prevention of water pollution through the continuous reduction in discharges" .

We cannot delay environmental work by going into inordinate detail rather than working on reducing total discharges of hazardous substances into the environment.

The EU' s Ministers for the Environment must therefore stand by their affiliation to the OSPAR Convention, which now already defines what is hazardous to the environment.

This Convention should be our guide in working for the clean environment which we owe to ourselves and, not least, to our descendants.

Mr President, it is difficult to summarise the areas covered by such a large and complex directive.

The Treaty of Amsterdam reiterates the priority criteria for prevention, for the implementation of the 'polluter pays' principle and for sustainable development through an environmental impact assessment.

Clearly, the importance of recognising the economic value of ecological factors in setting prices and making operators accountable through the adoption of incentives for non-polluting systems, seems unquestionable in the light of events that characterise the relationship between economic development and the protection of our environmental heritage, particularly our water resources.

This situation is loudly echoed in many sectors of the economy, and especially in the agricultural sector.

The concept of good agricultural practice has been introduced in amongst the complexity of the current relationships between agriculture, environment and water resources, and between positive and negative effects, and amongst the wide range of local realities and production systems and so on. This concept indicates which agricultural production method to use in order to satisfy the Community expectation of an environmental protection of water resources that surpasses basic standards, along with the subsequent costs and reductions in income.

The obligation to develop and consolidate a strategy for integration derives from this notion, with the aim of keeping the management of water resources at the heart of the sustainable economic production model in the light of current conditions.

We must not, with this in mind, pursue a strategy of separating the objective of preventing a deterioration in the state of surface water and groundwater from the objectives of protecting, improving and restoring their quality, as this would create a superfluous hierarchy of priorities detrimental to the overall functioning of interventions and specific measures that target a combined approach and the use of the best available techniques.

As regards eliminating the pollution generated by dangerous substances in the aquatic environment, an optimum approach should provide a regulation at both national and Community levels, which enables clearer identification of the various classes of bodies of water polluted as a result of human production activities.

Finally, we need to set up a system which prepares an objective list of potentially dangerous substances, using the increased information available on their chemical, physical and biological properties, in such a way as to create an integrated model for intervention at a range of strategic levels in order to protect our water heritage, which is fundamental to us all.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, if we are to take the principle of sustainability enshrined in the Treaty of Amsterdam seriously, then our long-term objective must be to achieve zero inputs in our water because we need to safeguard water so that future generations do not pay the price for our water consumption.

We can achieve this long-term objective by developing measures with demanding standards.

In this respect, I fully support the amendments proposed by Mrs Lienemann to develop a reasonable approach using quality standards so that we can eventually say that, when people use water, they are not consuming it but maintaining present stocks.

This directive contains a number of very positive elements which are worth highlighting.

First there is wide information for and involvement by the public, a rarity in a European directive.

I am glad a holistic approach to water is being taken here and that authorities in the individual national states and beyond the borders of the national states are at last obliged to work together and ensure that water is of a high quality.

Thirdly, I should like to address the question of the timetable.

I am firmly convinced that we need a strict, tight timetable in order to work towards our long-term objective.

Compare it with what happens in December.

We all know in December that Christmas Eve falls on 24th December and we start buying presents.

But what would we do if we knew in December that Christmas was in thirty years' time.

We all know what we would do, which is why we need a tight timetable for our water policy.

I emphatically support the rapporteur' s proposals and think that we need a tight timetable for all areas of the directive, from the list of measures to the question of employment measures.

Mr President, the purpose of the present objective ought to be to ensure that the Member States work together to protect groundwater, drinking water and surface water and that the level of protection corresponds to existing EU environmental legislation.

May I take this opportunity to remind you that previous resolutions concerning the Nitrates Directive have still not been implemented in all Member States, in spite of the fact that there is a common EU resolution.

The present proposal tightens up the protection of the aquatic environment in a number of ways which exceed our current environmental objectives.

It is proposed that a target should be achieved for concentrations in the aquatic environment which is close to the background values for naturally occurring substances and close to zero for humanly produced synthetic substances.

This cannot be done, and it also, in any case, goes against nature.

Adopting this report would have serious consequences for agriculture in the EU if concentrations of, for example, phosphorus and nitrogen could not exceed the background values for these substances in the aquatic environment and if a limit of zero were to be established for pesticides in the aquatic environment.

European agriculture would not, for example, be able to grow bread grain with a high enough protein content for it to be used for making bread.

As a result, agricultural production would move to other countries outside the EU, with consequent high socio-economic and employment costs.

I cannot vote in favour of the sections in the Water Framework Directive which deal with these states of affairs.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, water is a precious raw material.

Millions of people do not even have clean water - a absolute necessity for survival - at their disposal.

It should, therefore, not surprise us that water is the cause of wars.

The capitalist world too sends out its pawns in order to gain maximum control over water reservoirs.

General interest or solidarity often do not come into the equation.

Europe is therefore facing an arduous task; that of combining a Community water policy which is fragmented in terms of objectives and means into more coherent framework legislation.

I have to admit that in Flanders, where I come from, we still have a long way to go too.

We were recently rapped on the knuckles by the Commission regarding this matter.

Anyone with any sense would like to see this framework directive used as a big stick for those pursuing policies who are now failing in some way.

The common position is in this respect a farce, a document with no strings attached and a true affront in the light of the OSPAR agreements.

The period of implementation can even be extended up to 34 years.

By then, my children will be older than I am now.

You have to admit: this is a joke.

Tomorrow, we might opt in favour of a weak and permissive framework which ruins the future of our children. Either we opt for the amendments of my group, of the rapporteur or the Committee on the Environment.

I would like to finish off with this observation. In the past couple of months, we have witnessed a great deal of lobbying in Belgium.

What was remarkable about this dossier was the enormous pressure from the Council of Ministers.

In our own country, this pressure was exerted by both Flemish and Wallonian Environment administrations.

They have opted for the weak common position in favour of our Parliament' s more drastic positioning.

I really do wonder whether this is an approach of which the green Environment Ministers in my country are aware.

Ladies and gentlemen, fine words are no longer sufficient.

We need to change tack completely.

During the vote tomorrow, we can make it clear that Europe is drafting a responsible and future-orientated water policy.

This can only benefit our credibility.

The debate is suspended and will resume at 9 p.m.

The dialogue on Europe - institutional reform

The next item is the Commission communication - The dialogue on Europe - institutional reform: the issues at stake.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the Commission is discussing this issue right now but it will be very surprising if its work is completed today. I am basically here to speak to you, as indicated by your agenda, on a new initiative which the Commission is proposing as just one of its responses to the major challenge of institutional reform.

This reform must involve all the actors in European construction, with yourselves as MEPs at the forefront but also myself as a Commissioner, the Council ministers and national MPs. It must also involve the officials who work in our various institutions and who are committed to and motivated by this European construction.

This morning, in the lengthy debate which I attended with Mr Prodi, many of you mentioned the lack of democracy and remoteness of the European institutions.

Yet it is not just a question of who does what, as one of you said very clearly and forcefully.

Ensuring that our citizens understand who does what in our various institutions is the very least we can do.

We must also now explain what we are doing together and what we want to do together in the future, particularly with the countries which will be joining us.

We too are concerned about this lack of democracy, and the Commission has therefore decided to launch the 'Dialogue on Europe' in order to play its part in this direct contact with the people. This initiative will be launched on the day after the opening of the Intergovernmental Conference.

During the IGC I will have the honour of representing the Commission together with Mr Prodi and of working closely with your two representatives, Mr Brok and Mr Tsatsos. All the Commissioners have undertaken to use some of their time when they go to any country or region, and not just their own, which in my case happens three or four times a month, to engage in direct dialogue with the public, and not just with the élite or those in power whom we meet as a matter of course.

We also plan to establish direct contacts in universities, schools and factories, to meet the people, answer their questions and listen to them. In this way we will play our part, as will you, in making the necessary effort and meeting the urgent obligation to reduce the democratic deficit and the remoteness of our citizens from what we do.

We hope to conduct this initiative in cooperation with the Member States and in conjunction with the European Parliament.

We will produce a regular summary of this initiative so that public opinion can be measured and we can adjust or reorient the work.

We also hope to conduct this initiative in consultation with the national parliaments, local elected representatives, non-governmental organisations, socio-professional organisations and the media. Opinion multipliers, political groups and parties, MEPs and national MPs, elected representatives, as I have just said, local authorities or national parliaments, the Committee of the Regions, the Economic and Social Committee, organisations stemming from civil society and university and education circles will all be involved.

Need I remind you that the European Parliament itself took the initiative on 1 February? I must again thank Mr Napolitano for organising an initial working meeting with the representatives of the national parliaments who are, of course, the representatives of the people in each Member State.

The Commission will propose that the Member States become involved in this exercise either as part of ad hoc cooperation or a more structured partnership.

We are setting up a media plan and close contacts with the European Union Presidency and the European Parliament.

I have indicated the conditions under which the Commissioners will play their part through public meetings and visits.

We want to encourage debate among the people.

Without presuming to lecture you - God forbid - or even advise you, may I just point out that, when it was my honour to be Minister for European Affairs in my own country, I saw the need to establish a direct dialogue with the people? Each week, when engaging in this dialogue in each region, I realised that there was a real need for the European Union to have a face.

I therefore took a European Commissioner, and not just the French ones, or ambassadors posted in Paris or MEPs to engage in this dialogue each week. This made me realise that people had many intelligent questions and that they needed to be respected, listened to and informed.

So this is what we are going to do.

We will have a budget of approximately EUR 4 million for 2000 which you will hopefully approve.

Financing from the 2001 budget must also be negotiated as we want this initiative not just to be an experiment but to last throughout both 2000 and 2001. It will therefore be ongoing throughout the negotiation of the Intergovernmental Conference and the ratification process.

We will launch this dialogue on 8 March in Brussels in the presence of 700 young Commission stagiaires.

Your President, Mrs Fontaine, has agreed to take part with Mr Prodi and several Commissioners in this initial dialogue. I can assure you that, whenever a Commissioner intends to engage in dialogue, the most immediately available MEPs will also be able to take part in order to give their point of view and explain the work and role of the European Parliament.

That is all I have to say for the moment.

I welcome any questions, suggestions or proposals from the Members present.

You are expected to ask questions, not necessarily make lengthy statements.

You have one minute each in which to ask your question.

Mr President, I think I also speak for the Committee on Constitutional Affairs that I chair, in expressing my appreciation of this Commission initiative.

Moreover, this initiative is consistent with recommendations made by Parliament itself in its resolution of 18 November.

I have also heard Commissioner Barnier' s clarification of relations and links with the European Parliament during the implementation of this programme.

If I may make a suggestion, Commissioner Barnier, would it be possible for the communication to say something more on this subject, in addition to the straightforward and slightly clinical phrase which indicates that it will be carried out in conjunction with the European Parliament?

It would be helpful to stress this convergence of intentions and efforts because I can see a particular problem with coordination, specifically between the Commission initiative - which certainly does not only address members of national parliaments, but also members of national parliaments - and our committee' s programme. Following the working meeting of 1 February, which Commissioner Barnier referred to and which benefited from the weighty contribution of the Commission, the committee intends to take stock of developments at the Intergovernmental Conference at all of its meetings.

We therefore hope to benefit from the capable and consistent participation of members of national parliaments at all of our meetings, and this will be a channel which will ably supplement the ones in the Commission' s initiative.

I can confirm that our proposal is completely within the spirit of the resolution of 18 November.

I also want at this stage to say that I was able to propose this initiative to the Commission thanks to the cooperation and understanding of my colleague, Viviane Reding. This initiative was also established in conjunction with Günter Verheugen as it involves all the major challenges of enlargement, both its opportunities and risks, and of institutional reform.

These challenges must be explained to our citizens who are concerned about them and questioning them.

I understand your concern, Mr Napolitano, and an interinstitutional working group will be set up. Its first meeting should take place in March.

I will ensure that we go further than the rather dry terms of the Commission' s text and it will certainly be more a question of sharing the work than working in liaison with each other. I will also ensure that over the next two years we can coordinate the initiatives taken by yourselves and ourselves which will be separate but joint.

You realise that making a success of this dialogue means work for everyone concerned.

Mr President, Commissioner, it is music to my ears to hear you use the word 'citizen' so often.

We are increasingly concerned in this House about public opinion. The fear of public opinion is a rather paternalistic concept but our House is what it is and we must do what we can with it.

In terms of the IGC issue, I have a specific question for you. I believe that the Court of Justice in Luxembourg is currently looking very closely at the important issue of the fight against fraud and OLAF.

As you know, there are problems which not only concern this House but also the European officials who are also European citizens.

Given the urgency surrounding this issue, has the Commission considered the possibility of completely changing the structure of the anti-fraud office by moving to a solution which would entail the fight against fraud, in the Member States and in the European institutions, coming under the jurisdiction of the Court of Justice?

Mr Dupuis, first of all I attach a great deal of importance in my public life to the word 'citizen' .

It is one of the most wonderful words in a democracy and must be used.

We will conduct this dialogue with our citizens, including the most disadvantaged and those isolated from decision-making or information centres.

With regard to the IGC and this issue of the fight against fraud, and specifically fraud against the Community budget and interests, we have retained the idea in our proposals of creating a new and specific post of a European public prosecutor. We have done this in the spirit of this House' s work and perhaps by going down the same road.

This public prosecutor would have the authority, recognised by the EU Treaty and therefore by the Member States, to investigate thoroughly any case threatening the Community budget and interests.

We can clearly and almost clinically see that legal cooperation is now no longer enough to fight against this fraud whether it originates from inside or outside the Community. This is why we have proposed the creation of a European public prosecutor who could, having investigated a case from start to finish, then have this investigated and ruled on by the most appropriate national court.

In reply to your second point on the Court of Justice, we have not yet established our position on the Court of Justice because we were waiting for the Dur report which was published a few days ago.

The Commission, as I have promised, will complete its proposals on the IGC opinion about the legal system and the Court of Justice within the next few weeks.

Mr President, Mr Commissioner, the day before yesterday, there was a leading news item in the most popular Danish news programme, which I would ask you to comment on.

The story went that an official in the Commission had apparently told an Austrian businessman that, because he was Austrian, he would possibly be excluded from being able to participate in a scientific development project together with businesses in other countries, including Denmark.

I would ask you to confirm that, if an official has said that an Austrian company is in some way excluded from participating in joint development projects, then this official has got the wrong end of the stick, and that, if he has not said this, then there is no story.

Will you confirm what is the case?

Mr Haarder, to my knowledge no official has been authorised to say such a thing.

My personal opinion is that it would be wrong and unfair to penalise the Austrian people, businesses and employees because of concerns prompted by the establishment in Austria of a new government coalition.

Therefore, subject to verification which I or someone else will give immediately after this sitting, I can confirm what you have just said, that the Commission has never said or authorised anything of this sort.

Generally speaking, there are other lessons to be learnt from what is happening in Austria. I have myself suggested various possible responses to this challenge which serves to remind us all once more what we have been doing together since 1957.

This is an economic community, of course, but it is also, primarily, a community of values.

This is why we are drawing up a Charter of Fundamental Rights which will more widely and more clearly protect our citizens on an individual basis. This is why we have Article 13 of the EC Treaty on discrimination which we proposed, in our opinion of 26 January even before the Austrian crisis, should be applied after the IGC by qualified majority rather than by unanimity.

This is why I personally have an idea to supplement Article 7 of the EU Treaty with a new paragraph which would give the democratic warning or monitoring procedure a legal basis. Finally, this is why we have public debate.

The only way to eliminate misconceived ideas is to offer alternatives, which brings me back to the subject of our discussion. I firmly believe in the democratic force and value of debate, particularly to fight against demagoguery.

Commissioner Barnier, you laid great stress in your statement on the importance of dialogue with the citizens of Europe.

With reference to the IGC, as you know, under the Helsinki decisions the Portuguese Presidency was given the specific entitlement to add to the agenda of the IGC during the course of the IGC.

Clearly, Parliament has its own representatives present, Mr Brok and Mr Tsatsos.

But would you, Commissioner, also be in a position to give an undertaking that if and when the agenda is enlarged by the Council you would report this to Parliament so that we could discuss it amongst ourselves and indeed with you, with the intention of continuing that dialogue with the citizens on which you have laid such stress?

Mr Beazley, my answer is clearly yes but that is no surprise.

Mr Napolitano, the chairman, and many other members of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs and even more MEPs in this House know that, on behalf of the Commission, I will be available to tell you how things are going as they happen throughout these negotiations, in a spirit of transparency.

I will perhaps say this differently from Mr Tsatsos and Mr Brok who are your direct representatives but it is also probable that, in many cases, we will say this together.

It is very important that these negotiations is not secretive with the European Parliament or the national parliaments which, when all said and done, will have their opinions to give and their positions to take in the ratification process.

This is why I congratulate Mr Napolitano' s initiative for regular joint consultation between the national parliaments of the Fifteen and the European Parliament.

Having said that, the duty of transparency and debate starts here with regard to the reform of the institutions.

I will therefore be available whenever you want in order to inform you of our positions and the progress being made in these negotiations throughout this year.

Mr President, firstly I would like to compliment the Commission on its approach.

I think it is extremely useful to open up the communication channels with the citizen at an early stage. This did not really happen for the Treaty of Amsterdam or the Treaty of Maastricht and this has only led to a great deal of mistrust.

I have two questions. Firstly, you mentioned that you will start a two-way dialogue with the citizens and I am already making a start with the 700 placement students at the European Commission.

Do you intend to address the citizens via the media as well, that is to say via the television and Internet?

My second question is of a critical nature.

The European Commission has just issued a proposal on transparency.

If I compare this with the transparency proposal which pertains to legislation in the Netherlands, then the European model is vastly overshadowed by the Dutch model, and that proposal has met with a lot of criticism in the Netherlands.

My question is really: how do you intend to organise transparency with regard to the IGC, because the present directive is not a good example of this.

Mrs Maij-Weggen, given that we are talking about ensuring transparency in the IGC, it is clear how business will be conducted and the negotiations are starting right now.

The group of representatives is currently meeting in Brussels and I will try to join them as soon as possible.

The documents will in the main be open working documents.

Although the negotiation sessions which will take place throughout the year between ministers and the European Council will not be open to the media, I am committed, as I must be at this stage, to ensuring this transparency and reporting in the most appropriate arenas on these negotiations and the Commission' s viewpoint.

I can confirm, and thank you for having asked me about this, that we will use all the most modern means, television in particular, to broadcast our public debates in each country and even across Europe.

We will open an Internet forum and create permanent discussion forums.

The Commissioners will undertake to respond rapidly to any questions raised.

These are the modern means to be used.

However, I believe we must also make the effort to get as close as possible to the people.

Although this may be a rather Utopian ideal, I want a Commissioner, when he can, an MEP, a minister to attend public debates in all the regions of Europe.

I have evidence that this is possible.

The majority of you hold these debates in your constituencies and regions.

Although this may seem rather egotistical, I want the Commission, in the minds of the people, to have a face and for those people forming the Commission to be able to meet our citizens as often as possible.

Mr President, I welcome Mr Barnier' s commitment to go to the regions, both to explain and to listen to what citizens have to say.

I would like to invite him to my own region of Yorkshire, a major European region that is a full participant in the single European market and a major recipient of European structural funding.

He can come with both the hats that he wears as a Commissioner.

I would like to ask him how vigorous the Commission will be in this information campaign?

In some Member States it is not just a matter of providing information to a public that is not as well informed as it might be.

That is certainly important but it is also a question of combating the misinformation that is put around by a very active anti-European movement and anti-European organisations that exist.

The Commission will have to be very vigorous in the responses that it puts out to some of the comments that it will be receiving as part of the campaign.

Mr Corbett, thank you for your comments.

I willingly accept your invitation. If I have understood you correctly, you want me, when I come to Yorkshire, to talk not only about the reform of the European institutions but also the Structural Funds.

I can perform this dual task.

I forgot to mention my intention to go before the national parliaments, as I have already done, not only by meeting their representatives here but by going to see them in situ.

Ten days ago I was in Westminster, so you can see, Mr Corbett, that I am not afraid of the difficulties.

Next week I will go to the Bundestag in Berlin.

I have already appeared before the French Senate.

Therefore, throughout this debate, whenever I can, I will go directly to see the national parliaments too.

With regard to the dialogue with our citizens, it is not a question of propaganda or marketing, nor even of communication.

I want this dialogue to be a real dialogue. So, after a short film objectively explaining the challenges of institutional reform, those in the public gallery can participate in an open discussion.

I will say again that we are going to conduct this dialogue initiative through specific cooperation or a more structured partnership with the Member States. I sincerely hope, with your support, that the governments of the Fifteen will participate in this dialogue initiative in the manner which they consider most appropriate.

Mr President, I should like to join Mr Barnier' s study group with the 700 trainees so that he has some people to discuss matters with.

It is not much fun, of course, having to discuss transparency and intergovernmental conferences with yourself.

In connection with the Intergovernmental Conference, Mr Barnier said, during his presentation in Parliament, that social policy was not to be subject to majority decision-making but, when I look at page 63, I see that rights of travel and of residence - that is to say, the Residence Directives - ,combating discrimination, the whole of social security and the renewal of Regulation No 1408 and, with a few exceptions, of arrangements in the socio-political sphere are to be subject to qualified majority voting.

Is not Mr Barnier nervous about penetrating the inner workings of the Member States' election processes?

It is, of course, these issues which people go to the polls about and which lead to new majorities in the Folketing and other parliaments.

Can such matters be controlled from Brussels?

Is this an element in the radical decentralisation which Mr Prodi talked about this morning?

I was very glad to learn last week that the Commission is giving close attention over a number of years to the concept of subsidiarity and its reference, not merely to relations between the Union and Member States, but also the Union, the Member States, regions and cities.

I hope that in his pursuit of dialogue around the regions of Europe, Commissioner Barnier will expand upon that thought and learn from what he hears.

Commissioner, I want to go back to one of your previous answers. In this you mentioned what I would refer to as the possibilities of protecting the EU Treaty against any risks of deviation and, in particular, the variation of penalties which may be imposed on a Member State, pursuant to Article 7, for the violation of fundamental freedoms.

Do you believe that these proposals, or proposals of this type, form part of the mandate of the IGC as defined in Helsinki?

Are you not afraid that such penalties might get out of hand and serve to punish not violations of human rights but simple differences of opinion, unpopular opinions or deviations from the dominant European thinking?

Yes, Mr Bonde, we will be starting this debate with 700 young people in Brussels who are going to be working in the institutions and with the Commission.

I believe that it will be good to start this dialogue with young people who are motivated.

In terms of social protection, I can confirm that we have made proposals about qualified majority or unanimous voting but these are regardless of ideology.

In your country, Mr Bonde, like everywhere else, I believe people are keen for the internal market to work properly under the fairest conditions of competition and movement of goods and people.

This will therefore be our rule.

We are proposing that decisions on certain policies or measures involving taxation or social protection and social security should be taken by qualified majority voting when there is a direct link with the proper operation of the internal market. Our proposal is not general or systematic.

I am well aware of the sensitivity of these taxation and social protection issues.

I do not believe that all the national systems of social protection should be made identical.

This has never been the case. We are simply trying to ensure, in a Europe with 30 or 27 Member States, the best conditions for the operation of the internal market without one country being able to block the other 26 or 27.

Mr MacCormick, I agree that this dialogue must reach beyond the national capitals.

It must get as close as possible to the people, where they live and where they have their roots.

If I said anything different I would be contradicting myself as Commissioner for Regional Policy which is one of the most specific and most visible policies for increasing employment and improving the quality of life of people in their regions. You will often hear me say that this policy does not just have one main objective of achieving cohesion and solidarity between the regions but that it is intended in addition to help people, where they live, to preserve their roots, traditions, soul and identity.

We will therefore conduct this dialogue with the towns and regions.

Mr Berthu, the Helsinki mandate is clear and we are working within this.

It specifies that we must deal firstly and as a priority with the three basic issues which were left out in Amsterdam.

It also adds related institutional questions and issues which may be included in the negotiations depending on the Portuguese and French presidencies.

The Commission is acting correctly if, on a particular point, it believes it must add to its opinion which covers many institutional questions. I am not yet sure that we will do this on Article 7.

However, if we do, this will not be solely in response or as a reaction to an economic situation which is sufficiently serious that the fourteen governments of the Union must mobilise together to give their response. We will also do this with regard for the future in general.

We will use all the means available to permanently strengthen the community of values which we have been building together since the founding of the Union in 1957, and even before that, on the rubble of the Second World War.

Everything which can be done will be useful. I am sure that you and I, Mr Berthu, can at least agree on this.

You have answered the questions precisely and also opened the dialogue for Europe that you referred to.

You have set a very good example of time-keeping today.

The next item is Question Time (B5-0009/2000).

We will examine questions to the Commission.

Subject: High infant mortality in Kosovo According to the latest UN data received from the World Health Organisation, Kosovo has the highest rate of infant mortality in Europe; almost 50% of babies born prematurely die, while the war has produced a steep rise in miscarriages and children who manage to go to term are smaller than the norm.

In the context of the humanitarian aid provided by the Union and the efforts of its envoy Bernard Kouchner, will the Commission say what measures have been taken to safeguard the women of Kosovo's right to motherhood and the health of pregnant women, women in childbirth and babies?

Mr President, the Commission is conscious of the very difficult situation concerning health and health facilities in Kosovo, not just for pregnant women but across the board.

This results both from the recent conflict and from the years of neglect and lack of maintenance that preceded it.

The statistics quoted on child mortality speak for themselves and are wholly unacceptable.

However, the situation is hardly better for other parts of the population.

The Commission' s response has been as follows: firstly, the health sector has been a significant beneficiary of ECHO funding.

ECHO is currently focusing on the provision of medical supplies and emergency health care, on support to institutions as well as vaccination.

However, efforts are increasingly oriented towards the establishment of a self-sufficient healthcare system in the province.

UNMIK has already taken a significant role in this field.

Secondly, under the reconstruction programme, urgent intervention at the hospital in Mitrovica has already been initiated with a EUR 1 million rehabilitation programme.

Progress is slow due to the tense relations between the ethnic groups of this divided city.

However, the Commission is maintaining its efforts with the support of UNMIK for this project.

We hope that one day it may become a symbol promoting the benefits of ethnic reconciliation.

Under the European Community' s damage assessment, estimated costs of the reconstruction of healthcare facilities and provision of equipment to dispensaries and health houses amount to EUR 4 million.

The Commission is now turning to the programming of 2000 funds.

We expect to dedicate a considerable sum to improving the healthcare system.

The emphasis will be on long-term reforms covering health financing as well as training and procurement.

Work is already under way with UNMIK to determine an appropriate contribution from the Commission to this enterprise.

Commissioner, this morning President Prodi, among others, stressed that the Balkans are testing our ability to act effectively, the very credibility of the European Union is on trial, and the gap between words and deeds must finally be closed.

Commissioner, do you really think that the facts we have about high infant mortality in Kosovo - the highest in Europe - and more generally the picture of human misery and destruction that prevails in Kosovo, are not already damaging our credibility and casting doubt on our ability to live up to our promises?

Besides, Commissioner, is so-called humanitarian military intervention justified by the present picture of human destruction in Kosovo?

Do you think that so much inaction is excusable when, on the continent of Europe itself, the right to life is at risk?

I do not think that our reconstruction agency or the task force before it, which have been working incredibly hard in Kosovo, would regard it as an adequate description of their labours to suggest that they had been standing idly by.

I am sure the honourable Member did not mean that.

Of course, she is entirely correct in saying that the Union' s credibility is on the line with what happens, not just in Kosovo but in the Balkans as a whole.

I am very concerned that the assistance we provide should arrive expeditiously and in a way which can maximise our assistance.

I would just make two points about the situation in Kosovo which we are addressing as enthusiastically as we can along WHO lines.

First of all, I am sure that the honourable Member recognises that over the period of the 1990s the government in Belgrade underfunded the health service in Kosovo, and many Albanians found that they were not really receiving any health care at all.

As a result of that, a parallel health care system was put in place through the Mother Teresa Society.

So what we are dealing with is not just the consequences of conflict but the consequences of years of neglect and chronic under-investment.

Secondly, and I am sure that the honourable Member recognises this as well, some of the tragic stories to come out of Kosovo in recent weeks have not been about child mortalities during carriage of a baby, but child mortality after a healthy baby has been born.

Those were cases in which women who during the hostilities, or before the hostilities, tragically killed their own children.

We are dealing with a horrific story in Kosovo.

We have to work as well as we can in the health care field and in others to restore something approaching civilised standards and civilised behaviour, but it is not going to be easy.

Commissioner, I would like to thank you for your response to the Member' s first question and the supplementary question.

However, I still have some contacts in Kosovo who have informed me that food packages which are distributed by ECHO, among others, are often of inferior quality.

In some cases, there have been incidents of food containing insects and such like.

Are you prepared to act upon it?

This is my first additional question.

My second question pertains to the reconstruction of the hospital in Mitrovica.

You are perhaps aware that this hospital is located in the Northern part of the city and that, given the tense situation, Albanian Kosovars do not have any access to this section at all.

What does the Commission intend to do in order to ensure that Albanian Kosovars too can get to hospital?

On the first question, I am going myself to Kosovo at the beginning of next month for another visit and I will certainly look into the allegation made by the honourable Member about the ECHO food package.

I have not heard that suggestion before, but it is an important point and I will certainly investigate it when I am there.

Secondly, I do understand exactly what the honourable Member is saying about Mitrovica.

I was in Mitrovica a couple of months ago, I saw the situation there for myself.

I had discussions with municipal leaders from both communities, including the leader of the Albanian side who had himself in the past been a doctor and was generally recognised for the medical work he had done during the hostilities and subsequently.

So I know the very serious problems that exist in that hospital and I can assure the honourable Member that we will be doing all that we can to see that adequate health facilities are available for everybody in Kosovo, whatever ethnic group they come from.

The particular difficulties in Mitrovica - for example, it is not just a question of Albanian patients having difficulty getting to hospital, Albanian staff have had difficulty working there - are particularly acute problems.

We will try to address them, but it is not easy.

Subject: Turkish blockade of Armenia Given that the European Union is actively promoting social, economic and political relations with Armenia through the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement signed on 12 October 1999, what steps is the Commission taking to persuade the Turkish Government to lift the economic blockade of Armenia?

The Commission supports any effort aimed at the settlement of the disputes between Turkey and Armenia and regrets that there has not yet been any normalisation of relations between these two countries.

In the present political circumstances it is however unrealistic to imagine that the border between Armenia and Turkey, as well as the one between Armenia and Azerbaijan could be opened without settlement of the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict.

Mr President, the Commission will be holding negotiations in the future on the accession of Turkey to the European Union.

Will it make it a condition that negotiations can only start if the blockade is lifted because, in the final analysis, we are all neighbours and we want to cultivate positive neighbourly relations inside the European Union?

My question therefore is this: will the Commission make this one of the conditions in order to improve future discussions?

The key issue is to support the efforts of the OSCE Minsk group to find a settlement to the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict and we stand ready to help in any way we can.

We have also been substantial contributors of development assistance under the TACIS programme to Armenia.

Let me relate my answer specifically to the question of Turkish accession to the European Union.

The situation of Turkey's relations with its neighbours will, as the honourable Member asks, be closely examined in the framework of the pre-accession strategy.

As stated in Agenda 2000 - and I quote: "Enlargement should not mean importing border conflicts".

That statement could not be much clearer.

But I repeat that the most important contribution we can make is to try to assist in the resolution of that conflict which has had such harmful economic and humanitarian results.

Subject: Implications for human rights of the construction of the Ilisu Dam in Turkey Given that Turkey has recently been granted applicant country status, what is the Commission's view of the implications for human rights of the construction of the Ilisu Dam, given the massive displacement of the Kurdish and the other people of the region that will result?

The Commission has no information regarding the impact of the construction of the Ilisu Dam on the population of the region.

We will, however, consider raising the matter with the Turkish authorities, together with other issues concerning regional development policies in the framework of the new pre-accession strategy for Turkey.

It concerns the implications of the dam on access to fresh water in the region as a whole.

As you know, the dam will limit the supply of fresh water to Syria and to Iraq in particular.

Given the extreme volatility of this region and given the very real concerns of many commentators that we will see an increased incidence of conflict, of so-called "water wars", in the coming decades, what is the Commission's view about the potential destabilisation, both in Turkey and in the wider region, that will be caused by this dam?

Can you say whether you will indeed raise this point as well?

We will certainly raise the point made by the honourable Member.

We have heard anxieties expressed on that point and I will ensure it is taken up.

There have also been considerable anxieties expressed about the potential danger to the archaeological heritage in the area.

We will raise that, too, in the representations we make.

A number of other hydro-electric schemes planned over the last 30 years in Turkey have raised matters of concern, such as the effect on displaced farmers.

On the whole those seem to have been dealt with relatively satisfactorily and I hope that the same can be true of this project which - just to make the point clear - is not a project in which the Commission is participating in any form.

We thank Mr Patten for having replied on behalf of the Commission.

Subject: Drafting of Charter of Fundamental Rights The general public welcomes the fact that a Charter of Fundamental Rights is to be drawn up. It is also to be hoped that it will meet the challenges of Europe in the 21st century.

What are the Commission's views on the substance of the Charter? What type of rights will the Charter set out (economic, social and cultural)?

Which citizens will it cover (those of the European Union or the citizens of all European countries with a view to enlargement? Will it cover immigrants etc.?)

Will it set out established social rights in the European Union or will it set a broader agenda?

What means will the Charter use to ensure that it clearly guarantees equality between the sexes?

What are the Commission's views on incorporating the Charter into the Treaty on European Union?

Like the honourable Member, the Commission welcomes the decision taken by the Heads of State and Government to start the process of drawing up a European Charter of Fundamental Rights. In the conclusions of the Cologne European Council the Heads of State and Government even established the broad outlines of the Charter' s content.

According to these conclusions, the Charter must contain three categories of rights. The first category is rights of freedom and equality and procedural rights, as guaranteed by the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms.

The second is the rights reserved for citizens of the European Union. The third is economic and social rights, as contained in the European Social Charter and the Community Charter of the Fundamental Social Rights of Workers, insofar as they do not merely establish objectives for action by the Union.

The Commission considers that the Convention responsible for drawing up the Charter of Fundamental Rights must respect the mandate given by the Cologne European Council.

Having said that, this does not mean that the Convention should be limited to a codifying role of simply compiling the existing rights from various sources.

As I have said before in this House, the Commission is convinced that the Convention must be able, if necessary, to adapt and develop these rights in view of current circumstances, particularly technological and social changes.

However, given the mandate and the final objective of the text to be submitted to the Heads of State and Government, this power must be exercised with caution and on a case-by-case basis.

The rights conferred by this Charter will have at least two types of beneficiary.

Some rights will apply to anyone present in the EU territory while others will benefit only citizens of the European Union.

It may also be envisaged that some economic and social rights could be guaranteed only for citizens of the European Union and third-country nationals meeting certain conditions.

It is not possible at this initial stage of the process of drawing up the Charter to prejudge its content in more detail.

However, I can confirm that the principle of equal opportunity and equal treatment between men and women will certainly be included among the rights guaranteed by the future European Charter of Fundamental Rights. This is because this principle already figures among the rights guaranteed by the EC Treaty and by secondary legislation and because it undoubtedly constitutes a common constitutional tradition in the Member States.

As I have also said before to this House, the Commission is favourable to inserting the Charter in the EU Treaty.

However, we are fully aware that the final decision on this matter will fall to the Heads of State and Government.

The difficult part, which will fall to the Convention, is therefore to draw up an ambitious and politically significant text which can be integrated as such into the Treaties.

In its opinion on the holding of an Intergovernmental Conference to amend the Treaties, the Commission noted that the European Council must decide during the year 2000 on the inclusion of certain items on the IGC agenda, in particular the European Charter of Fundamental Rights.

Commissioner, it is quite significant that at the beginning of this new century people in Europe, men and women, are being called upon to redefine their rights and obligations.

We hope that this important Cologne Council decision will become a reality.

Globalisation on the one hand and enlargement on the other, make it urgently necessary to define those rights.

Seattle is a real source of concern in that context and we hope that the European Council in Nice will not be a wasted meeting.

But if we are to secure the public' s participation in this new planning, we would like to learn what plan the European bodies and specifically the Commission are proposing as the social and democratic model of Europe in the twenty-first century.

I listened to your general guidelines and I would like to ask you what is the position of children, as entities in their own right, in the Commission' s plans for the new model of society in the twenty-first century.

Mr President, Mrs Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou, in my opinion, and as Mr Prodi said this morning, the drawing up of the Charter is an exercise with great political significance. This is because it shows that the Union places the fundamental rights of citizens at the top of the political concerns for the future of our common project.

In this context, the criteria by which these rights are to be chosen must be clearly indicated.

The essential criterion is the rights of citizens with regard to the European institutions, as contained in the European project enshrined in the Treaties of the European Union.

I understand your concern about the rights of children.

Many elements of our work, and particularly of my work as Commissioner for Justice and Home Affairs, involve protecting the rights of children.

This is an area in which the principle of subsidiarity applies fully.

Each Member State is principally responsible for defining its responsibilities towards children.

As for the EU' s responsibility, the rights of children must be recognised in the Charter according to the areas in which the Union can give added value to the promotion of the social and economic situation and even the citizenship, in its broadest sense, of children.

I hope we can meet the challenge which the honourable Member has posed for the Commission and the whole Convention.

Mr President, I have had the privilege of hearing the Commissioner a number of times on this issue and I very much agree with his approach.

However, I should like to ask a slightly different question.

We have just heard Commissioner Barnier say that he is anxious to communicate better with the people and to aim the information policy of the Commission towards the major issues that the Community is dealing with this year.

Would the Commissioner argue for some of the information budget of the Commission to be put towards informing and consulting the citizens on this issue of a Citizens Charter?

It is very important that the people feel engaged in this process.

I know that the Convention itself will do much in this area but it does not have the resources that the Commission has.

Will the Commission look at using its information budget to ensure people are engaged in this debate?

It is the policy of the Commission to promote an open and wide debate on the Charter of Fundamental Rights, not only with non-governmental organisations but also with the citizens in a project as far-reaching as the Charter is.

I can assure you that the Commission will do its best to promote the debate on the future Charter of Fundamental Rights.

We can achieve the best of both worlds by having a clear text, a text that can be easily read by the citizens, and at the same time a text that can be used as a legal instrument.

There is no contradiction between the two.

The challenge we have is to bring them together in the final version of the Charter.

I am very glad to know that I can count on your support here.

Subject: Articles 6.1, 7.1 and 7.2 of the Treaty on European Union Article 6.1 of the Treaty states that the Union is based on principles of liberty, democracy, respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms.

It is clear from statements over the past years that Jörg Haider and the Freedom Party do not respect human rights and fundamental freedoms with respect to third country nationals and minority groups living in Austria.

Therefore, will the Commission state when they intend to propose under Article 7.1 that there is 'the existence of a serious and persistent breach by a Member State of the principles mentioned in Article 6.1.' , and urge the Council acting by qualified majority to suspend certain rights deriving from the application of this Treaty to Austria including the voting rights of the representative of Austria in the Council?

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I would like to begin my answer by reminding you of the position adopted by the Commission with regard to the formation of the new Austrian Government. This was reiterated this morning in President Romano Prodi' s speech on that government which includes Ministers from Jörg Haider' s Freedom Party.

I am referring ,of course, to the statement made by the Commission on 1 February 2000, the basic elements of which I would like to restate.

The Commission confirmed then, as it does today, that it shares the concerns underlying the Portuguese Presidency' s statement of 1 February 2000.

These concerns are legitimate and there are good reasons for them.

There is no need for me to remind you of Jörg Haider' s political bias and of his many xenophobic and racist public statements, which are also anti-European.

The fact that an openly extremist, racist and xenophobic party can reach power in a Member State of the European Union will inevitably be a source of concern to the other States that are taking part in the European project. The European Commission is certainly not indifferent to the matter either.

Secondly, the Commission reiterated and reiterates again its commitment to continue fulfilling its duty as guardian of the Treaties, specifically with regard to Articles 6 and 7 of the Treaty on European Union.

One of the most important innovations provided by the Treaty of Amsterdam was to clarify the basic principles which represent the shared heritage of the Member States. Another innovation was the establishment of a mechanism which would monitor whether these principles are being fulfilled, and which would react if any of them were violated.

The Commission thereby gave a practical demonstration of its commitment to one of the essential pillars: that of the rule of law. This principle means that the Commission must act within the limits laid down by the Treaties and it is in this context that the statement of 1 February was made.

The Commission is not a State. It cannot and must not act as if it were one.

In order to give a precise answer to your question, Mr Ford, I must remind you that in order for the mechanism established by Article 7.1 of the Treaty on European Union to be applied, there must be proof of the existence and I quote, of a "serious and persistent breach by a Member State of the principles mentioned in Article 6."

I repeat, a "serious and persistent breach" is the condition necessary for the Commission to be able to propose to the Council that measures be adopted against a Member State.

I think that it is obvious that conditions have not been met which would apply to the current situation in Austria.

As a matter of fact I think that I am right in saying that we all hope that these conditions of a serious and persistent breach of human rights and of democracy are never fulfilled, either in Austria or in any other Member State.

I would like to assure you of my personal commitment and of that of the Commission, as stated once again by President Prodi this morning, to doing everything to ensure that we do not have to apply the mechanism stated in Article 7.

I would also like to assure you though that we will not hesitate to apply it should it prove necessary.

The values at stake are too central, too fundamental for us to accept dithering or compromises.

Individuals and governments should be judged by what they do rather than by what they say.

In Austria' s case, the statements are contradictory to say the least.

On the one hand, any of us could pick up on a whole cluster of inflammatory remarks by the leader of the Freedom Party.

On the other hand, the new Austrian Government' s programme reaffirms its commitment to defend democracy and human rights.

We will soon have our first opportunity, and an excellent opportunity it will be, to see which one of these two faces of the Freedom Party is the real one.

I am referring to the position the Austrian Government will adopt at the Council with regard to the Commission' s proposals for the establishment of an action programme to combat discrimination and for two directives.

One applies to the principle of treating people equally, without differentiating on the grounds of race or ethnic origin. The other proposal will provide protection at work against discrimination on the grounds of ethnic or racial origin, religion, handicap or sexual persuasion.

These are significant texts, adopted in accordance with Article 13 of the Treaty, which gave the Community jurisdiction to fight discrimination on the grounds of race, ethnic origin, sex etc.

Lastly, I would like to assure you, Mr Ford, that the Commission will remain vigilant and will not fail to act in accordance with its responsibilities, should it prove necessary.

I thank the Commissioner for his reply to my question.

But is Commissioner Vitorino aware, not only of Mr Haider's and the Freedom Party's words, but also of their deeds?

Mr Haider has actually been in government in the southern province of Carinthia where he has led a racist and xenophobic campaign against the Slovene-speaking minority in that region who are Austrian citizens, where he has attempted to abolish dual language education and where there has been clear discrimination against the Roma and immigrant communities.

Could the Commissioner answer two questions.

Can he tell us how that verification will take place and who will do it?

Secondly, does he not agree that were the current government, at a national level, to pursue the kind of policies that Mr Haider and the Freedom Party have pursued at regional level, then there clearly would be a breach of Article 6(1) of the Treaty with regard to fundamental freedom and human rights and it would be incumbent upon the Commission to take the necessary action?

We are not talking about words here.

We are talking about deeds by the Freedom Party and Mr Haider.

It is quite clear to me that it is the responsibility of the Commission to closely monitor the evolution of the situation in the Member States according to the procedures and standards that are enshrined in Article 6 and justify the use of Article 7 of the Treaty.

Therefore I am fully confident that the Commission will be able to follow very closely the evolution of the situation in Austria, as in any other Member State.

If any concrete case of persistent violation of human rights perpetrated by the government of one Member State occurs, we will be entirely capable to react and to act accordingly.

I also rely not only on the cooperation of the Members of the European Parliament, but also on the cooperation of non-governmental organisations, which have always made an important contribution to the anti-discrimination policy of the Commission.

Regarding the situation in Carinthia, we need to look at this in detail.

The honourable Member raised the question.

The protection of ethnic minorities and of minorities that speak a specific language is an element of the programme and of the two directives that the Commission has put before the Council.

We should not only focus this debate on the Austrian question.

That question calls for reflection, for debate and, if necessary, for action.

I sincerely hope that all Member States will take the opportunity of this action plan and these two directives that the Commission has presented to the Council to reiterate in clear and concrete terms their approval for the action plan and for the directives and their commitment to fight against discrimination, racism and xenophobia wherever it might occur.

Thank you very much, Mr Vitorino, for your valuable contribution to this Question Time.

Subject: Surplus electrical and electronic equipment Each year the European Union has to deal with a growing volume of surplus electrical and electronic equipment (6 million tonnes' worth in 1998), mainly on account of the speed with which such equipment becomes obsolescent.

The environmental problems stemming from the incineration and the dumping of such waste are mainly attributable to the presence of hazardous substances (lead, cadmium, mercury, hexavalent chrome, PVC and halogenated flame retarders).

A preliminary draft directive intended to regulate the management of such waste has been through three successive versions, the most recent of which dates from July 1999.

Can the Commission account for the lengthy gestation of this draft, which should in theory have emerged in its final form in 1998?

Is it true that the US Government is disputing most of the provisions of the current draft and is even threatening to appeal to the World Trade Organisation (for infringement of Article XI of the GATT and Article 2(2) of the Agreement on technical obstacles to trade) if it is adopted?

The Commission agrees with MEPs that the current method of dumping electrical and electronic waste is causing major environmental problems.

Consequently, the Commission decided to prepare a proposal on the subject and, since 1997, has been involved in discussions with the parties concerned.

The outcome of the discussions, as well as of the in-depth investigations which are being carried out in this area, are now being examined by the Commission.

Some parts of the proposal have been criticised, among them the phasing out of some heavy metals and brominated flame retardants, as well as the application of the principle of making manufacturers responsible for the disposal of electrical and electronic waste.

The United States' delegation to the European Union is concerned about certain points in the last consultation paper, inter alia the phasing out of the materials already mentioned, as well as certain questions arising from the principle of manufacturers' responsibility for the disposal of electrical and electronic waste.

The main argument put forward by the United States in this context is that the present provisions are, they say, incompatible with international trade law.

The Commission is currently carefully reviewing the United States' arguments.

I should just like to add that my intention is that the Commission should be able to present a proposal on the dumping of electrical and electronic waste before Easter.

My question specifically concerned the reaction of the US Government to the text of the preliminary draft.

There have in fact been three preliminary draft texts with the last one, to my knowledge, dating from July 1999.

Is this the text which you will be submitting, or an amendment to the original version?

Version 3 is already much weaker than Version 2 following the comments of US industry as relayed by the US Government.

I note in particular that when you talk about the international law with which the text would not be compatible, you are referring in fact to the rules of the World Trade Organisation.

The arguments of the US Government concern the fact that a future ban on the presence of dangerous substances in electrical and electronic waste would be contrary to the WTO rules.

This worries me because this means that, when adopting texts, we are going to be continually threatened by attack from the World Trade Organisation. This will fundamentally weaken European environmental legislation and particularly this proposal.

Thank you for the follow-up question.

It is important for me to have a chance to answer it.

It is clear that in a process such as this, where we are discussing the disposal of a considerable stream of both electrical and electronic waste in Europe, there is an on-going dialogue between the different parties concerned.

The dialogue has been fruitful and has led to our preparing a proposal.

Parts of it have been strengthened, but other parts may well contain too many compromises.

We are still in the process of preparing a text, and the dialogue with the relevant parties will continue up until the last moment.

I do not think that the intervention of the United States should push us in a direction that would lead to our taking insufficient account of environmental considerations.

I strongly oppose using the WTO and trade rules as a pretext for preventing the EU from introducing radical environmental standards.

I start from the assumption that we should in fact introduce these.

However, I do want to listen to all the points of view.

For example, I recently met representatives of the electronics industry who put forward suggestions - including practical ones - for improving our own proposal.

However, I totally reject any suggestion that I would allow the United States to determine the shape of our directive.

In fact, I believe that we should be showing the way, an intention that will also characterise the final proposal.

Subject: Gender and environment Practically all the contributors involved in the Rio and Kyoto processes - individual organisations, civic action groups, governments, the World Bank, the UN and relief organisations - believed that women should take a greater part in decision-making on the environment.

More women in decision-making positions on various environmental bodies would extend the predominantly male terms of reference beyond business alone to embrace social justice as well.

Is the Commission prepared to adopt an action plan to increase the active participation of women in decision-making in the environmental field?

In 1988, the Commission introduced an action plan to promote equal opportunities for women and men.

Through the current programme, which covers the period 1997 to 2000, we are endeavouring to encourage a workplace culture in which the value of both men and women is integrated and where gender-specific needs are taken into consideration.

One of the programme's aims is to develop and supervise methods, strategies and measures for promoting gender equality in the decision-making process and in positions of responsibility.

Within the framework of the action plan, each individual directorate general is to prepare its own programme of measures.

One of the goals of those programmes is to increase the number of women in managerial positions.

The new Commission's own objective is to double the number of women managers before the end of its term of office.

The same line is being pursued with particular vigour in the Directorate-General for the Environment, where nearly 60 per cent of directors and 20 per cent of unit heads are women.

Our policy is to encourage the recruitment of women to administrative posts in order to create a reserve of suitable candidates for future promotion to managerial positions.

Currently, women hold 24.5 per cent of our A-grade posts, and we hope the number will increase steadily.

Moreover, we are trying hard to attract qualified women to participate in our consultation groups.

As regards our external partners, all we can do is set them a good example and encourage their efforts to democratise their decision-making processes.

With respect to the general principle of incorporating a perspective of equality, as you know, this principle is included in the Treaty of Amsterdam.

Article 3 of the Treaty states that, in all the activities referred to in this Article, the Community shall aim to eliminate inequalities, and to promote equality, between women and men.

The Commission gives its full support to the efforts being made in this area and is continuing its investigations into whether specific measures can be implemented in the environmental field.

I should, of course, like to take this opportunity to say that I appreciate the role played by the European Parliament' s Committee on Women' s Rights and Equal Opportunities, particularly its chair.

I should just like to recall that, during the lengthy process of approving the present Commission, every Commissioner was questioned by the Women' s Committee on how they would tackle the issue of equality within their own particular field.

We shall be monitoring each Commissioner carefully, so the other Commissioners have now been forewarned.

I interpret it as saying that you agree that what is needed is an action plan to enable more women to take part in specific environmental fields.

I should also like to point out that the Beijing Declaration emphasises the importance of having the institutional capacity to introduce a perspective of equality into all environmental programmes.

Environmental agencies often do not have the required knowledge or procedures for incorporating such a perspective into their daily work.

I naturally want to know whether the Commissioner is willing to incorporate the idea of equality into environmental policy and programmes.

In order for all policies to be similarly permeated by the concept of equality, it is especially important that people in key posts should have the basic knowledge required.

(SV) My understanding of mainstreaming is, of course, that this should characterise everything we do.

In the action plan prepared by my Directorate-General, issues of equality play a very important role.

For example, I am prepared to give seminars on leadership or other subjects myself to encourage women to take on further tasks within the Commission.

If we are to be able to motivate everybody, I believe it is extremely important for this message to be sent all the way from the top down or, if you prefer, from the bottom up.

My impression of environment-related work, broadly speaking, is that in many instances it is dominated by women.

This state of affairs must be encouraged so that women have a chance to secure managerial posts or reach high-ranking positions in the environmental field.

I should like to make it plain that our programme reflects that intention, but there is certainly room for improvement.

I have some experience in drawing up plans and following them up.

I hope that this will be of benefit.

Subject: The Boyne Estuary and the Drogheda Port Company The Boyne Estuary is designated a Special Protection Area (SPA) under the Wild Birds Directive and is under consideration for designation as a Special Area of Conservation under the Habitats Directive, as it is an area of international importance.

However, the Department of the Marine, Louth County Council and Drogheda Corporation have allowed the development of a new port in the SPA and even the elimination of a mudflat at Stegrennan recently added to the SPA specifically at the Commission's insistence.

What is more, a very large warehouse has been constructed, in respect of which it is proving difficult to secure access to the planning permission and other infrastructures are planned by the Drogheda Corporation.

How can the Commission ensure that this sort of development financed through the Structural Funds does not conflict with the nature conservation needs of the area?

Is the Commission ready to suspend funding completely, pending a review of the development plans of the area?

The Commission is aware of the construction of the harbour, but we know nothing about the warehouse or the rest of the infrastructure mentioned by the honourable Member.

The harbour construction project is receiving support from the Structural Funds and chiefly involves dredging the river Boyne Estuary and depositing the mud on the mudflats at Stegrennan.

The Boyne Estuary is designated a special protection area under the Wild Birds Directive.

That means that any development that takes place in or near the Boyne Estuary and that is likely to affect the special protection area must take account of the protection criteria for the area laid down in the Community' s Habitats Directive.

Since 1998, the Commission has received a number of complaints alleging that the harbour will damage the mudflats at Stegrennan, which are now designated a part of the special protection area, and that the relevant protection criteria have not been observed.

After investigating these complaints between 1998 and the beginning of 1999 - during which time the project did not receive support from the Structural Funds - the Commission became convinced, in the summer of 1999, that the relevant protection criteria had been observed during the building of the harbour.

An in-depth environmental impact assessment had been carried out.

The most serious harm caused by the project, the damage to the Stegrennan mudflats, was only to be temporary, and the developers were liable for completely restoring the mudflats.

At the Commission's suggestion, the mudflats at Stegrennan were formally included in the Boyne Estuary special protection area, from which they had previously been excluded.

Furthermore, to compensate for the negative effects on the bird populations caused by the temporary disappearance of the mudflats, the intention was that other habitats in the estuary should be improved.

However, since last summer the measure just mentioned has been in dispute.

Firstly, the Irish authorities withdrew their earlier commitment to carry out improvements.

They then renewed their commitment after an Irish non-governmental organisation began a legal challenge in the Irish courts.

However, the new commitment included some minor changes which, in turn, led to a further complaint.

In view of the fact that the Irish authorities have undertaken to make compensatory improvements and that other issues have already been resolved, the Commission will not, for the present, propose that financial support from the Structural Funds should be suspended.

However, it wishes to discuss the question of compensatory measures with respect to improved habitats with the Irish authorities, particularly in the light of the continuing legal challenge in the Irish courts.

- I do not quite understand what the Commissioner said.

The mudflat at Stregrennan, which was made a special protection area at the request of the Commission, has been completely destroyed at this stage.

It is clear that the activities that have taken place there are in clear breach of EU directives.

You say there will be no further funding.

I would like to know whether you are going to stop completely the funding at this stage until there is a proper investigation.

If you are, when exactly are you going to do it?

Is it correct and proper that the department which owns the company is also the authority which issues the licence, and also the authority which basically takes the money from the EU and gives it to a company that it owns 100%?

What is your opinion on that?

Any EU funding for the project must be stopped because it is in clear breach of EU directives.

Even the area designated by the Commissioners as a special protection area has been destroyed.

Compensation afterwards is not going to make up for the damage that was done.

The first legal challenge followed the start of work on the port of development in early autumn 1999 without the compensatory habitat improvements being in place.

As a result, the Irish authorities agreed to reinstate the cord grass removal but this time by direct mechanical means.

The use of mechanical means led to a further legal challenge - that is what I referred to also in my first answer - based on the argument that mechanical removal would damage the underlying mudflats and would cause the ecologically-harmful spread of cord grass in the estuary.

There is to date no conclusive outcome to this legal challenge.

The adoption of the necessary compensatory measures is a matter for the national authorities, and does not require prior Commission approval.

The Commission' s role is to make sure that the standards required by the Birds Directive are fully met, and clearly there would be a problem with compensatory measures which were themselves damaging.

In this case, the Commission proposes to seek further clarification from the Irish authorities on the up-to-date position on the compensatory measures and possible problems with the mechanical removal of cord grass.

We are not at the moment ready to propose to stop the financing from the Structural Funds.

Mr President, sadly, the specific case raised by Mrs McKenna is not an isolated one.

There are other examples of conservation in special scientific areas being damaged as a result of EU funding.

Will the Commission consider issuing instructions to all Member States saying that, if in future it discovers that European environmental directives have been breached or proper environmental assessment has not been carried out, it will not only stop future funding but will withdraw the funding already granted, in other words, reclaim the money from the Member States?

It is only such action which will discourage this practice in the future.

(SV) This is a very important question.

As MEPs are well aware, in the course of last year a joint text was issued by our predecessors in the Commission, Ritt Bjerregaard and Monika Wulf-Mathies concerning the relationship between the Structural Funds, money from the Structural Funds and protection under the Habitats and Birds Directives.

The message contained in the joint text is still valid.

We cannot hand out money with one hand and, with the other, take countries to court, where they may well be fined.

It is therefore important that there be a coordination strategy.

The result may, of course, be some difficult questions of priorities.

In my view, the most important consequence, however, is that countries should do some careful thinking and, above all, make sure they send in their lists of Natura 2000 sites. Then we will be in a position to carry out methodical monitoring and follow-up procedures.

In that respect, Ireland falls short, like other Member States, but we hope that the pressure we are exerting will produce results.

I should just like to point out once again that the joint text still holds good.

The Rules of Procedure do not allow this.

You will have to discuss this outside the Chamber.

Subject: Partnership arrangements and the third community support framework for Greece The recent Regulation (EC) 1260/1999 laying down general provisions on the Structural Funds places greater emphasis than the previous regulation on stronger partnership, involving the regional and local authorities and other public bodies, the economic and social partners and all other relevant bodies not only in the preparation but also in the funding, monitoring and assessment of the measures taken.

However, local authorities have repeatedly expressed the view that 'partnership' arrangements under the new CSF for Greece have remained unchanged and are singularly lacking in substance.

Has the Greek Government introduced any changes so as to extend the scope of partnership arrangements to the local authorities and other representative bodies?

In what way have the local authorities be given a greater say in the preparation and administration of the third CSF and what steps will the Commission take to ensure greater participation by the 'partners' in all measures taken under the new CSF?

May I quickly add something to the answer given just now by Mrs Wallström to Mr Martin?

This was a joint letter between our two predecessors and I consider, as the successor to Mrs Wulf-Mathies, that this letter is still valid. I will actively endeavour with Mrs Wallström to verify the compatibility of the projects financed by the Structural Funds with the EU environmental directives and policies.

I am also saying this as a former environment minister.

Turning now to the question posed by Mr Alavanos, who I hope will pardon me for this brief diversion onto another subject, the Commission has been monitoring and will continue to monitor, during the preparation of the new programming period, the application of the partnership principle.

The involvement of regional and local authorities in the Community' s action is, as you know, one of the essential elements of the new post-Berlin Structural Funds Regulation.

With regard to the specific application of this partnership principle within the next Community support framework for Greece, the Commission has noted that the public authorities were largely involved during the preparation of the Greek regional development plan for the 2000-2006 period.

Mr Alavanos knows that I have been to Greece twice under the quite tragic circumstances of the earthquake disaster. During these visits, I held discussions with the Greek Government and raised this concern about the correct implementation of the partnership objective and requirement.

As for subsequent phases, in other words the preparation of national and regional programmes, it is not enough for this objective to be taken into account at national and theoretical level. It must also be specifically included in the programmes establishing the CSF at national, regional and local level.

As for the monitoring and management of these programmes, I have not yet received the national provisions proposed by the Greek Government pursuant to Article 8 of the new Regulation.

In the current negotiations on this third Community support framework, I have asked for the provisions on the partnership principle to be fully respected, with regard to both regional and local authorities and to non-governmental organisations and associations.

Within the third CSF, this principle must specifically lead to the participation of all these partners in the monitoring committee.

This is all I can say.

I thank the Commissioner, and do not at all question his intentions and interventions, which adopted a positive line.

However, things are really quite different.

The operation of the Community Support Framework is ruled by a centralising hand and indeed at this time we are experiencing state, government and party delirium as regards the European Union' s funding.

I cannot show you the television programmes here but I can show you the Greek newspapers from a few weeks before the elections.

In the Sunday papers all over Greece: the Ministry of Public Works concerning the structural fund: the Minister' s work; the Ministry of Agriculture: the Minister' s work - just a few weeks before the elections - the Ministry of Telecommunications: the work of the Minister for Telecommunications; the Ministry of Education: the work of the Minister for Education and a photograph of the Minister; the Ministry of Employment: the work of the Minister for Employment, a photograph of the Minister and a photograph of the State Secretary, and behind them all the symbols of the Community Support Framework.

There are only a few weeks to go before the elections.

This is both propaganda by the party and propaganda by the candidates, financed by the European Union, the CSF.

My question to the Commissioner is this: what is to be done?

Will it bring it up with the Greek Government or will we persist with the pathological situation we had with the previous Commission?

Mr Alavanos, I see that you have thrown to your left all the documents which you have just cited.

Would you let me have these documents so that I can read them, after I have had them translated? I can then determine what they contain in terms of information and communication, which I can only welcome as the Commissioner for Regional Policy, and what is propaganda.

Then if it is really necessary for me to do this, I will make comments or recommendations to the Greek Government.

I would therefore be very pleased if you could pass me these documents or I will come and get them from you later on.

Having said that, I thought your question related more to the partnership issue.

Further to your questions on the pre-electoral period, I can only repeat my intention that local and regional authorities should be involved together with non-governmental organisations.

I can only quote what is contained in the general Structural Funds Regulation which specifies that the Commission will work with the governments of the Member States. It is therefore the Greek Government which is my primary partner.

Subsequently, if I need to ensure that this partnership is disseminated and decentralised, then I will do this.

I cannot do other than work with the Greek Government.

I think that my colleague Mr Alavanos will be giving all these particulars to the Commissioner so that he may be aware of them, because this really is propaganda and not just some way of promoting Community programmes.

However, turning to the substance, I should like to ask the Commissioner to bear in mind the following: that for all national and regional programmes, Greece is regarded as a region which expresses itself - at the level of its partnership relations with the European Union - via its central administration, its central government.

From that point of view, neither local governments and much less non-governmental organisations, for example the farming cooperatives which would be interested in further development of the farming sector, have any involvement in the formulation of proposals for the third Community Support Framework, nor have they had any involvement in the previous CSFs.

What can the Commission do about that?

Mr Theonas, I can only repeat what I said to Mr Alavanos.

I will monitor this situation very closely. If necessary, within and pursuant to the Structural Funds Regulation, I will make comments on the use made, not of Structural Funds which are not yet committed, but of the negotiations prior to the allocation of these Structural Funds.

However, I am obliged to respect the national authority with which I must conduct these negotiations.

Having said this, I will look at the situation objectively.

As for the rest, if you have any recommendations or suggestions on the involvement of a particular structure - I think you spoke of a cooperative structure - I am ready and willing, on the basis of suggestions from MEPs - you will be acting within your role and I within mine - to relay these suggestions, provided that they respect the spirit and letter of the Structural Funds Regulation.

Why would I not say that we have noticed in previous years, on the part of the Greek Government, some shortcomings in the application of the new Regulation and the previous regulation in terms of involving representatives of civil society?

I am saying this objectively and when a problem or shortcoming is noted, this must be remedied.

I will therefore monitor this in the implementation of the new Community support framework.

Subject: Structural Fund financing of research in the civil nuclear technology field Can the Commission confirm that in the last Structural Fund programming period, 1994-1999, no assistance was granted to research in the nuclear fusion or fission areas?

Can it also undertake to rule out any measures providing financing for research of this type during the negotiations in progress with the Member States on the plans and programmes for the new 2000-2006 period?

What role will aid from the Structural Funds play, on the other hand, in the promotion of renewable energy?

Can we expect that Structural Fund financing relating to energy policy will focus on the promotion of regional, renewable energy sources?

Will the Structural Funds also finance the large-scale energy transmission networks?

On Mrs Isler Béguin' s first point I must remind her that the improvement of the scientific basis and technical capacities of the regions in order to increase their competitiveness was one of the Community' s priorities during the previous programming period.

The support allocated by the Structural Funds for technological cohesion, or research and technical developments, within the Community support frameworks for that period is estimated at approximately EUR 7.5 billion.

This is about 6% of the whole Community contribution.

With regard to your specific concern, I can say that, as in the previous period, the Commission does not intend to directly finance through the Structural Funds research and technical development in the area of nuclear fusion or fission.

However, it is still the responsibility of the Member States' management authorities to select the projects to be implemented within these CSFs.

Consequently, even though this is not a Community priority, a Member State can decide to finance research and development projects in the civil nuclear technology area, provided that these projects contribute to regional development. The Commission does not have to be systematically informed of these.

On your second point of renewable energy which, as you know, is of great interest to me, the Commission' s approach is given in the document on the Structural Funds and their coordination with the Cohesion Funds.

These Funds specify that investments in the renewable energy sector must be encouraged where they favour the development of local resources, where they contribute to reducing dependency on energy imports and where they create jobs at local level.

I was able to verify this, for example, during a visit I made to the Azores in Portugal a few days ago with regard to a natural source of renewable energy.

The Structural Funds contribution which has enabled greater penetration of the renewable energy market was also underlined in the campaign to promote renewable energy sources launched by the Transport and Energy Department.

Finally, on large-scale energy transmission networks, the guidelines also provide for financial participation from the Funds to develop these networks where this helps to reduce dependency on an external supplier or to combat the effects of isolation.

This is particularly valid for the region of the Azores which I have just mentioned and also for all most remote regions. It is also valid for certain regions handicapped by their isolation due to mountains, for example.

Commissioner, thank you for your answer. However, I asked this question because we are rightly concerned that the report on the third framework programme for research contains a project entitled 'International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor' .

This project amounts to several billion ecus and areas eligible for Structural Funds, such as those listed in Objective 1, might welcome this type of installation.

We would like to know whether the Commission would be likely to finance this type of project in terms of the installation of this research site rather than directly in the specific 'nuclear research' context.

You did not fully answer the last part of my question on large-scale energy transmission networks.

Could you please give an answer on this issue?

You are concerned about whether the Structural Funds will be used to finance the installation of nuclear plants anywhere.

Quite simply there is no question of this.

I said that the selection of projects remains the responsibility of the Member States pursuant to the Structural Funds Regulation.

As a result, the Commission services are not systematically informed of all projects selected.

However, you are right to question me as this is your task, as mine is to answer you.

As has happened in the past, the Member States are required to provide answers when the Commission questions them or asks for clarification.

I will therefore step beyond the confidence usually shared between Member States and the Commission and I will find out exactly what is happening on this specific point.

The Member State or States concerned will then be required to answer me and I will send you this answer as soon as possible.

I thought I had answered your question on large-scale energy transmission networks.

The energy situation varies widely from region to region in the European Union. Assistance from the Structural Funds could be justified in certain cases and for certain regions, particularly in the case where the connection to basic energy networks is still underdeveloped.

This is the only answer I can give you on the link between large-scale energy transmission networks and the Structural Funds.

Subject: Structural Funds and additionality In the light of the Commission's recent helpful response to my priority Written Question about Structural Funds and additionality, I wish to ask whether the Commission has any plans to seek amendment of the rules concerning additionality.

In particular, would the Commission look favourably on a change in the rules to ensure that additionality operates not only at the level of Member States but also within Member States, with regard to budgetary provisions between central government and internally autonomous regions or countries?

Mr MacCormick, the Commission has no plans to amend the rules concerning additionality which were stipulated, for the 2000-2006 period, in Article 11 of the general Regulation on the Funds.

As in the past, these rules state that the additionality principle applies to the relationship between the Structural Funds and all development expenditure of the Member State.

In this respect, it must be stressed that it is the expenditure financed by the Structural Funds which must be additional.

The cofinancing provided by the Member State does not need to be additional to its existing expenditure.

Provided that the Member State does not reduce all its own expenditure, the Structural Funds are added to the national expenditure and the principle of additionality is therefore respected.

As for the budgetary provisions within the Member States, between central government and internal autonomous regions or countries, these are determined according to exclusively national considerations and are therefore not affected by additionality within the meaning defined in the rules.

Please excuse this very legal answer.

However, after verification it is precisely in this legal manner and specifically according to the post-Berlin Structural Funds Regulation that we must define and read the additionality principle.

- I am grateful for a clear answer though naturally a little disappointed by its content.

We are left with Article 11(1) which says that the appropriations of the funds may not replace public or other equivalent structural expenditure by the Member States.

Very well: that is to be the unchanging rule.

Does section 11(1) conceivably authorise the following practice.

When an autonomous region's or country's funding from European structural funds increases, the state makes a concomitant reduction in central funding to that region, so that the total funding package available matches a formula set nationally without regard to the quantum of structural funds granted by the Union.

Unfortunately I do not have time to go into depth on this issue. If Mr MacCormick would be satisfied with my partial agreement with his reasoning, I will give him a full answer in writing by restating the legal bases of both Article 11 in general and Article 11(1) in particular.

I am aware of the Member' s competence on these matters.

I also know the particular problems in your constituency in Scotland where disputes and discussions are occurring on these subjects.

However, on a general level, I would say that in all cases it is the Structural Funds expenditure which must be additional. This is how, provided that the Member State does not reduce all its own expenditure, the Structural Funds can be added to the national expenditure and we can consider that the additionality principle is respected.

I will go further in the written answer which I have promised in order to set things out more objectively and precisely.

- Additionality is a major issue too in Wales, which I represent.

Just last week it was one of the issues that brought about a vote of no-confidence and the resignation of the First Secretary of the National Assembly of Wales.

As recently as 1991 and 1992 the Commission won a battle with the UK over additionality, at that time linked to the RECHAR funding.

This led to an agreement being signed whereby the UK Government agreed to introduce procedures to ensure that EU spending reached the areas for which is was intended and was actually additional.

And yet we still have these problems in Wales and in Scotland.

Could the Commission look at this particular situation in relation to the agreement that was signed with the UK Government?

I take this to mean that the debate of which I was aware in Scotland is also occurring in Wales.

I will verify this point and, if you wish, I will give you a written answer at the same time as the one I have promised to Mr MacCormick.

Mr President, I will try to be brief in answering the Member' s question. The regional development plan submitted by the Spanish authorities on 29 October does not indicate how the Community funds will be allocated among the Spanish Objective 1 regions and therefore what your region of Andalusia will receive.

As I did not fully understand the plan, I contacted the Minister for Economic and Financial Affairs, Mr Rato, in a letter of 14 December which I have here, to ask him for more information on the document submitted.

In the coming weeks, the Commission will start negotiations with the Spanish authorities with a view to drawing up the Community support framework for the new period of 2000-2006. During these meetings I can assure you that the Commission will obtain the clarifications required on the regional allocation.

Therefore, if you wish, as soon as I have this information by sector and region, I will personally send you the information on Andalusia.

Mr Commissioner, the problem is that when Mr Aznar comes to the European Union to receive money for all the people of Andalusia, he counts all of them, but when he goes to the Andalusia Council to pay for services, he fails to notice 400 000 Andalusians, and this is very serious, because 400 000 children are the equivalent to the whole of Strasbourg or a city larger than Granada, full of children.

This question is very important and I would like to know - since this is a kind of 'baby fraud' - whether the Commissioner will see to it that these funds are not taken away from the Andalusians, so that the funds which the European Union are going to pay to Andalusia, based on the census, will take into account these 400 000 children which Aznar does not count when it comes to providing them with schools and services.

Mrs Izquierdo Rojo, I would ask all of you - and do not take this as a warning - to deal with strictly Community matters.

I know that these are very important issues in Spain and there are differing viewpoints.

I would point out to the Commissioner that Mr Aznar is the President of the Spanish Government.

Mrs Izquierdo Rojo, I hear that you have a strong voice. I hope it is loud enough to be heard in Madrid for I realise that what you have said was not strictly intended for me.

I have given you my answer.

I am keen that the Structural Funds, particularly those in Objective 1, are allocated where needed.

We have criteria which are applied and we know roughly what each of the regions of Europe should or could receive.

I can only say that I must discuss these matters with the national authorities and government of each country. I am not avoiding the issue but I must abide by the general Regulation.

It is the responsibility of these authorities and governments to allocate the funds as objectively and fairly as possible.

I need to know about this allocation, however, and this is why I said that I could not answer today.

As I did not have an answer, I wrote to the Minister for Economic and Financial Affairs on 14 December.

I am about to lose patience at not having received an answer from him but I will send you this when I get it.

I regret that the Commissioner has once again become involved in an imaginative and, in this case, passionate intervention.

I would like to remind all of you that Spain is about to hold elections, and in fact there are just 25 days left before the elections.

It should be of comfort to the Commissioner that these elections will take place in 25 days time, since after that he will probably not have to deal with this type of question again.

I do believe it is important to say that Andalusia is going to receive 50% more within the Community support framework and that Spain also holds the record for the use of the Structural Funds, which means that the distribution is based strictly on the implementing regulations and is decentralised by means of the regional development plans and different Community support frameworks.

Lastly I would like to ask the Commissioner a specific question: Do you consider it necessary to change the implementing regulations for the Structural Funds or do you consider the current distribution criteria to be acceptable?

This is a fascinating debate which I realise is not totally Community-related.

Having said this, we must accept that elections are always taking place in the countries of the European Union.

I am pleased that the Structural Funds are the subject of discussions in Greece and Spain.

We were talking a short while ago in this House about debates involving our citizens, about public debates.

The more we talk about Europe and what Europe is doing for daily life, even when we disagree, the better this will be, provided that we talk about this objectively.

I am not going to give an opinion on any amendment to the Structural Funds Regulation.

This Regulation was adopted just last year in Berlin and I will be applying it for the next seven years.

We will talk about this issue during the cohesion report which I regard as an important time for making an assessment with and before this House and for outlining future prospects. The time will come at the beginning of next year for any amendments to be highlighted.

For the time being, please let me apply the Regulation which has not yet been applied as it was only approved in Berlin.

This is all I can say today.

Thank you very much for your replies, Mr Barnier.

Questions Nos 48 to 50 will be replied to in writing.

Subject: New premises for the OHIM At present the Office for Harmonisation in the Internal Market (OHIM) is still operating from the same temporary premises, even though its new building was opened in June 1999.

In view of this unusual situation, will the Commission say why the OHIM has not yet moved to its new premises?

The honourable Member asked a question on this topic in November 1999 and I would like to refer him to the answer given at the time.

Furthermore, I have asked the president of the Office for Harmonisation in the Internal Market, that is to say the Office in Alicante, to comment further on this new question and I can, as a result, inform the honourable Member as follows, on behalf of the Office:

The Office is not yet ready to move into the new building.

Unfortunately, a number of deadlines have been exceeded.

A number of technical provisions need to be made, such as the installation of a computer network, archives, a canteen and furniture.

The OHIM is now in the process of arranging this and is expecting to move into the new premises by June.

During the previous question, we were discussing electoral issues.

I believe that this issue is relevant to my question. Commissioner, you were not present at the extraordinarily named 'official opening' of the headquarters of the OHIM on 9 June, in the middle of an election campaign in Spain leading up to both the European elections and the local and regional elections.

If you had been there, I am sure you would have been ashamed.

The President of the Commission and some secretaries were present.

In the middle of an election campaign, a series of authorities, all of them run by the party in government, made clearly electioneering speeches which, furthermore, were broadcast live on television.

It was bizarre to see the President of the Region of Valencia praising the work of the Spanish Government, as well as his own work, although it was irrelevant to that event.

The opening of a building which was not finished, in the middle of an election campaign, which eight months after the opening can still not be occupied, makes the Spanish Government look ridiculous.

I am not worried that the Spanish Government should look foolish, because at the end of the day it was their responsibility, but it does worry me that the Commission should look foolish by endorsing, through its presence, this absurd event.

I would therefore like to ask you, Mr Commissioner: does it seem normal to you that an unfinished building should be opened during an election campaign?

Does it seem normal to you that the Commission should attend such an absurd event organised by the Spanish Government?

It does not fall within my remit to make statements about internal political situations within one Member State or another.

As such, I would prefer to withhold any comment on the situation which Mr Berenguer has just described.

I have to confess that I fail to comprehend why a certain opening ceremony was held in Spain.

What I can say is that I hope that this building will now be occupied as soon as possible.

May I also add that I hope to be in Alicante myself at the end of May to speak at a conference.

I hope that this building will then be occupied.

I would like to point out to the Commissioner that it is not an electoral question.

As members of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market, we have followed the creation of that institution and it is clear that it was established for electioneering reasons.

A year later, it is still not functioning, which means that the Commission spent money on a false opening.

We should ask ourselves to what extent this spending of funds was justified.

I would like to reiterate that the Commission is unconcerned with the underlying motivation of Member State actions.

It is, however, interested in official statements and actions.

We do not intend to go in the direction of what is termed in French un procès d'intention.

We are concerned with public official actions and events, rather than any possible underlying motivation.

This is why I find it also difficult to meet Mr Medina halfway and respond to his question.

Once again, the Commission does not speculate why something is happening earlier or later than planned. It only appreciates that a building for this Office is opened and occupied as soon as possible.

Also, the Commission does not engage itself in finding out whether certain expenditure was real or virtual.

As far as I am concerned, all expenditure is real.

And any remaining skeletons, I intend to leave them in the cupboard.

As the author is not present, Question No 52 lapses.

As they deal with the same subject, Questions Nos 53 and 54 will be taken together.

Subject: Swedish derogation regarding the import of alcoholic beverages At present, Sweden has a derogation until 2004 allowing restrictions on alcoholic beverage imports.

The Swedish Government and a large percentage of the Swedish people want the derogation to be extended on public health grounds.

What is the Commission's position on the Swedish derogation concerning these imports?

Subject: Alcohol monopoly and the internal market What action does the Commission intend to take in order to prevent the extension of the State alcohol monopoly apparently being planned by Sweden, and the associated import restrictions, and to ensure that the rules of the single market are applied?

I would like to answer these two questions as follows. When Sweden joined the European Union, it was allowed to retain quantitative restrictions on alcoholic beverages which travellers can bring into the country from other Member States.

This derogation from the principle of the free movement of goods lapses on 30 June of this year.

Sweden now wants to extend this measure by another five years, as this would be necessary to protect public health.

My position on this is clear.

Sweden has now had sufficient time - since its accession to the Union - to adapt its policies to a situation where such import restrictions do not exist.

I cannot see a reason, therefore, why a further extension for this measure should be proposed.

European citizens have the right to buy goods for their own use, including taxes, in any Member Sate and to take them to another Member Sate without having to subject these goods to controls and without possibly having to pay another set of taxes on them.

That is a basic principle governing the internal market and derogations from this principle must be exceptions and must be limited in time.

We want to guarantee that Swedish citizens too can enjoy the benefits of the internal market, just like other citizens of the European Union.

This certainly does not mean that I do not share the concern in Sweden surrounding the possible health problems which can be caused by alcohol abuse.

A recent study, carried out by Professor Lindgren of the University of Lund, however, has shown that abolishing the restrictions would not lead to a higher alcohol consumption in Sweden.

I have already had a chance to discuss my position with Mr Ringholm, the Swedish Finance Minister on two occasions.

I also discussed this matter with the Swedish parliamentary Finance committee last week.

It is now up to the Swedish government to take the necessary measures.

I should just like to apologise for the error in my question to the Commission.

Instead of 2004, it should, of course, be 1 July 2000.

I have some sympathy with the Commission's standpoint that derogations should only be granted occasionally.

Such a rule is only normal.

Nevertheless, I should like to ask two questions: Are you thinking of embarking upon continued discussions with the Swedish Government about extending the derogations, for example for as long as Denmark and Finland have derogations?

My second question concerns the whole policy on alcohol.

This may, of course, be seen as an issue concerning the internal market, but also as a public health matter for the whole EU.

What are the respective roles of alcohol policy and public health considerations in the Commission's work?

A Europe-wide policy on alcohol is not just an issue concerning the internal market. It also has important implications for public health.

If we had considered these aspects in their overall context, then it might have been easier to carry on a dialogue with Sweden.

May I thank Mr Andersson for the supplement to his first question and may I answer that question as follows?

Firstly, Finland and Denmark are subject to exemptions to the basic rule of the free movement of goods until 2003.

These countries are in the process of taking measures in preparation of free access of alcoholic products in the year 2003.

However, in the case of Sweden, the situation is different.

In 1995, a five-year derogation period was decided upon, which is now lapsing.

I have as yet not heard any arguments on the basis of which the Commission would need to extend this period.

Secondly, the Swedish Government is being consulted all the way.

I can inform Mr Andersson that I will leave for Stockholm on Monday, 6 March, in order to talk to Minister Ringholm, to members of the Swedish parliament, and, if necessary, also to the Prime Minister or other ministers, in order to continue discussions on this matter. I am fully aware that emotions are running high in the political arena in Sweden regarding this issue.

Thirdly, I understand very well that the health aspect of this matter is naturally important.

I would repeat at this juncture what Professor Lindgren of Lund University has stated, namely that whatever happens in terms of import restrictions, the consumption of alcohol will remain the same.

The question is then, of course, where does the volume of alcohol originate from which is not imported by travellers?

The answer is that this is smuggled into the country or made by the Swedes themselves, and as Mr Andersson knows, this is an extremely dangerous and unhealthy activity.

Well now, Mr Andersson seems to think that the health situation will improve if we restrict the import of alcohol.

But in that case, not only Sweden, but all EU countries, should then be subject to a total ban on alcohol. We can cast our minds back to a similar situation in the United States.

Mr Andersson will be familiar with what was termed then 'prohibition' .

He will also be aware of the effects the ban had on Mafia activity within the United States, where, eventually, prohibition was withdrawn.

All this means that we need to protect health, of course, but not by banning alcohol, because that does not work.

Mr President, the question at issue is the income from the Swedish alcohol monopoly and when the Swedish Government says that it must cover health costs, then this is proof of a distortion of competition because other countries must cover their health costs themselves, with no alcohol monopoly at their disposal.

My question refers to whether you too know of studies which state that a moderate intake of good quality alcohol such as Franconian wine or Bavarian beer is good for you and would therefore also be good for the Swedish budget.

I gather that Mr Posselt has hinted at the fiscal aspects of this matter.

I also happen to know that the high tax on alcohol products in Sweden goes back to the year 1638 and that since then, the sale of alcohol products has accounted for a significant portion of the state' s tax revenue.

As is known, this has led to a state monopoly in Sweden which, in itself, is at odds with Union legislation.

As to the healing effect of alcohol - to which, I believe, Mr Posselt also made reference - I could not agree more with him: I think that a good bottle of wine can be extremely good for your health and is also socially extremely pleasant, and perhaps Mr Posselt, Mr Andersson and myself could meet in the bar of this Parliament one of these days to share an aquavit.

Mr President, I listened with interest to the Commissioner's reply about the need to apply the laws of the single market.

I wonder whether he can say whether he considers his reply to be compatible with the failure by the Commission to take the French Government to the European Court of Justice on the application of France's Loi et Vin, which effectively prevents single market rules applying to the sale of alcohol products in France?

Can we now expect the European Commission to take action against the French Republic before the European Court of Justice?

I should like to reply very briefly to the question raised by the honourable Member, since this matter is now under active consideration by the Commission.

The Commission has to take a decision on whether the matter is closed or whether it should refer it to the European Court of Justice.

My reply is perhaps not satisfactory right now, but I would like to assure the honourable Member that the Commission will take that decision within a matter of weeks.

I ask for the Member's understanding for this small delay in the Commission's decision.

Commissioner, do you have any reason, on public health grounds, for a difference in the taxation rates on, for example, Scotch whisky or French Bordeaux wine or even my colleague's Bavarian beer?

Can you envisage applying an alcohol - equivalent basis for taxation in Europe?

The matter of excise taxes, to which the honourable Member is referring, is the prerogative of the Member State concerned.

The Commission has no instruments to enforce any particular decrease or increase in excise taxes on alcoholic products or on any other products.

Towards the end of this year the Commission will submit a report on the differences in excise taxes between Member States.

It will no doubt engage in a discussion both with Parliament and the Council on this state of affairs, which indicates that there are quite a lot of differences in excise rates between Member States.

For example - I believe the honourable Member referred to this - no excise taxes are applied on wine in France, whereas they are applied in the United Kingdom.

That leads to a distortion of the internal market because wine is smuggled from France to the United Kingdom.

The question specifically refers to the relation between excise taxes and the alcohol content of the goods subject to excise tax.

The Commission has no means of influence here.

In the case of Sweden, the instrument of excise taxes is indeed used to reduce the consumption of alcohol.

Although this leads to a disparity in excise taxes between Sweden and other Member States of the Union - and that by itself increases cross-border smuggling of alcoholic products - it is a legitimate instrument to decrease the consumption of alcohol.

There is ,of course, elasticity of demand, in this case a price elasticity of demand.

I am not sure exactly what it is, but it is not zero, therefore it must have some effect.

My question would have been almost exactly the one raised by Mr Purvis, but I would like to press the point further.

Granted, as you say, that excise duties lie within the prerogative of Member States, nevertheless the use of that prerogative in a way which is unfairly discriminatory against producers in one part of the Community versus others might still conflict with the single market principle.

For example, if we take what Mr Purvis and I would be thinking of, the malt whisky producing parts of the Highlands - a very peripheral part of Europe, very hard-pressed, a whole farming community as well as a distilling community dependent upon it - a general practice of taxing the alcohol in Scotch whisky, Dutch gin or Danish aquavit more than the alcohol in beer or the alcohol in wine, seems to me to be discriminatory and a discriminatory use of something which is admittedly within the prerogative of the Member States.

May I assure Mr MacCormick and other Members of this Parliament that the present situation where excise taxes differ between Member States is indeed something which is not conducive to the proper functioning of the internal market.

We need not restrict ourselves to alcoholic products.

If one looks at petrol, for example, one sees that excise taxes in Germany are different from those of Holland, and consequently Dutch motorists cross the border and fill up their tanks in Germany.

That is indeed distortion of the internal market.

If I had my way, I would wave a magic wand and equalise excise taxes across Europe.

As a result, smuggling would no longer take place except if products were intrinsically more expensive in one Member State than another.

But I do not have a magic wand and I do not have my way.

This is an area of unanimity, as Mr MacCormick knows, and unless all Member States agree on the equalisation of excise taxes, it will not happen.

Once again, towards the end of this year, the Commission will forward a report on the state of affairs on excise taxes, and I am obviously available for any discussion with Parliament on that report.

Today we will take note of what you say and have a glass or two of Alsace wine, although we do not know how much tax is put on it, but I suppose it is a lot.

Since the time allotted to Questions to the Commission has elapsed, Questions 55 to 114 will be replied to in writing.

That concludes Questions to the Commission.

(The sitting was suspended at 7.30 p.m. and resumed at 9.00 p.m.)

Community policy in the field of water (continuation)

The next item is the continuation of the debate on the recommendation for second reading of the Community action in the field of water policy.

Mr President, the situation regarding fresh water in Europe is not as serious as in other parts of the world but, in general terms, it is a fact that the demand for water has continued to grow and its quality has continued to decrease.

To this we must add the water pollution problems which afflict the potential new Member States in the East.

In fact, a reservoir containing cyanide has just burst its banks in Romania, threatening aquifers which supply the population of Yugoslavia.

I understand that Mrs Wallström, whose presence here tonight I appreciate, is going to visit the area.

I believe that no country, no government and, of course, no member of this Parliament can fail to recognise the need for this directive in order to end the current fragmentation of water policy and facilitate the implementation of a programme of specific measures for each river basin.

The development of this directive has been difficult and complex, involving diverse interests and divided opinions.

I have no doubt that the rapporteur for this legislature, Mrs Lienemann, has made great efforts and shown great dedication in reconciling positions, and has succeeded to a large extent.

However, it is almost impossible to understand and correctly assess all the different situations and expectations.

I come from a country whose southern half is on the Mediterranean and the availability of water historically depends on the whims of an unpredictable climate and a difficult terrain.

The Mediterranean region has had to fight for its development by trying to overcome this adversity, century after century, year after year, day after day, and is still doing so today.

Therefore, it seems essential to us that the directive complies, in practice, with the obligation laid down in article 164 of the Treaty on the need for Community legislation to take account of the diversity of its regions.

In accordance with this principle, the Spanish delegation of the European People' s Party will oppose Amendments Nos 4 (Recital 21), 13 and 49 (Article 11(d)), since they imply a serious limitation in an area of management exclusive to the Member States, that is, the regulation of water resources.

It would be very difficult for the Community to determine the conditions for the regulation of water in the different regions, given the different internal balances which are always in play and which require profound knowledge of the different areas and the relevant interests.

We also reject the amendments which aim to incorporate the integral cost of water for 2010.

We must clearly set water prices which promote its efficient use but which, at the same time, safeguard the competitivity of the producing industries in the less-favoured regions and do not hinder their legitimate development.

I would lastly like to refer to the amendments on dangerous substances which establish that we must achieve a zero, or close to zero, degree of pollution.

In no field of human activity have we ever discovered a zero degree of pollution.

We will be doing a general disservice to the objectives of this important directive if we are not able to provide it with the necessary flexibility and adaptability to guarantee compliance with its provisions.

I hope that, once again, this House will vote with a sense of reality and respect for the principle of subsidiarity, seeking a suitable balance between the environmental objectives and economic and social considerations, the three essential elements in achieving the sustainable development which we all wish to see so much.

Mr President, Commissioner, this is a very important directive.

Its aim is to improve the quality of water and the reliability of the water supply and sewage systems.

The public must have a right to clean water.

It is important not only for the environment but also for public health.

I am not speaking so much for myself, as I happen to be one of those few lucky people in Europe who can drink water directly from their own lake at home.

We must make sure that we get started quickly with the programme to improve water quality.

Action must get under way immediately.

We cannot afford to waste time.

It is important that the timetable is an ambitious one.

In my opinion, the timetable is not too ambitious if we believe that by 2020 we will no longer allow impurities in water and we aim at zero level quantities of impurities and toxic matter by then.

It is a question of doing what is technically possible; obviously it is not possible to do anymore, but we must be sufficiently ambitious.

I would like to comment on one issue, which was spoken about earlier.

I believe the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy has restricted too tightly the debate on the transfer of water.

This is not merely a problem for Spain; it is one for the Nordic countries, and I sincerely hope that we can rely on national solutions in these matters, when they are better for the environment and the economy than what is proposed in the directive.

Mr President, Madam Commissioner, congratulations, Mrs Lienemann on an excellent piece of work.

Water and air surround us everywhere. We share them with everyone on this earth.

Water is a prerequisite for human life. And there are more and more of us in the world.

Mrs Schleicher intimated earlier today that clean water was an unrealistic goal.

Nothing could be further from the truth!

It is unrealistic to go on causing the quality of our water to deteriorate and so, too, the conditions for life.

It is especially unrealistic in regard to agriculture which is most dependent upon a clean natural environment and unpolluted resources.

I would therefore appeal to Members of Parliament to appreciate that tough demands for a clean environment are a sign of long-term realism of the highest order.

Mr President, we - myself included - support the report by Mrs Lienemann, the targets it sets and the directive under discussion.

However, we should look a little more closely at some points.

For example, a major problem in my country is the diversion of rivers and the consumption of water from lakes, which people try to justify by pseudo-developmental arguments, and which, of course, are a great risk to ground waters, water tables and surface waters.

I therefore think that regardless of whether we finally conclude who should decide whether such diversions take place, the specifications common to us all must be very stringent.

But the key issue is, in my opinion, planning how to restore water tables, the natural flow of rivers and the natural content of lakes, which must be carried out within the ten year period we have in mind.

I think such projects ought to be eligible for funding, because, at the end of the day, that restoration may well prove to be a first-rate development policy.

Mr President, here we have what is basically a good measure.

It sets out achievable standards based on subsidiarity principles and the water basin management.

Its aim of good-quality water for drinking, for wildlife, the environment and economic purposes is right.

The prevention of pollution and water deterioration has to be right as well as the ability to manage water in times of drought and flood.

The first is the transfer of water between basin areas.

That is a matter which affects my colleagues from Spain, Ireland and the United Kingdom.

Amendments Nos 4. 49 and 87 would not be acceptable because they would restrict the ability of a country to move water from where it is in supply to where it is needed, be that arid areas or urban areas.

Secondly, we have to have realistic targets, but targets nevertheless.

Looking at Amendment No 7, for example, which calls for the complete elimination of naturally occurring substances, you can see that some of the targets set are unrealistic.

Also, some of the targets which are set at close to zero - in English, that is quite a meaningless term.

We need to look very carefully at those.

The concept of continuing reduction as in Amendment No 58 is much better.

Thirdly, I raise the problem faced by Scotch whisky.

Scotch whisky - especially malt whisky, which is the best - requires water extraction which is used in some quantity and then returned to the water stream.

Some of it ends up in the bottle and is drunk.

We must make sure that Amendments Nos 49 and 87 leave the deletion exemption so that whisky can continue to be drunk in "high quality", which means it must use good, Scottish peat water.

That is my third request - that we look carefully at these measures before passing this measure as a whole.

Mr President, first of all, we want to denounce the fathomless hypocrisy of those who claim to be concerned about the environment and water, but whose criminal activities such as the attacks against Yugoslavia, aside from leaving thousands dead and wounded, have also brought about huge ecological disasters for water resources too, making them not only unusable but even extremely hazardous.

Turning to the report, we believe that implementing the principle that the cost of water services should be recoverable must never result in additional taxation of the economically weakest strata, or even in the annihilation of small and medium-scale farmers because of the prohibitive cost of water for irrigation.

We also wish to point out that especially in areas with acute drought problems such as my own country, and especially on the islands, funding must be provided for infrastructure for the saving of water, by increasing not its cost but its quantity. This should mainly be carried out by collecting the rainwater that now goes to waste, running off into the sea and eroding the soil, with all the problems that creates.

In that spirit, we support Amendment No 107 by Mr Marset Campos.

River waters must also be used more effectively so as to preserve life in areas that suffer chronic drought.

Finally, as regards the Council' s allegation, which the Commission echoes, that there is no need for many specific references and explanations because they are covered by the examples given in the directive or contained elsewhere therein, this is chicanery.

Its purpose is to preserve a semi-transparent field of action, which during the directive' s first implementation period will allow critical choices to be finalised to the benefit of big business.

Mr President, first and foremost, I want to say that protection of the aquatic environment, both surface water and groundwater, is probably one of our most important duties of all.

That is not only because it is about guaranteeing sufficient water resources but also because it is, to a large degree, about safeguarding water resources against pollution so that we can also have clean drinking water in the future.

We are all entitled to clean drinking water.

I should like to express my great appreciation of Mrs Lienemann' s work on this matter.

It has been a huge task, and I should like to express my support for all of Mrs Lienemann' s amendments. These are all improvements to the common position.

Moreover, I shall only highlight the most important ones.

First and foremost, I think it is important that we should establish some clear objectives concerning the condition we should have achieved for our water within a period of no more than 10 years.

I also think it is important that we should put pressure on the Member States to devise the necessary action programmes more quickly than is proposed in the common position.

And, finally, I want to say that I think that the tighter arrangements which are being introduced in regard to payment schemes and pricing are quite proper if we, as consumers, are to be given an incentive to use water resources efficiently and, at the same time, obtain arrangements which can promote the achievement of those environmental goals about which, I believe, there is broad agreement.

In this regard, too, I think that the 2010 deadline is appropriate.

Finally, I want to say that I attach great importance to making a start on phasing out discharges, emissions and leaks of hazardous materials and to the fact that we can do this gradually but, at the same time, be set a target, namely the year 2020 by which time we should hopefully have reduced such emissions to zero.

If this cannot be adopted as the objective, then I am naturally prepared to support the proposal to the effect that we should have achieved levels very close to zero by the year 2020.

I think that Mrs Lienemann' s proposal is a good basis for further negotiations with the Council.

Mr President, I would like to thank the rapporteur for some excellent work in drafting this important directive.

The second reading of the framework directive on the issue of water is most timely; the shocking news of the environmental catastrophe in Romania must feature in today' s discussions and also more generally when we ponder the environmental dimension of Union enlargement.

First of all we have to find and call to account those who are guilty of the act.

The cyanide and heavy metals in the rivers are gruesome examples of how environmental negligence may ruin the waterways for decades to come.

The event proves that in some countries applying for EU membership the environmental norms and environmental thinking are still light years behind the EU.

The Union ought to reassess how aid for environmental projects can be allocated in a better way in support of a sustainable policy on water.

With regard to the proposal for the directive it is worrying that the amendments tabled by the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy do not take sufficient account of the importance of unpolluted surface waters to increase the occurrence of clean, natural groundwater.

In Finland surface waters are very clean.

The production of so-called artificial groundwater is an ecological means of filtering a clean supply of fresh surface water through to the groundwater reserves.

The process does not require a chemical sewage plant.

The directive must not be allowed to endanger this work.

Deviating from the Council' s common position, the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy is also attempting to restrict further the facilities for the transfer of water.

This would cause problems for those countries where reserves of water are unevenly distributed.

The ecologically sustainable transfer of water must not be restricted by Union acts.

The work should, of course, be regulated and subject to license in the future too, but the same rules cannot apply to, for example, Finland and Greece, which suffers from drought.

Mr President, Commissioner, water is a precious natural asset, a vital necessity, and it is our duty to protect it.

I think it essential to have a framework directive on water policy in the European Union, which will be the basic legal instrument for improving the quality and proper management of water resources, and I congratulate the rapporteur on her attempt to address this thorny issue and take due account of all the points of view.

I must say, however, that, there are discrepancies between the countries in the north and south concerning water, and that is why the matter cannot be dealt with in the same way.

There are parts of Europe with an inherent shortage of water, and that should be taken into account by this directive.

In recent years, climate change has compelled Mediterranean countries to face serious problems of flooding or lack of rain.

We agree with the common position but we also accept several of the amendments tabled, whose aim is to improve it.

However, we cannot accept amendments such as those that refer to the issue of costing water, granted that in my country a high proportion of the users are farmers.

In addition, amendments which ban the transfer of water from one hydrological basin to another would condemn many areas in my country to water shortage.

The issue of eliminating hazardous substances ought, I think, to be made more realistic so that we can achieve it.

As for the time scale demanded for the directive' s implementation, it must be borne in mind that there are countries where creating the infrastructure for this directive' s implementation will take time and considerable resources.

In spite of these remarks however, I believe our common objective of sustainable use of water resources can be maintained.

Mr President, Commissioner, the measures contained in this directive range from drafting water management plans, comprehensive information and hearing rights, and close cooperation between the Member States, to combating water pollution caused by individual pollutants.

And considering how long this Chamber has been trying to introduce a framework directive of this kind, I am pleased to be present here today, and I would like to congratulate Mrs Lienemann on being in the happy position of presenting this report to us.

However, it is also extremely important to me to point something out that many people actually take for granted.

I would still like to highlight this point though: this directive does not constitute any kind of legal basis for diverting water from a Member State' s territory against its will.

And by way of reaffirming this once again, I have introduced an amendment - gratifyingly with the support of a large number of Members - and I would be very pleased if Parliament would endorse my proposed amendment tomorrow.

It is all about making it clear that water - and this is not the first time this has been mentioned today - is no ordinary commodity but a resource which belongs to the individual EU Member States and which must be protected and treated with the respect due to it.

I am aware, and the previous speaker highlighted this, that there are States in the European Union that have problems with water.

I believe that every one of us, in every country, could improve the way in which we manage our water and could make use of it in a cleaner way.

But only when each country has done its utmost to conserve its water resources, when literally everything has been done that could have been done in our own countries, only then, in my view, should it be necessary to start thinking in terms of harmonising water usage.

Mr President, Commissioner, we should be pleased that this directive has already reached second reading.

However, I must say that I am not over-pleased because I believe that this directive is not of great quality, it is going to be very difficult to implement and has many shortcomings.

Firstly, I believe that this directive is excessively tough, simplistic and reductionist.

In many cases other existing directives on water have not been complied with and governments and the Commission have often not imposed discipline as they should have done, although I know that this is not pleasant.

It is not a question of having much tougher regulations, because in many cases the problems concern management. It is not a question of exercising the relevant competences and not referring the big problems of the water systems to the legislative, the complications of which we are all well aware of.

This is a reductionist directive. We cannot lump countries with navigable rivers together with countries which lack water, where great cracks open up in the ground through a lack of water and which see temperatures of 55ºC or 60ºC in the sun.

I say this because the ball does not need to be in our court. This issue is in the hands of the governments and the Commission.

In the same way, this damage and these tragedies which are happening, as in Romania, are not the problem of the legislative, but of the executive and of the governments.

Furthermore, it is not a fair directive because it ignores the large uninhabited areas, climatic diversity, desert areas and arid areas.

That is how the common position has been worded.

The same can be said with regard to transfers.

Transfers are an example of the distribution of wealth, of solidarity between peoples and territories, because unfortunately the Earth is not perfect and some areas have more and some have less.

Lastly, I am highly critical of the fact that the directive is not accompanied by a study of its impact.

It is very easy for us to demand that others assess its impact but, on environmental questions, we should demand it of ourselves and consider how many people, how many farmers, could be ruined by having to pay the costs.

Some kind of study has been done which has not even been read, and I believe we should carry out impact studies by way of good political practice, rather than just laying down doctrine.

Mr President, through the consolidation of existing directives this framework directive establishes the basic principle of a sustainable water policy in the European Union.

It is a framework for the protection and management of our water - surface, ground, transitional and coastal - through the establishment of river basin districts at national and, in our case in Ireland, cross-border level.

Ireland is very supportive of the common position and many of the European Parliament amendments.

A 25-year roll-out for legislation, for example, is hardly acceptable.

We have no difficulty with the "polluter pays" principle in relation to the recovery of costs on water usage at industrial, commercial and agricultural level.

However, I feel very strongly that as water is life and access to clean drinking water is a basic human right, this directive must allow for a basic domestic water provision free of charge, a quota per household for drinking, cooking and sanitation.

We must of course pay for wastage and luxury use at domestic level and the recovery of costs can be balanced accordingly.

The introduction of water meters is viewed with great suspicion in Ireland where we have had no domestic water charges and hence no meters since 1977.

Meters could be viewed as a very important tool in water management by the new river basin districts, to help the elimination of water wastage and for the proper planning of future requirements.

The whole purpose of this directive is to promote sustainable use of water in the EU.

Water is a scarce and precious natural resource.

Ideally, I would like Amendment No 45 to fall tomorrow so that the common position on Article 9 would hold on water charges.

That would allow for subsidiarity on a cost policy for water charges, with each Member States drawing up its own scheme, so long as the principles of this directive on incentives for sustainable and efficient use of water are fully protected.

If Amendment No 45 does not fall, I will have to move an oral amendment tomorrow to ensure that Member States may grant exemptions to the provisions of this article in order to allow a basic level of water use for domestic purposes before contributions to the recovery of cost of water services.

All legislation must be enforceable and be based on the general principle of political acceptance.

I believe that access to clean drinking water without charge is a basic human right in the developed as well as the developing world.

Mr President, Commissioner, at this point in the debate I am going to insist on certain aspects which, from an agronomic point of view, and since I come from a southern country, I consider to be absolutely essential to this directive.

These include, for example, costs and transfers.

With regard to costs, I would like clarification of what costs we are talking about.

Are we talking about the distribution and sourcing of water?

Are we talking about the quality of the distribution networks?

Are we talking about the nature of the works required to provide water services?

Or are we talking about large-scale hydraulic works and reservoirs?

All these costs added together would be horrendous and would have repercussions for the agricultural sector.

Transfers are defined as the transfer of surface water between different territorial areas.

Is the Commissioner aware that our country has one of the oldest systems of transfers in Europe?

They already existed in ancient times: they had them in Roman times, although on a smaller scale.

One of the most significant transfers - the Tajo-Segura transfer - which has been in use for many years, almost 30 years, has an allowance of 658 hm3 per year.

The largest volume transferred in one year has been 453 and the average volume over twenty years has been over 200.

We cannot be accused of bad management.

Is the Commissioner aware that, of this 263 hm3, we used 25 for irrigation on the left bank of the Levante, 30 for water supplies in the area of the Júcar, 7 for supplies in the southern area of the Júcar and the rest in the Segura, equally divided between supplies and irrigation?

We are not doing a bad job of management.

We cannot be prohibited from carrying out transfers when our economy and the development of our regions depend on it.

I will not tackle the issue of quality and the best available technologies, because I believe that we will return to a discussion of this directive.

Take good note: in this diverse Europe, which we are building in a spirit of mutual cooperation, we have to find diverse solutions, not single solutions.

I therefore appeal to the common sense of the Commission, the Council and this House so that, when voting, they do not impose uniformity on the different countries of Europe in areas where subsidiarity is required.

I would like to hear the Commissioner's view on Amendment No 45.

I may have missed it in the list she gave out.

The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 p.m.

Financial instrument for the environment (LIFE)

The next item is the recommendation for second reading (A4-0014/2000), on behalf of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to adopting a European Parliament and Council Regulation on a financial instrument for the environment (LIFE) (Rapporteur: Mrs Lienemann).

(FR) Mr President, we have already had the opportunity, at the first reading, to examine this report and I was given to believe in committee that there was a broad consensus within this House.

LIFE is the only budget line for direct assistance for the environment in the Community budget, and one cannot help but note that it does not live up to our ambitions since the amounts allocated to it have been stagnating for years. Despite the enlargement which has already taken place, when we renewed the first LIFE programme to move on to the second, despite enlargement, the level of appropriations remained the same.

And then we see that, increasingly, the regions, the various operators, businesses, associations, are submitting LIFE projects, both for LIFE-NATURE and LIFE-ENVIRONMENT, projects that are of excellent quality, which following technical assessment by all the competent committees are unanimously found to be worthy of European Union support, but we still cannot fund them, for lack of budget appropriations.

It must also be mentioned that this budget experiences a rate of consumption of appropriations which is quite exceptional within the Community budget.

Patently we have here an instrument that is appropriate for the policies which we wish to implement.

I would stress the LIFE-NATURE strand in particular.

We are well aware that, in the European Union, a whole raft of directives such as the directive on habitats and the directive on migratory birds encounter problems in implementation. With LIFE-NATURE we should be able to support policies which demonstrate the feasibility, the validity of the objectives of these directives, and their capacity to be implemented.

And, for want of appropriations, we lose this legitimacy and allow the idea that these European directives of ours are not reasonable and are not applicable to develop.

And so the debates taking place today focus on two major issues: firstly, comitology, an ongoing debate within this House, but Parliament wished to implement policies settled rather by management committees or advisory committees which give the Commission some flexibility and which do not give the Council too much scope to obstruct and have their intergovernmental philosophy prevail over the Community philosophy which we are here to stand up for within the European Parliament.

But we have these comitology debates with regard to most of the European Union' s financial programmes and instruments.

I would say that in my opinion - and the experiences we have had in the past tend to show this - that reconciling opinions on comitology is rather easier than reconciling opinions on the budget.

Let me point out that Parliament is asking for 850 million ecus in appropriations, not a vast sum in the Community budget, and that the current proposals are for 613 million ecus.

I feel, at any rate, that for the ultimate application of LIFE, at least, there would be some way for the Union to make a significant budgetary gesture in favour of the environment.

Let me conclude with the matter of our institutions' way of working.

This is the essence of how I understand the situation: we are being told that it is essential for us to reach a conclusion quickly, that, basically, the Members of Parliament should drop their claims, particularly claims on the budget, for if we do not soon, in line with the codecision procedure, get around to establishing the framework of the regulations for LIFE, then its implementation for the year 2000 is going to suffer a delay, and in the meantime the NGOs and the operators at grass roots level are waiting for our appropriations.

I would, however, like to point out that the Council has plenty of time to formulate its ideas and that it is submitting its proposals to us only a few months before the fateful date.

As for us, we our bound by the terms of the texts: a maximum of four months.

We meet our deadlines and afterwards we are told that we should hold on and that in order to be reasonable we must go along with the position of the others, because in the codecision procedure there is just not enough time.

I think Parliament often protests about this method, not to point the finger at any specific party within the Council, and I certainly would not want the Portuguese Presidency to feel responsible for this state of affairs, since, the truth is, it is something of a tradition, which the Council has kept going for a long time.

But I should like to stress the fact that, on this issue of the environment, the budget issue is a central one and Parliament cannot yield to the blackmail which requires it to be the only reasonable party in the deal.

I therefore hope, firstly, that our fellow Members will support us in the conciliation - but votes on this area are always very much in agreement - but also that the Council and the Commission will manage to listen to us and that we shall each take a step towards the other.

Mr President, it is true that we are in open disagreement on some of the choices made by the Council and the Commission, and I will refer to this later on.

It is equally true, however, that we should begin by saying that this regulation is better than those covering LIFE I and LIFE II.

It is better firstly because the framework proposal made LIFE I more rigorous, more transparent and more rational.

Secondly, it is better because the common position includes some fundamental recommendations, which were advocated by the European Parliament at first reading. Specifically, these are: to promote employment as a factor to be taken into consideration when selecting candidate projects, and to reduce the environmental impact of products at every stage from production to recycling and elimination.

This is one of the aims that LIFE-Environment must achieve. Thirdly, the fact that the common position has for the first time introduced upgrading and planning for coastal areas as one of LIFE-Environment' s priorities is an extremely positive step.

In spite of all its virtues though, LIFE III' s regulation fails in what is obviously the most important aspect of determining a financial instrument' s impact, which is its budget.

By persisting with their proposal of EUR 613 million as a reference amount for 2000 - 2004, and by refusing to accept the European Parliament' s proposal of EUR 850 million, the Commission and the Council are taking a decision which we do not feel is based on the same criteria of rationality and justice that they introduced, and rightly so, for other measures in LIFE III.

We want the Commission and the Council to know that we will not give up trying to provide LIFE with the budget it deserves and which best guarantees the environmental results that we are seeking to achieve with this kind of instrument. We have four very straightforward arguments which we feel justify our choice.

Firstly, LIFE is the only direct financial instrument which is designed to promote environmental policy within the European Union.

There is no other such policy.

Secondly, LIFE is an instrument that has already produced good results, and has enabled innovative methods and techniques to be developed and has an excellent rate of implementation.

Thirdly, the LIFE budget has been reduced in real terms has not kept up with the enormous dynamism and creativity of demand.

Fourthly, as Parliament ascribes so much value to LIFE, it has allocated ever-greater appropriations to this project in its annual budget. This means that approving the proposal put forward by the Council and by the Commission would represent an unacceptable reversal of this trend.

Our concern does not centre purely on the budgetary issue, however.

Climate change and water policy are subjects that are of great concern to the European public and which have deserved considerable attention from this House.

We therefore feel it is crucial that as Amendments Nos 5 and 6 seek to establish as objectives which LIFE-Environment should achieve a plan for the sustainable management of ground water and surface water, as well as for reducing greenhouse gases, they should be adopted.

Lastly, I would like to congratulate Mrs Lienemann on her report and to take the opportunity to say to her that we will be voting in favour of her amendments on comitology even though, as was made clear in the Committee on the Environment, we would prefer LIFE to have been monitored by an advisory committee, we do want to contribute to allowing the solution proposed by the Council to be accepted as quite frankly, it was worse.

Mr President, Commissioner, I would firstly like to congratulate Mrs Lienemann on the report she has carried out, and also the Commission - why not? - because this report, this position, generally improves on the texts in force.

Furthermore, it contains more acceptable systematics and is clearer and more transparent.

I would also like to congratulate the services of the Commission, since the evaluation, control and monitoring of the LIFE programme provide a reasonable guarantee with regard to the selection and execution of projects.

However, I would like to insist on certain points.

Firstly, its continuity, which, in principle, I am not questioning.

Sadly, only 7.2% of the projects requested receive funds.

Of the EUR 1 919 million requested, only EUR 784 million have been granted.

Now the financial statement shows only EUR 613 million to cover more countries and competences.

Parliament has proposed EUR 850 million, but the document repeats the initial proposal of EUR 613 million.

Commissioner, our environmental commitments are increasing in all areas, while the only financial instrument exclusively dedicated to the environment is decreasing.

Let us not demand from others what we are not prepared to give ourselves?

Why do we all go on about the environment and are then not prepared to pay for it amongst all of us, but rather expect the usual people, the ones who live there all year, to pay for it and maintain it?

The cost of maintaining the environment, which we all enjoy, must be met by all of us, and the LIFE programme is the only financial instrument aimed exclusively at the environment and whose projects have generally been effective.

Mr President, LIFE has been the principal instrument available to the Community since 1992 for supporting and developing environmental policy, both within the Community and in the surrounding third countries.

On the basis of the experience gained over the past eight years, an attempt is being made to increase the effectiveness of action on behalf of the environment in the third development phase of that financial instrument.

The funding of activities for the implementation, adaptation and development of Community policy in the environment sector and the incorporation of the environment in other policies, particularly ones that contribute towards sustainable development, are central elements of the regulation we are to vote upon.

An important element of LIFE-Nature, which mainly concerns the realisation of the Natura 2000 network, is the introduction of a multinational approach to formulating plans for international projects and activities, so as to avoid the fragmentation of biotopes and to offer better protection of biodiversity.

In the second, LIFE-Environment strand, which is more concerned with projects involving small and medium-sized enterprises and local government agencies, the incorporation of the environment in other policies is expressed very clearly indeed.

As regards the financing package for the implementation of LIFE over the next five years, I wholeheartedly support the increase from EUR 613 million to EUR 850 million proposed by the rapporteur, Mrs Lienemann.

Unless the necessary means are secured to pursue environmental protection, there is no point on the one hand in continuing to raise the environmental awareness achieved in recent years, and on the other hand in incorporating the environmental dimension in other policies.

Besides, we cannot remain indifferent towards the increased challenges in areas around the Union or towards addressing very acute environmental protection problems in the applicant countries.

What has happened over the past few days with the pollution of the Danube and its tributary has been instructive.

Consequently, I consider that support for environmental action under the LIFE financial instrument will help to further Community policy in the environmental sector and can contribute substantially to fulfilling the Community' s mission of achieving a high level of environmental protection and improvement.

Mr President, I should like to begin by congratulating Mrs Lienemann on her sensitive approach towards the environment, ably demonstrated in the two reports we have discussed this evening.

Two minutes is certainly not long enough to deal with such an important topic.

So I will simply appeal to the Commissioner to undertake full responsibility for such an important issue.

For five years, I have been the representative of the Committee on the Environment in a regional organisation, which assuredly does not have Parliament' s broad perspective.

The environment is in a parlous state.

Like a number of previous speakers, I, too, wish to consider the economic problem and the problem of finding funding for projects, which, in my view, should be incorporated into the pubic domain.

As regards funding, EUR 613 million is not enough.

Even EUR 850 million is not enough.

At the end of August 1999, I took part in a meeting of the Committee of the Environment in which it was said that EUR 2 million, or ITL 4 000 billion, should go towards eliminating or, at any rate, reducing smoking.

However, the environment constitutes a far bigger and more serious problem than smoking.

EUR 850 million - assuming that such a figure is actually agreed - believe me, is not enough, in practical terms, to allow any type of project to be carried out.

In many areas the parks which are a fundamental element in the LIFE programme have been established.

But creating parks with very limited financial resources, without any system of signs is inefficient and ineffectual.

I would therefore ask Parliament and the Commission to give the matter their full attention.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, ever since the beginning of 1999, discussions have taken place between the institutions on the subject of the proposed regulation for a third stage for the instrument for the environment known as LIFE.

I would again thank the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy and Mrs Lienemann for the good and constructive co-operation we have had on this matter.

As a result of this, I can confirm that the Commission wholly or in principle approves nine of the fourteen amendments which have been adopted by the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy.

The Commission welcomes, above all, Amendments Nos 1, 2, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 13, which apply to the Committee procedures.

In these cases, Parliament has fully taken account of the objections which the Commission had to the common position.

The Commission can, in principle, also approve Amendment No 4 which ought, however, to be introduced into another place in the text.

With regard to Amendments Nos 5 and 6, I want to emphasise that projects for the sustainable exploitation of groundwater and surface water, together with projects for reducing forms of air pollution which contribute to the greenhouse effect, are to a large degree covered by LIFE.

The Commission nonetheless considers that, if this is stated separately, then that is to go against the original decision to have the proposal focus on just a few priority areas.

There is also a risk of overlap with other Community programmes such as the Fifth Framework Programme for Research, Technical Development and Demonstration.

The present programme' s key measures - water quality, tomorrow' s city and innovative products and processes - to a certain degree cover the same questions.

Where the question of the budget is concerned, I am pleased about the confidence shown by the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy.

Amendment No 12 requires a larger budget than that stated in the common position.

I am also convinced that LIFE has great potential.

This instrument could finance good projects with a higher amount of money than that quoted in the proposed budget.

The amount quoted in Amendment No 12 does not, however, tally with the budget set on the basis of Agenda 2000.

Allow me also to add that, if the budget is increased, greater demands are obviously going to be made upon the Directorate-General for the Environment if an increased number of projects are going to be dealt with.

Account will also have to be taken of other programmes where decisions are to be made within the framework of the joint decision-making procedure.

At this stage, the Commission is keeping to the amount which has been set in the common position.

With regard to Amendment No 3, which we did not approve at first reading, I want to emphasise that each programme has its own objectives, conditions under which it may be applied for and costs which make it eligible for aid.

It is therefore meaningless, and often impossible, directly to transfer projects from LIFE to other instruments.

If other sources of finance were to be investigated for each project, more resources would, moreover, be required than are available in the present situation.

Now that the Commission has to consider carefully what resources are required for each activity, this is an example of the kind of activity we ought to avoid: one that is inessential but demanding in terms of resources.

Nor can the Commission approve Amendment No 14, which is contrary to the Commission' s right of initiative.

With regard to the discussion concerning the deadline, I want to say that the final date for beginning to implement LIFE - 31 March 2000, as set in the common position - must now be moved forward.

The date will be fixed as soon as the present regulation has been adopted.

Finally, I want to repeat that I am convinced that LIFE will be an effective instrument in support of development and the implementation of the Community' s environmental policy.

Parliament has contributed greatly to improving this instrument.

I am convinced that you share my wish that it should be possible to adopt the regulation as soon as possible, especially in view of the fact that there are great expectations in the Member States and in other countries, especially among the applicant States which are now being given the opportunity to participate in LIFE.

The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.

The next item is the report (A5-0033/2000), by Mr Andersson on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs, on the communication from the Commission on a concerted strategy for modernising social protection [COM(1999) 347 - C5-0253/1999 - 1999/2182(COS)].

Mr President, the issue of social security systems is an important one.

This is a natural consequence of cooperation within the EU.

The basis is monetary cooperation, which has since been followed up by macro-economic cooperation and cooperation on employment policy.

It is now a natural consequence to move on to social security systems.

These areas are mutually dependent upon one another.

Economic stability is a reason for growth and can provide high employment.

It also provides the opportunity to develop welfare provision.

But the reverse is also the case: a well-developed policy on social security can contribute to high employment and to increased growth.

In other words, social security is a factor of production.

Social security systems differ from one EU country to another.

This is largely due to historical factors.

We are now faced with a number of common challenges, however; demographic development, for example, which has to do not only with the increase in the number of elderly people but also with the lower birth rate.

The labour market is also changing.

Women are venturing into the labour market in ever greater numbers.

Another challenge is presented by technical development.

We must meet these challenges together.

The Commission' s communication recommends that experience should be more widely shared, a high-level group formed and benchmarking introduced.

What is more, the report on social security should be published annually and examined in conjunction with the report on employment.

This is good, but it is not enough.

We propose a procedure like the Luxembourg process.

Clear guidelines and indicators are required. At the same time, the Member States are to formulate the relevant methods in national action plans.

We are creating a common model, but retaining the principle of subsidiarity.

This social convergence is a process which will continue for a long period.

Parliament must therefore be involved in the work - not by being part of the high-level group, but by enabling parliamentary representatives to track the work of the latter and come up with proposals as to how the process is to be carried on.

Like the work on employment, the Commission' s proposal is founded upon four pillars.

These are: to make the systems employment-friendly; to make the pensions systems sustainable in the long term; to promote social integration; and to guarantee sustainable, high-quality health and medical care.

In our report, we have highlighted the importance of combating poverty within the EU and of finding indicators as soon as possible so that we can make progress in this area.

Equality has no pillar of its own.

There, it is mainstreaming which applies.

All four pillars should reflect aspects of equality.

This is something we have borne in mind.

We are submitting a wide range of proposals to the effect, for example, that there should be a transition to individualised social security systems; that parental leave should involve entitlement to benefits under the social security systems; that there should be better opportunities to combine family and working life; and that the basic old-age pension should guarantee a decent standard of living.

Parallel to this European strategy of social convergence, a concrete plan for legislative work in the social sphere is required, together with proposals for framework agreements in the context of the dialogue between employers and employees, accompanied by a concrete timetable.

We expect the Commission to present this as part of its proposal for a social action programme.

Social convergence is also needed before the enlargement of the Union, partly in order to strengthen the social model and partly to combat the risk of social dumping.

The Commission ought to consider devising a special action programme concerning social policy in connection with enlargement.

We have had a constructive discussion in the Committee.

We had a lot of amendments, but succeeded in agreeing upon a report.

Now, the amendments which are to be voted on at the plenary sitting have been reduced in number to only fifteen.

This indicates that we have a broad consensus.

A number of these amendments have come back from the Committee reading, and these I shall reject.

I shall also reject those amendments which have been tabled by the Technical Group of Independent Members, because I do not think that these add anything to the report.

On the other hand, my group will applaud Amendment No 14 from the group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party.

I think this proposal is a good one.

Certainly, it resembles Amendment No 1, but Amendment No 14 is better.

Finally, I want to say that the EU is not only concerned with cooperation on trade.

The EU is also a union for employment and social justice.

In creating a citizens' Europe, social policy has an important role to play.

By means of this report, Parliament wishes to make its contribution to reinforcing the social dimension of European society.

We hope that the Council and the Commission will take this contribution seriously and include it in future social policy.

The Lisbon Summit will provide an excellent opportunity to present a strategy of this kind.

Mr President, I would like to congratulate the rapporteur, Mr Andersson, very warmly on his report on modernising social protection which is now under discussion.

In the capacity of coordinator of the European People' s Party in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs, I am very pleased with the compromise which was reached and which Mr Andersson put so much effort into.

I am also delighted that he based the report on a report which was written by myself as rapporteur under the previous Parliament and has partly followed the gist of this old report.

The goal of the Commission' s notification of June 1999, on which the Andersson report is based, is to reinforce cooperation between the Member States and the EU in terms of social protection.

Key sub-goals are: promoting employment and ensuring that work secures a fixed income; secondly, safeguarding old-age pensions and making these affordable; thirdly, promoting social integration and fourthly, guaranteeing affordable, first-rate health protection.

Gender-related aspects must feature prominently in all these goals.

I believe that congratulations are also in order for the Commission with regard to this notification, for these four points are, in fact, to a very large number of EU citizens extremely important - if not the most important points which merit further thought.

The Commission' s communication is an important strategic document for bringing about European social convergence.

Macro-economic policy, employment policy and social policy all affect each other and this is why they should be brought more closely together.

The Commission has recognised this interrelatedness.

It is our intention to bring about an integrated social strategy which is, of course, underpinned by a sound macro-economic strategy and a sound employment strategy.

These aspects are very much interconnected.

It is, therefore, surprising that this topic has, to date, not been incorporated in a strategy and this is why the Commission' s notification constitutes a break-through in a way.

It brings me great joy to witness that the Council now seems to accept this break-through and also wants to bring it to the fore in Lisbon.

We should, of course, not get overly excited about it.

It marks the beginning, rather than the end, of a process.

Some people have wondered whether our demands are too low or whether there should be more dialogue.

But it is extremely significant for the process to be set in motion.

The issues involved are extremely important but the systems in the European Union are quite different from one another.

The levels of employment are different and this is why it is very important to set the ball rolling gently but to make steady progress nonetheless.

In this way, we will be able to meet a number of huge challenges.

The majority within my group is of the opinion that something like this needs to happen.

The funny thing about the Andersson report is that it does not get bogged down with too many details of how everything should take shape; from this perspective it is not a pie-in-the-sky report.

It is a report which tries to give direction.

There are, however, one or two aspects about which I have doubts as to whether or not we are being too specific.

I think that a number of MEPs will make reference to this.

But that does not take away from the fact that the report' s importance mainly lies in the fact that we are developing a strategy and that there is a reasonable chance that it can make a significant contribution in Lisbon.

I believe that if it were to be adopted in Lisbon in this way, Lisbon will turn out to be a success.

If it is not adopted, Lisbon will not add much to what has already been said in the past.

As far as this is concerned, the report, albeit a component, may well be the key component of Lisbon, because it is really innovative, while many other things are merely a rumination of what has been said before.

All in all, I am indebted to the rapporteur and the Committee for this report.

I hope that Europe, in terms of social protection, will make a step forward, taking into account subsidiarity, for without subsidiarity, this would not be possible.

Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, like my fellow MEP, Bartho Pronk, please allow me to thank the Commission for this communication and, in particular, to congratulate our rapporteur for the work he has put into this report.

Commissioner, the fact that this report is no longer controversial within Parliament does not mean that it has lost any of its crucial importance.

There have been times within this Parliament when such discussions on social security were actually quite awkward.

It is also a timely discussion - as Mr Pronk said just a moment ago - at a time when preparations are in full swing for the Lisbon Summit, which intends to find out how we can put economic growth, employment and social cohesion on the agenda in Europe via the Information Society.

Within my group, it speaks for itself that social protection forms an important part of this social cohesion and should thus also be added to the agenda in Lisbon.

My group is pleased that the Social Affairs Council gave the go-ahead for a better cooperation strategy as early on as the end of last year and that, in fact, a group of high-ranking officials has already been commissioned to submit to the Council an initial report by June 2000.

However, we, the Parliament and, in particular, the group of the Social Democrats, want Lisbon to go one step further now.

It is of great importance that, in our fellow MEP' s report, this European Parliament advocates a true European strategy of social convergence, based on what provisions have been made for employment via the so-called Luxembourg strategy, that is to say it should encompass common goals, guidelines, national action plans and performance evaluations.

We believe that this course of action is ambitious, yet achievable.

Needless to say, it is clear that harmonisation of social security is not viable at European level.

The financial and organisational systems vary too greatly for this, and this is also an important reason why social protection has only just been put on the European agenda, and why, in fact, scenarios such as Danny Peters' thirteenth Member State or the European social snake have scarcely got off the ground.

But this new course of action is very exciting.

The employment strategy has proved that it can function well and social convergence is also necessary, for our social security systems are facing the same challenges, and in an EMU era, social security systems would otherwise threaten to fall prey to social competition.

But let me make one thing clear on behalf of my group: social convergence strategies should not be an alternative to social legislation.

They can merely serve as an extremely useful complement to what we are developing and expecting from the Commission in terms of social legislation.

I think that it also a good thing if, moreover, the European Parliament tried to convince the Council to substantiate the common strategy as early on as in Lisbon and to launch an annual procedure to reduce poverty levels no later than at the beginning of 2001.

I am pleased about the fact that the European Parliament supports my group' s idea and we hope, Commissioner, that we can also count on your support.

Finally, we urge the European Parliament, both sides of industry and social NGOs to be closely involved in this process.

The success of this strategy hinges on a broad and democratic base and we hope that we can count on your support.

Mr President, the four chief objectives which the EU countries' governments endorsed in November of last year and which were mentioned earlier here today were as follows: that care should be taken to ensure that it is worthwhile working and guaranteeing oneself a secure income; that pensions should be guaranteed and pension arrangements made sustainable; that social integration should be promoted; and that sustainable, high-quality health care should be guaranteed. These are four goals which have been worded in such broad terms that everyone must be able to support them.

Having a group of high-ranking officials as the focal point for the pooling of experience and for the coordination and evaluation of the ways in which social and labour market policies are being developed is also something we can all benefit from.

The Commission' s communication, which we are discussing today and which was put by for a decision by the Council in November, is a well-balanced report on how we can obtain a more professional debate and more knowledge of the challenges faced by the Member States in the field of social policy over the next few years when we have ageing populations and are experiencing the effects of the enlargement of the Union.

We now already have major social problems and major social costs to find from the public budgets, which is a problem for many Member States.

If reforms are not got under way, we are in danger of eroding the economic basis of social policy, and a strong and competitive economy is now undoubtedly the most secure basis for effective social security.

It is therefore only reasonable to put these subjects on the agenda.

In the debate about coordination of social policy in the EU, we often use the expression social convergence.

As liberals, we can support this concept when it means that we in the EU are to establish broad common objectives with which the individual countries then seek to comply by means of their own national social policies.

It is not, therefore, about harmonisation but about common objectives.

It is, of course, a fact that the EU countries have different ways of organising social policy.

We have different traditions and there are differences in culture and, in spite of there being many points of similarity, there are also major differences between one country and another in the nature and extent of the social problems concerned. It is therefore important to emphasise that social policy is a national concern.

National policy is, of course, subject to a number of common parameters. That is the case with minimum social entitlements, which are established by treaty.

It is true in regard to guaranteeing the free movement of labour without loss of social entitlements. It applies to the fact of our having to coordinate our economies; and it applies in the case of economic cooperation.

So coordination and cooperation are facts of life.

But convergence should be about goals, not means.

I should also like to thank the rapporteur, Jan Andersson, for his report and for his very constructive contribution to the attempt to reconcile different positions and to secure support for his report.

I can support the report, but there are a few points which are not completely to my taste.

I do not agree with the requirement that the Commission should intervene in regard to what is referred to as unfair competition between social and tax systems, if interference of this kind is to be used to stem the tide of new thinking and to restrict development and the process of making our social systems more efficient, or else to prevent a reduction in the unduly high tax burden in many EU countries.

I am sceptical about the detailed regulations that might result from the Commission' s having to deal with the scope and quality of child care and care of the elderly, and I am sceptical about the value of a common poverty threshold.

Dialogue and the coordination of social policy are to be commended, but we should not lump all nations together as if they were the same. There should be room for a multiplicity of solutions.

Mr President, Commissioner, with regard to the strategy which has been set out here on modernising social security, I would like to point out some positive things as well as raise some questions that have come up for me.

I feel positive about the movement which is very gradually taking place in the dossier.

This seems to be a good thing and useful.

I also feel positive about the essence of the communication, namely the strategic approach.

We therefore hope that the four objectives which are mentioned in it can reasonably be achieved.

We would also underline the importance of the way in which the strategy is handled. On the one hand, it would be useful to have guidelines and a process styled on Luxembourg, but we also think it is important, as is already mentioned by Mrs Van Lancker, that guidelines are drafted to accommodate less typical work scenarios, such as sole traders, etc.

We nonetheless foresee two problems for which solutions will need to be found.

The first problem is that concerning the downward adjustment of social security, which, we hope, will be replaced by high-level convergence.

I can illustrate this with examples from a study which was carried out recently by the Dutch trade union movement into social security reforms within the European Union.

It appears from this study that adjustments are rife but most of these adjustments, in fact, the majority of them, appear to be downward adjustments, the remainder being improvements.

The lion' s share of these adjustments pertains to pension plans: eleven restrictions and two improvements.

In the case of unemployment benefits, we came across six restrictions and five improvements.

The reasons for adjustments are, for example, to improve employment, reduce social security expenditure, but are also due to policy competition and EMU criteria.

Policy competition mainly occurs in the northern countries.

The highest level of stability and even improvement of social security can be found in the southern countries.

All in all, both sides of industry only have a limited role to play in the process as a whole.

This is nothing to write home about and means that the convergence strategy must focus on the best approaches.

To use a figure of speech, cappuccino is not always good for us.

Mr President, I would, in turn, like to congratulate both the Commission, for making another step in the convergence process with regard to social security, and the rapporteur for the sound report he has compiled.

The European Union' s policy encompasses social policy in addition to economic and employment policy.

So far, social policy has remained limited in terms of set-up and resources.

But under the influence of the free movement of employees, of the internal market and of the euro, the labour markets are actually beginning to become integrated.

This has undeniable repercussions on social protection which is tied in with labour to a large extent.

Cross-border workers, employees on secondment and migrating employees, as well as job-seekers, students on placement and other students, experience hindrances in exercising the right of free movement. This is due to a lack of coordination and a lack of convergence in terms of social protection.

In fact, the same phenomenon occurs in tax law.

In order to combat distortion of competition and prevent dumping, the Commission has, in my opinion, developed a well-balanced approach which steers a midcourse between harmonisation and non-intervention.

On the one hand, binding and enforceable rules apply to equal pay or additional old-age pensions and on the other hand, programmes are used to offer incentives with regard to non-discrimination or social exclusion.

Based on a number of recommendations, reports and communications, the Commission has made another step in the convergence process by setting out objectives and by setting up a working party of high-ranking officials.

Both proposals have already been accepted by the Council and it is thus a matter of endorsing this approach in order to be able to make an assessment in time, with knowledge of all facts and/or in order to establish to what extent and in what way social protection should be reorganised in the European Union.

Indeed, expansion, globalisation, a sharp increase in the ageing population, individualisation and changes in family situations render such reorganisation inevitable.

Denying that such shifts take place is tantamount to surrendering social protection.

With regard to eurosceptics and nationalists, I would say that social protection within the boundaries of a Member State is not social and offers no protection.

Indeed, if social protection were to be phased out as a result of competition, this would also harm social protection as a production factor.

And less social protection means less purchasing power, fewer healthy employees and fewer happy employees.

In respect of the super-Europeans, I would say that European social protection is neither attainable nor desirable.

The discrepancies between the Member States are too immense in terms of provisions, rightful claimants, revenue or benefits, etc. It is thus impossible to bring all States into line.

The path which the Commission is walking is, in fact, obvious.

It has the advantage of clarity, and it can collect data and exchange experiences in order to agree on objectives and finely tune solid, comparative indicators and put forward recommendations.

I endorse this view. I will give my support to the Commission and I hope that Lisbon will take us a step forward in this matter.

Mr President, Mr Andersson' s report contains a lot that is of interest.

Unfortunately, what is most interesting is that the report, which purports to be concerned with a combined strategy for modernising social policy, instead proposes an extension of traditional social policy and more supranationalism in the social sphere.

Social policy needs to be renewed in order to reduce unemployment in the Member States.

Even though the socialists, now that there are so many social democratic governments, talk much less about unemployment than they used to, the unemployment in question is still high, and this in spite of the trade boom.

Something must be done so that unemployment does not turn the so-called European model into a parody.

Social policy must facilitate employment, creating incentives for employers and employees to, respectively, provide and accept jobs.

Mr Andersson' s report demands social convergence, that is to say that systems should be increasingly standardised within and throughout the EU.

The EU should apparently adopt what are called real convergence criteria, which would be binding and of real effect.

Mr Andersson also wants to see efficient and ambitious tax coordination, that is to say supranationalism in the fiscal sphere.

The EU should also, on the basis of a uniform definition of poverty thresholds, table recommendations concerning what is called the minimum acceptable subsistence level in the Member States.

The EU should devise guidelines governing the quality of the job opportunities which are to be created, whatever that may mean.

It is certainly not going to be possible to reduce unemployment with all these additional regulations and forms of interference.

Those structural problems which make unemployment higher in Europe than in the United States will become even greater.

There is no need at all for supranationalism in this area.

The Member States can devise their own systems in the social sphere, each within the framework of its economic resources and political preferences.

It is most especially important not to create unnecessary problems before the enlargement of the EU.

Mr Andersson thinks that the less wealthy Eastern countries should be reminded that social convergence is to apply to them too.

It is obvious, however, that these countries, impoverished within a Communist economic system, cannot cope with a social policy like, for example, Sweden' s.

Talk of minimum regulations and poverty thresholds is meaningless to the present Member States and unreasonable as far as less wealthy applicant States are concerned.

Mr President, as others have done, I should also like to congratulate Mr Andersson for the report he has produced.

He has done a great deal of work on behalf of Parliament in producing a wide-ranging consensus on what is, by any definition, a thorny issue, not just in this Parliament but in virtually every Member State.

I also welcome the Commission's communication.

It was slow in coming but well worth waiting for.

It could be a landmark in the development of a social Europe, providing we take it seriously and do not allow individual Member States to baulk at the steps that must be taken to implement it.

We can, and must, take the unique European social model we have and reform it to fit the twenty-first century, a century which is globalising fast.

I am afraid the proposals that are being put forward by Mr Herman Schmid will not deal with that globalising world.

To be successful we have to ensure that our economic policy, our employment policy and our social protection policy in its broadest sense, are integrated and that we deal with them as a whole.

We have to ensure that our ECOFIN ministers and our employment ministers acknowledge that social affairs ministers have a contribution to make to the establishment of a society in Europe which is creative, has initiative and which will provide a high quality of life for all of our citizens.

This is not an option for us any more.

European citizens will not settle for any less than a quality of life which befits them as human beings.

We do not want the US model - a model which has spectacularly failed to create the employment that is necessary to provide a decent quality of life.

What it has done is increase dramatically the number of working poor in the United States.

That is not what we want to do in Europe.

We have the traditions of solidarity in Europe and we have the experience of a better way of doing things.

But we have to grasp the tools to do that.

I therefore urge that we not only implement the high-level group as proposed by the Commission but also go further and have a Luxembourg-type process so that we have an integrated approach to this issue of social protection.

Mr President, Commissioner, this is one of the social areas to which the European Union ought to pay much more attention.

Macroeconomic policies, the stability pact and the criteria for nominal convergence have put a brake on modernising social protection which would improve the quality of people' s lives, specifically by means of a significant increase in pensions and pension schemes, particularly of the minimum pensions, and through fighting social exclusion.

This situation is particularly serious in countries such as Portugal where the minimum pensions and pension schemes are barely more than half of the minimum national wage which in turn, is the lowest in the whole of Europe.

Therefore, while the Commission does not accept the need to amend its macroeconomic policies to create more jobs of quality, with employee rights, which is a fundamental basis for maintaining and modernising a solid, public social protection system, we harbour serious doubts as to its position.

Although the Andersson report has gathered some positive proposals, including some that we put forward ourselves, we are still critical of some of the bases for the Commission' s proposal and we still have concerns about the strategy for modernising social protection.

Mr President, in my previous life I ran two manufacturing businesses, one in the United Kingdom and one in the Netherlands.

As the UK business grew, we invested in more people, as the Dutch business grew we invested in more machinery.

The simple reason for this was that social costs in the Netherlands were just too high in comparison.

I am in favour of social protection, I am in favour of the original Commission document, but I do not want to see people priced out of jobs because social protection costs become unrealistically high.

That is why in committee I proposed some form of business impact assessment, so that costs and risks to jobs could be taken into account, and the EPP-DE Group supported this amendment.

But I must record that other groups, led by the PSE Group, guided by my countryman, Stephen Hughes, voted this out.

I accept that Mr Andersson's report is very well-intentioned, and I respect him for the work he has done, but in my view the way the report defines and promotes social convergence would drive social costs higher throughout the EU.

This would put more jobs at risk and also put at risk the credibility of this House by showing how remote we are from the real world.

I therefore urge this House to reject the full report and let the original Commission proposal, which was very well-balanced, stand unamended.

Mr President, we are unable to vote for this report.

The European Union should actually place social issues at the heart of the building of Europe.

Social rights should determine economic choices, and not the other way around.

This is why, when it comes to social protection, we are opposed to schemes copied from the Luxembourg process which run counter to this rationale: broad economic guidelines, then convergence criteria and, finally, social issues, dealt with as the last resort.

The European Union should proclaim one general principle, to wit, that the social rights acquired in Member States may not be restricted.

Any Community intervention should aim to complement and to harmonise existing guarantees according to the highest common denominator.

In order to strengthen the funding of social security systems, we need a policy of general wage increase, the establishment of a minimum legal wage in each Member State.

In order to fight poverty, entitlement to an income and to employment are inalienable rights.

Finally, in order to avoid health being treated in any way as a commodity, the European Union should declare itself clearly opposed to pension funds and to a situation where private insurance companies have access to the health system.

I sincerely hope, in conclusion, that social Europe cannot be satisfied with mere words and pious hopes.

For millions of people the situation is too tragic for that.

Mr President, Commissioner, the aim of developing a coordinated strategy for modernising social protection in the European Union is certainly an admirable one.

Just as the launching of a European convergence strategy on employment and labour market policies at the Luxembourg Summit was commendable.

The labour market and social protection are, in fact, two sides of the same coin, that require harmonised policies and rules.

If the labour market functions by means of certain levels of employment, flexibility and salary discipline, then it is impossible for the welfare state and social protection not to function, and vice versa.

Until recently, the European countries fixed, it could be said in an autarkic way, the rules governing the functioning and financing of the two markets.

Budgetary and exchange rate policies were responsible for maintaining internal and external stability.

With the Maastricht Treaty and the single currency, budgetary discipline became tighter and recourse to devaluation ceased as a means of endeavouring to restore marginal competitiveness.

The structural and economic differences of the various countries cannot, therefore, be rebalanced through budget deficits and trade.

That being the case, in the absence of complete labour mobility inside the Union, and without a redistributive fiscal policy at federal level, it is left to the labour markets and welfare systems to provide what degree of flexibility there is to remedy both structural and economic disequilibria, the so-called exogenous asymmetric shocks.

Political and monetary convergence in Europe unavoidably entails convergence of the respective rules of the game in the labour market and welfare systems. But, at the same time, the single currency and the absence of labour mobility, as well as of a redistributive fiscal policy, force us into a situation of non-convergence in terms of salaries and welfare, in order to compensate for the differences in marginal productivity at national and regional levels.

Hypocrisy and fine-sounding words such as convergence, benchmarking, modernisation and concerted action are not going to extricate us from those contradictions.

Either the European Union becomes a genuine federal state with a genuine redistribution of resources, genuine free movement of workers and therefore - but only at that point - common labour and welfare regimes, or it would be better not to deceive and be deceived by hopeless paths to convergence which sound impressive but which, in reality, only cause harm, above all to the most vulnerable.

That is something we would do well to recognise.

Mr President, unlike several of those who have spoken in today' s debate, I am inclined to endorse the Andersson report, one of the reasons for this being that I can see clear differences between the report and the Commission' s communications.

In particular, I am referring to the fact that this report - and I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on this - defends the European social model' s approach, which is one based on solidarity.

I would like to highlight the clear positions adopted against social dumping, together with the right to a basic level of social security, the goal of social convergence, and, in particular, the quite specific points that have been made about equal opportunities for women being the primary objectives of this social policy.

I can certainly see that it has its shortcomings in failing to undertake a sufficiently rigorous analysis of macroeconomic policy within the European Union, and it is this policy which stands in the way of the aforementioned solidarity-based revival of the European social state, model. All in all, though, I deem this report to be worthwhile.

Mr President, I have taken the floor in order to reaffirm the need for the modernisation of social protection, which is much more then simply one more step in the construction of Europe.

This message is contained in the excellent report by Mr Andersson.

Europe, the European Union, although it is very strong in economic and political terms, will remain shaky, weak and limited, perhaps inadequate, if we are not able to strengthen it from a social point of view.

I believe that the latter means the possibility of employment for those who require it, but also decisive action in support of the socially disadvantaged.

Bearing in mind that everybody has the right to social protection and a minimum guaranteed social income, I believe that we must not forget about those people who were not born in the European Union.

Let us not forget that, in 1999, 717,000 people came here to compensate for our low birth rate.

In social terms, it is therefore absolutely essential that we have an immigration policy with a social conscience, as President Gutierres recently stated in Spain.

We must be very aware of the situation of those people whose prospects of finding work are threatened or reduced by economic changes, mergers, take-overs, new technologies etc.

What is required here is a training policy to qualify and prepare people for new jobs, for those who already have a job and for those who need a second opportunity, because sometimes, as the title of the film states, the postman always rings twice.

In my humble opinion, it is the responsibility of all European, national and regional governments to ensure that he rings on more than one occasion.

It seems to me, Commissioner, that the Commission has the responsibility to promote and coordinate these opportunities.

Mr President, I should like to congratulate Mr Andersson on his really excellent work, which is the reason why there is broader agreement, and I also thank the Members of Parliament involved for their contribution.

I would like to make a number of comments about what has been said.

First, I must stress that the debate about social protection issues began several years ago among the European bodies and since 1995 there has been the first statement entitled: "The future of social protection" and there have been statements from the European Parliament, those of Mrs Weiler and Mr Pronk.

Today, we have the statement by Mr Andersson.

I believe we have made considerable progress since we are now talking about the modernisation of social protection.

The second point is that we must bear in mind the legal basis by virtue of which the European Commission can operate.

You know very well that the Treaty provides no legal basis for policies at European level, but there is the agreement expressed at the last Council, there is agreement that work should begin on coordination and the exchange of experience, as well as the exchange of successful programmes between the Member States.

The third observation is that as regards the four issues on which the specific statement focuses, which relate to paid work, the sustainability of pension systems, social convergence and lastly quality in health care, there is a horizontal approach to the issue of women because in each of these categories - as the speakers said - there are special problems relating to women and those problems should in many cases be addressed by separate policies.

The next point concerns the specific action we have undertaken.

As you know, a high-level group has already been set up by the Portuguese Presidency, which will present its first report to the Summit Conference in June.

The Portuguese Presidency has focused on two things: sustainable pension systems and social accession.

I believe that the proposal for a corresponding group at Parliamentary level is very positive and can contribute towards our progress to the next step after approval of the said high-level group.

Concerning some remarks about the role of social protection systems, the cost of social protection and the part played by those systems in the competitiveness of the Member States, I should like to say that in Europe policies strive to combine competitiveness and social cohesion.

Of course, we must take due note of the issue of competitiveness, but social protection too must be planned in a way that makes it a factor of economic growth and employment.

I think the statement' s content makes this clear.

Ladies and gentlemen, the aim is that in the next year, and after a unanimous decision by the Council, we should progress to a first level of coordination, exchange of views, listing of social problems and creation of a data base for the better coordination of policies.

As many of the speakers have said, I believe a first important step has been taken.

Already at the Intergovernmental Conference, social policy issues are being addressed more broadly and I believe we are in a new phase, in which social policy will, to a large extent, become a European policy.

The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.

The next item is the recommendation (A5-0008/2000) by Mrs Cederschiöld, on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market, on the proposal for a Council Decision on the approval, on behalf of the European Community, of the WIPO Copyright Treaty and the WIPO Performances and Phonograms Treaty [COM(1998) 249 - C5-0222/1999 - 1998/0141 (AVC)].

Mr President, we are now taking a stance on an important issue, an international agreement, which may influence the prospects for prosperity of many Member States.

In my own country, Sweden, one of our biggest export industries is affected, namely the music and sound recording industry.

It is about artists' entitlement to copyright or to protection for their artistic products.

It is about the WCT (World Copyright Treaty) and the WPPT (World Performance and Phonograms Treaty).

Without protection under intellectual property law, creativity is inhibited and financial incentives obstructed.

It is estimated that, in Europe alone, income of EUR 4.5 billion is lost because of piracy.

The problem affects a lot of jobs in the entertainment industry.

This is an historic agreement because the EU is the contracting party.

This is the case, in spite of the fact that it is not the EU, but only the Member States, which belong to the organisation.

There exists a special clause which requires Parliament' s assent in two cases.

With regard to the present agreement, both these conditions are fulfilled.

A new institution is being created, an assembly which, in the future, will monitor the agreement and its consequences.

The agreement also concerns questions dealt with in accordance with the co-decision-making procedure.

Parliament must therefore give its assent, because the agreement concerns its sphere of competence.

The future will show whether it is right, by means of this new parliamentary assembly, to reduce the Commission' s powers regarding these issues.

Parliament cannot, in any case, at present do anything about the matter.

The agreement complements the Berne Convention in regard to literary works.

It creates international legal protection in connection with distribution, sale, rental, public reproduction and the making available of works.

It also creates protection for software and databases.

There are problems regarding the term "author" .

For example, it has not been defined.

Another issue, which is somewhat problematic, is that of intermediate storage.

This too has not been solved.

It is dealt with by means of a general clause which does not provide any definition.

If no definitions are provided in questions such as this, it can lead to their being dealt with differently around the world, with no uniformity of approach.

That would not be a good thing.

The question of arbitration procedures is still to be resolved, too.

We can only say yes or no to the agreement as it stands.

Yes or no to an agreement which contains deficiencies.

Both myself, as rapporteur, and the committee think we ought to say yes.

We have here an agreement which, in spite of its defects, constitutes a significant step forward for the issue of copyright.

We have of course discussed at length whether Parliament and whether the EU should have powers in regard to patents under intellectual property law.

However, there is still no Community legislation in the areas of patent law and protection of designs, and there needs to be.

A European patent is in the offing, and that is a good thing.

Now, the Union and the Member States are combining to take the first steps in the area of intellectual property law.

It is good for us that we have the power to do this, in spite of the fact that we are not completely satisfied.

In that way, we can act as a model for the applicant States.

We have a direct financial interest in these issues being settled before enlargement.

I want to thank the Commission for its efforts in this area and for the cooperation with the Commission' s officials, which has been quite excellent.

Finally, I also want to thank this Chamber for being so good as to listen to these words at this late hour.

Mr President, I too would like to congratulate the rapporteur, Mrs Cederschiöld, on her very serious work.

She has clearly identified the problems created by the approval of the World Intellectual Property Organisation' s treaties.

Their approval is undoubtedly an historic occasion because for the first time the European Union is participating as a contracting party in an international treaty that governs the field of intellectual property.

It is a fact that the road has been a long one, mainly because of the legal problem that arose in connection with the extent to which the Community could be considered to have absolute competence in matters of intellectual property.

Today we are asked to give our assent in effect to two treaties: the treaty on intellectual property and the treaty on interpretations, performances and phonograms.

As regards the first of these, it seems to provide an effective solution for the long-standing demands by the creators of artistic and literary works, while at the same time creating a framework of protection in relation to issues such as distribution, rental and the presentation of their works to the public.

As regards the second treaty on performances and phonograms, it must be stressed that for the first time an international treaty signed by the Community as well recognises exclusive rights for performers, interpreters and artists for reproduction, distribution and rental to the public, and the right to fair remuneration for radio broadcasts.

In that context a noteworthy and important step forward is the treaty' s treatment of the right of reproduction.

Even though, as the Commission says, the texts of the treaties do not contain special provisions to regulate all the respective issues raised by technological development, it can nevertheless be said that within the legislative framework created, performing or interpreting artists enjoy broader protection than that accorded by the Treaty of Rome or even by the Community directives.

Interpreting Article 7 of the Treaty, we can conclude that the application of protection for reproduction does not only mean protection for the reproduction of the interpretations or performances themselves as such that are embodied in recordings, but also protection against copying, whether in whole or in part and whether permanent or temporary, and protection against any other form of production.

It would be appropriate, however, for us also to mention some points which should be at the focus of future WIPO work or the work of other diplomatic conferences.

First, there is the right of distribution as referred to in Article 8(1).

The option accorded to States by the next paragraph of the same article to regulate the exhaustion of the above right is dangerous and is one of the Treaty' s most negative points, since there is nothing to prevent States from enacting special conditions for the exhaustion of the right, a thing that would be to the disadvantage of artists.

As regards rental rights, on interpretation of Article 9, we can conclude that the exclusive right of rental belongs to artists, interpreters or performers, only if this is laid down by national legislation. I think this conflicts with Article 13.

To conclude, I want to say that ratification of these treaties opens a horizon for property rights.

In the 21st century, the century of knowledge and the invisible economy, intellectual property will be the dominant form of property and will, in many cases, be more important than traditional property.

We are at the dawn of an age in which new legislation will be created, where the right to utilise intellectual property will clash head on with the public interest in terms of its dissemination and exploitation by the public at large.

Mr President, I should like to thank our rapporteur for this excellent report which, nonetheless, concludes that, as a Community, our accession to these two WIPO treaties must not boil down to a mere institutional development, however important that may be, i.e. the opportunity for the European Community and the WIPO Assembly to work together.

This ratification is also necessary in the light of the enlargement of Europe.

However, an objective is emerging behind this issue of Community accession, one I find as yet too theoretical but one that some Member States, nonetheless, find too offensive.

This is the affirmation of a European cultural policy. In this connection, I expect our three institutions, Parliament, the Commission and the Council, to be in agreement.

Cultural policy means, in particular, defending the role of the arts, recognising the role of authors and setting high cultural standards.

In addition, at a time when Europe faces the task of defining a new policy on copyright and neighbouring rights, there is an urgent need - as has just been pointed out several times - to define and redefine what exactly an author is.

Our definitions are still too vague and new technologies now make it essential for us to clarify them.

Mr President, Commissioner, the adoption of the WIPO agreements was a very positive step in the direction of the global information society.

The agreements crystallise the decades-old legacy of copyright, and they represent a precisely considered and balanced solution for the regulation of copyright and neighbouring rights.

The entry into force of the treaties and their final form is, however, in addition to this recommendation, dependent on implementation by the parties themselves.

In the United States the WIPO Treaty has already entered into force, having been enacted into law by means of the Digital Millennium Corporate Act and there they have managed to retain the delicate balance of the Treaty by means of this legislation.

The EU too must proceed in its legislative work in accordance with what is agreed in the WIPO.

It is worrying that the position adopted by the previous Parliament does not support this balanced WIPO system.

The opinion on the copyright directive at first reading was very distorted, and, furthermore, the balance is moving in a harmful direction from the point of view of Europeans.

The recommendations that have been made will not improve the status of culture in Europe, on the contrary.

Parliament' s amendments would mainly improve opportunities for the media enterprises that are well established in the market to move their old, in excess of 80% market share to a new environment with rigid, excessive copyright regulations.

I am not now speaking of Charlotte Cederschiöld' s recommendation, which is an excellent paper, but of the matters of copyright that the previous Parliament discussed.

On one point of detail, I would like to thank Mrs Cederschiöld for having clarified, for example, the concept of so-called temporary copies in her opinion.

There is no consciously adopted position in the WIPO Treaty on temporary copies.

If these, which technically speaking are copies, were covered by the protection in force it would make the transfer of information - as the recommendation quite rightly states - expensive and complicated for no good reason.

It would be as if the deliveryman had to pay a copyright fee whenever he carried a book to be read by the purchaser.

The real benefit of culture is that art and knowledge can be transferred safely and easily from the artist directly to the user, the consumer.

The new operational environment is, above all, a huge opportunity to create and spread culture in a different way than ever before.

It is essential that the interests of all parties are taken into account.

Parliament has tried to take account of this in its own recommendation.

(NL) Mr President, I would like to start by congratulating the rapporteur on the work that she has carried out.

The Commission is under the impression that she has worked fast and effectively.

It befits the Commission to express its gratitude towards the rapporteur.

I would like to present the Commission' s conclusion to you without any further ado: it agrees with the conclusions of the draft recommendation and, therefore, with ratification by this Parliament.

I would like to stress the importance of both Treaties.

Both the WIPO Copyright Treaty and the WIPO Performances and Phonograms Treaty constitute progress in the international protection of copyright and neighbouring rights and are, as such, a considerable improvement on the Berne Convention and the Treaty of Rome.

Both Treaties contribute towards a high level of protection for works and other matters, but offer the public access to the contents of these via electronic networks.

The two Treaties explicitly permit the Community to become a party to the Treaties and to play an important role in managing them.

Consequently, approval of the Treaties by the Community is of major importance, because it illustrates that the Community sets great store by intellectual property rights.

In addition, assent leads to more widespread international recognition of the European Union' s role in terms of copyright.

At international level, there is a great deal of support for treaties entering into force more swiftly.

These have now been ratified by twelve or thirteen WIPO Member States, including the United States.

The entry into force of treaties largely depends on the European Union, because thirty ratification acts are required in order for treaties to enter into effect, and these acts that are signed by the European Union and the Member States, including associated countries, are of vital importance in order to reach this number.

The developing countries, too, expect the European Union to bring about ratification swiftly because this would give a strong signal worldwide.

In this context, Parliament has already played a key role in the discussions on the draft directive on copyright in the Information Society, which led to the approval of the Barzanti report in February 1999.

This directive is the necessary counterpart of the proposed decision and largely embraces the key principles of the WIPO Treaties.

The European Parliament must now follow once again the exceptional assent procedure of Article 300(3).

It is vitally important to give the correct signal to the outside world, in the form of this recommendation.

In a nutshell, I would like to reiterate the Commission' s conclusion here: it supports the draft recommendation and hopes that it will be of key importance to anyone with an interest in intellectual property.

The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30a.m.

(The sitting was closed at 11.55 p.m.)

Adoption of the Minutes of the previous sitting

The Minutes of yesterday' s sitting have been distributed.

Mr President, I see in the Minutes that two Members spoke yesterday about delayed flights to Strasbourg on Monday.

I would like to add that the flight from Amsterdam' s Schipol airport was also delayed and then cancelled.

We were diverted to Basel-Mulhouse Airport.

We were told that a bus would meet us there on arrival.

In fact, it took 45 minutes after we arrived before the bus appeared at the airport.

We finally got here, on Monday at 8.30 p.m., after some of us had spent more than 12 hours travelling.

This sort of service and difficulty in getting to Strasbourg on a Monday is quite hopeless.

If the French Government insists that we continue to meet in Strasbourg, it could at least ensure, where flights are diverted to Basle, that buses arrive on time to meet the diverted passengers, otherwise it is quite pointless for us to try to arrive here on Monday and attend to any kind of business.

I wonder if that could be added to the Minutes.

Mr President, I was booked on the same flight and I am rather embarrassed to admit that the airline was KLM, our national airline company.

I hope that next time, also if any other airline company is involved, things will run more smoothly.

Mr President, I would just like to draw your attention to something that concerns today' s agenda.

We decided on Monday that the Council' s statement on the Fiftieth Anniversary of the Geneva Convention was to be postponed.

I would just like to clarify that we will only be talking about the other items on this agenda today, and not about the Geneva Convention.

This item has been postponed until the next part-session in March. It was erroneously included in today' s agenda.

Mr Swoboda, I can confirm what you have just said and there is, in fact, a printing error.

The document that has been distributed contains inaccuracies, because the decision has been taken to postpone the debate.

Mr President, I just want to say that, as I was walking in this morning, I noticed two people smoking outside the Hemicycle.

Can you please do something about it?

I cannot do anything about it myself, but you are quite right. We need a quick way of educating people, including those who do not obey the rules decided upon in this House.

Regarding the problems caused by air travel delays, perhaps everybody who has had difficulty reaching Strasbourg for the present part-session should form a small group - although I am not sure that it will be small - to discuss the precise nature of the problems encountered.

Coherence of EU policies with development

The next item is the statement by the Council and the Commission on the coherence of EU policies with development.

Mr President, it is a great pleasure for me to address you for the first time on behalf of the Council presidency, particularly in view of the very important role that the European Parliament is bound to play in the near future, given the need to strengthen development policies at European Union level. The subject of the statement that I have the honour of presenting to you today, is the coherence of different Union policies with development policy.

I shall, of course, give the Commission an opportunity to add to some of the observations that I shall be making. I would like to start by emphasising the need we all feel, at EU level, to reconcile the extraordinary development and progress that we have seen in many areas of life - not least because of the marked technological impetus over recent years, which has benefited people in all walks of life, throughout the world, in terms of well-being and improvements in living conditions - with the fact that, at the same time, there has been a substantial increase in the pronounced imbalances between some regions and geopolitical areas of the world.

This endangers the stability of the international system and jeopardises peace.

We are all therefore duty-bound to seek to match our policies better to this objective of achieving greater stability and greater balance in the various parts of our planet.

The consequence of all this is a reassessment of development policies in response to the globalisation of economic and financial markets.

A serious imbalance in the functioning of these markets has emerged, which has of course made it necessary to make important adjustments, which in turn inevitably mean new options as regards development policies.

We will therefore find ourselves on the threshold of a new model for development policies which - and I would like to stress this - will require action on our part in four essential areas:

Firstly, there will be a need for more concerted action between all international players, by which I mean donors, requiring greater coordination, greater coherence and improved links between humanitarian aid and development policies; it will also require strengthening of the multilateral system and greater attention being paid to indebtedness and to financing and development problems. At the same time, however, there will have to be some changes in the framework within which those countries now receiving aid operate, particularly the need to fight corruption and to maintain democracy and good governance as fundamental principles in developing their political systems, together with a need to focus special attention on these countries' own policies for reducing poverty.

The second aspect of this new model for development policies relates to the need for a more integrated approach to development.

This means not just an approach limited to development aid as the sole element of this policy, but a policy that also increasingly takes account of the role of other policies in the spheres of finance, trade and investment. Furthermore, this new model must respect the need for this integrated vision of development to be approached both from a global policy angle and also in the light of the various donor countries' own policies.

A third aspect of this new model that I would like to emphasise is a policy aimed at achieving our objectives.

Since 1995, following a concerted international effort between the main donor states, involving in particular a reflection paper produced by the OECD' s Development Assistance Committee, it has been possible to establish some important objectives by way of guidelines for development policies, both at national and international level.

As you will know, the aim of these objectives is to cut poverty by 50% by 2015, by increasing compulsory schooling, by significantly reducing child mortality rates, and by implementing a raft of social welfare measures with a view to effectively achieving this objective.

This would mean moving away from the situation of extreme poverty in which more than a third of the world' s population lives, and moving away from the extremely poor living conditions suffered by over a billion people. This is an extraordinary state of affairs, which certainly means that if this objective is to be achieved the international community as a whole will have to participate and intervene actively.

And that brings me to the fourth aspect of this new development model that I would like to emphasise. Particularly in recent years, development policies have been regarded as an increasingly global matter, and yet there is apparently a lack of strong international leadership.

The concerted actions of the United Nations institutions have played an important role here, as has the Bretton Woods system.

I have in mind, in particular, the important impetus given to this debate by the World Bank, especially through its Comprehensive Framework document, and by the International Monetary Fund, where, for the first time, an institution of this kind has put the problem of reducing poverty at the centre of its policy guidelines and has forged a hitherto unimaginable link, for a body of this type, between debt relief and poverty.

This new role for international organisations on development issues is also a good reason for us to consider the role of the European Union in this context.

The Portuguese Presidency has highlighted the need for the European Union to combine its highly important international role as the main donor with a leading role - and a more active one - in this movement to reform international development policies, and to create greater scope for coordination, in particular with the United Nations system and the Bretton Woods system.

If we are to strengthen the European Union' s role in international development policies, we believe that it is basically necessary to take three kinds of action.

Firstly, we need to make the EU' s development policy more effective.

As you know, an exercise was carried out in 1995 involving an overall assessment of development policies, and the results of this overall assessment exercise were presented during the German Presidency.

The main conclusions emphasised the need for a more coherent EU policy and a more strategic overall EU approach to development issues.

The key aspects were the need for greater coordination and greater complementarity between policies, the need for harmonisation and simplification of the present organisational framework for the Union' s present cooperation policies, the need to make the EU' s aid management more efficient and, in particular, to review its mechanisms for intervention, and also the need to reinforce the assessment system and to introduce greater transparency into the process for granting aid.

A second aspect worth highlighting underscores the need for EU policy and the policies of the Member States to complement each other more.

It is widely known that a significant proportion of aid is today granted under the Member States' national policies, which are not always complementary or well coordinated. A great deal of the waste and inefficiency associated with aid from the European Union and its Member States is the result of precisely this lack of coordination and complementarity between the actions of individual Member States and the proposals and actions of the European institutions.

In this respect it is also absolutely vital that we should do our utmost, as soon as possible, to create stronger mechanisms for ensuring that the policies adopted by the Member States and European Union policies are coordinated and complementary.

The third aspect I would like to highlight is the strengthening and coherence of EU policies, the central theme of today' s debate.

Firstly, we are all aware that it is not enough just to improve aid conditions and that there is a need for better coordination with other European Union policies, so that development objectives can be achieved, not merely through aid and support, but also, first and foremost, through a more integrated approach to the various different policies that contribute to the objectives of development.

As you know, a Council Resolution was approved, in June 1997, under which the Commission was required to present evaluation reports. The first such report was presented to the Council in May 1999, and it referred to certain aspects of policy coordination, notably in the fields of peace building, food safety, fisheries and migration.

But as you will also be aware, we are waiting for a Commission communication on coherence, together with the communication on development policy.

Over the coming months, that is to say during the Portuguese Presidency, this debate will of course be enriched by the contributions that the Commission has undertaken to present to us.

It is evident that the scope for achieving coherence between policies will always be limited and it is only natural for there to be some contradictions between policies as these are means of balancing and weighting the contradictory and conflicting interests within the European Union. Only in this way is it possible to manage some degree of contradiction between policies.

But, quite apart from this, we would like to emphasise that, if we are to strengthen the coherence of European Union policies in the present circumstances and in the economic situation currently facing the Union, we need to give serious consideration to various issues associated with the dynamics of the European Union itself. By this I mean, of course, the internal dynamics of the European Union.

We know that the European Union has its own dynamics, which stem above all from the Treaty of Amsterdam, which has reinforced its political dimension. This inevitably has important consequences for the proposal for coherence in policies relating to development.

We will also have to await the outcome of the work of the Intergovernmental Conference as regards enlargement, to see to what extent the internal dynamics of the European Union are directed towards increasing the coherence of its policies, and, as regards development in particular, to what extent it also contributes to appropriate institutional arrangements for achieving this objective.

The second aspect that we need to consider, in relation to the coherence of policies, is development policy in the context of the Union' s foreign policy.

We know that the Union has entered a new era as regards its foreign policy, and we know that, with the creation of the High Representative, of the Rapid Reaction Force and of the military crisis management capacity, there is a whole trend towards confirming the status of the European Union that we should not underestimate when we consider the role of development policies. We also know that there are issues associated with political dialogue, with the adoption of common positions or joint actions, with the preparation of joint strategies, with preventive diplomacy, and with the development of regional capacity for crisis prevention and management.

There can be no doubt that implementing and developing all these aspects will inevitably make an important contribution to strengthening the role of development policies in the context of the European Union' s foreign policy.

It has to be said that, in approaching development policy in the context of foreign policy, the European Union is bound to go down the same road as many Member States have done with their own development policies in the context of their individual foreign policies. The success of this is bound to involve a need to strengthen decision-making mechanisms and institutional structures relating to the common foreign and security policy, so as to secure better coordination between instruments of development policy and instruments of foreign policy.

In this context, we are convinced that we need to move away from the post­colonial model towards to a truly European model of development aid. I say this because we know that, in Europe, development policy has been very much shaped by the policies of certain Member States, in view of the post-colonial concerns of those states.

The third aspect that needs to be considered is European Union policy and Member States' policy.

Coherence of policies at European level certainly means better coordination of Member States' policies with the European Union' s development policy. If we do not establish improved mechanisms to ensure coherence between national policies, it will certainly be more difficult to deliberate against a background of greater coherence in European Union development policy.

Ladies and gentlemen, the fourth and final aspect that I would like to draw to your attention, regarding development policy, is, of course, the Development Council. There have been discussions, especially in recent months, about the role the Development Council could play in relation to EU policies.

As you know, there is a glaring difference between the status of development policies and other EU policies - you only have to look at the difficult circumstances surrounding the EDF' s financing, or rather lack of financing.

It is difficult to imagine achieving greater coherence in the European Union' s policies without the Development Council playing a more active and interventionist role in relation to political decisions, which clearly come under the development banner and which are being dealt with in other Councils, in other decision-making forums, ranging from the Agriculture and Fisheries Councils to the Environment Council. Up to now, the Development Council has not had any opportunity to make its voice heard or to intervene in relation to these decisions.

So without a more active role for the Development Council in the overall coordination of political decision making which, although it directly impacts on the European Union' s development policy, is largely being dealt with outside this decision-making forum, it will certainly be difficult to establish a more coherent European Union policy on development objectives.

The views of the European Parliament on this issue too, will certainly be both timely and welcome.

Let me start by saying something about the successfully concluded negotiations between the EU and ACP countries.

I would like to remark that it was a very positive experience taking part in those negotiations.

I saw Member States working as a team, which was indeed a wonderful experience.

There was also deep satisfaction on both sides when this was over, not just because it was over, but because we all knew that we had achieved something together, the EU and the 71 ACP countries.

That is something that the world needs and is a very good signal in the framework of the whole discussion of globalisation.

I shall outline some of the major innovations in the new agreement.

We explicitly address corruption; we establish a framework for dealing with the problem of immigration for the first time ever.

We promote participatory approaches, we ensure the consultation of civil society on the reforms and policies to be supported by the EU.

We refocus development policies on poverty reduction strategies.

We base the allocation of funds not only on an assessment of each country's needs, but also of its policy performance.

We create an investment facility to support the development of the private sector.

We rationalise instruments and introduce a new system of rolling programming, allowing the Community and the beneficiary country to regularly adjust their cooperation programme.

We decentralise administrative and, in some cases, financial responsibilities to local level with the aim of making cooperation more effective.

We improve the policy framework for trade and investment development.

We enhance cooperation in all areas important to trade, including new issues such as labour standards and the linkages between environment and trade.

After Seattle I am sure you will appreciate the significance of these agreements.

Let me turn to some of the more important points.

Firstly the agreement on political issues.

The new agreement will entail a firm commitment on both sides to good governance as a fundamental and positive element of the partnership, a subject for regular dialogue in an area which enjoys active Community support.

Secondly, a new procedure has been drawn up for cases of violations of human rights, democratic principles and the rule of law.

In comparison with the current procedure, the new one puts more emphasis on the responsibility of the state concerned and allows for greater flexibility in the consultation process, with a view to conducting an effective dialogue leading to measures to be taken to redress the situation.

In cases of special urgency involving serious violations of one of these essential elements, measures will be taken immediately and the other party will be notified.

Thirdly, the EU and the ACP have also agreed on a new specific procedure to be launched in serious cases of corruption.

This is a real innovation, both in the EU/ACP context and in international relations in general.

This procedure will be applied, not only in cases of corruption involving EDF money, but also more widely in any country where the EC is financially involved and where corruption constitutes an obstacle to development.

It is thus not confined to EC activities.

This is a very important aspect, taking into account the fundability of public finances.

By adopting such a provision in the partnership agreement, the EU and the ACP States are together sending a clear and positive signal that will doubtless be appreciated by European taxpayers and hopefully also by European investors.

Another new theme in the ACP-EU agreement is migration.

We have reached a balanced agreement on cooperation in this area.

This new dimension to the partnership agreement reflects the guidelines espoused by the EU in accordance with the Treaty of Amsterdam and with the conclusions of the European Council in Tampere in Finland in October 1999.

The European Union undertakes to develop and implement an immigration and asylum policy founded on the principle of partnership with the originating countries and regions.

The agreement concluded with the ACP countries paves the way for new initiatives, in particular on the rights of third country citizens within the EU, and measures facilitating their integration.

We also agreed on provisions to address questions related to illegal immigration.

The EU and the ACP states will initiate the process aimed ultimately at defining, within a framework to be negotiated with each and every ACP country, the ways and means of repatriating immigrants illegally present on the territories of each party.

This also covers persons from third countries and stateless persons.

These very innovative approaches provide a good opportunity to improve governance.

The agreement also offers a good framework to underpin the mutually reinforcing effects of trade cooperation and development aid.

We have agreed on a process to establish new trading arrangements that will pursue trade liberalisation between the parties and to formulate provisions on trade-related matters.

We have met the concerns of the ACP states as far as the time-frame of the trade negotiations is concerned.

Negotiations will start no later than 2002.

This two-year preparatory period will be used to strengthen regional integration processes and the ACP countries' capacity to conduct trade negotiations.

A six-year period is programmed for these negotiations.

We will take account of the economic and social constraints of the ACP countries in two ways: firstly, through human and social development policies to accompany economic and trade reforms and, secondly, by helping the ACP states to become active players in the international economic and trade system through capacity-building and cooperation in multilateral forums.

This approach will lead us to a fully WTO compatible regime.

Economic operators will be more inclined to establish closer relations with their ACP partners.

Domestic and foreign investment will grow and more know-how and technology will be transferred, all of which will boost the ACP countries' competitiveness and ease their gradual integration into the world economy.

In addition, the agreements with the EU will act as an anchor. They will lock in the economic reforms, just as national and economic reforms will be stabilised by both parties' commitments under the agreements.

The rationale behind this new approach is also based on the idea that open trade policies combined with social development policies will lead to economic growth and poverty reduction.

Another important aspect is the improvement of the EU' s trade regime for all least-developed countries, 39 of which are actually in the ACP group.

This process will take place in the coming five years so that, by 2005, the LDCs' exporters will have free access for essentially all their products on the EU market.

As regards the volume of the next EDF, the EU has made its financial proposal.

It is based on the principle of reconciling the need to maintain a substantial amount of financial resources in a period of limited official development assistance budgets with the need to make Community aid more effective.

Today about EUR 9.5 billion of previous EDF resources are uncommitted.

The EU is committed to mobilising these remaining balances, plus the new EDF resources, over a seven-year period, that is to say, before the entry into force of the next financial protocol.

This will enable the Community to substantially increase annual flows of commitments and payments during this period.

We are thus not moving into a period in the coming years of reduced activity, we are moving into a period of increased activity.

Such a commitment entails an in-depth reform of procedures and implementation modalities on both sides.

There is a very real link between the reform process in the Commission as such, and our ability to deliver on the ground which is the basis of the deal with the ACP countries.

Turning to our development policy, I would say that the global context has changed drastically.

The marginalisation of many economies, increased poverty in the world, the need for better management of environmental interdependence, the destabilising effects of migration and the worrying consequences of armed conflicts and pandemic diseases are all major concerns.

It is within this changing global framework that we have to position ourselves.

Fortunately evaluations of EC aid give us a meaningful tool to improve what we are doing and also hopefully to meet the challenges I have just mentioned.

To focus on the input coming from the evaluations, I would mention the following problems: the objections of Community policy are too numerous and too vague and this adversely affects coherence.

This is due to the complexity of our own structures, but also to very real inconsistencies between sector policies and interests in the Member States.

The Commission has an aid system that is too complex and fragmented in terms of instruments, procedures and institutional mechanisms.

Often policies are more determined by the instruments available, than by policy objectives and clearly-defined priorities.

Human resources are too thin in relation to the volume of aid that we are supposed to manage.

On average, to manage $US 10 million of aid there are 2.9 staff at the Commission, compared with 4.3 at the World Bank and between 4 and 9 in major Member States.

This is a real problem: there are too many different financial instruments, each with its own characteristics and in particular a series of different budget headings.

This is difficult to reconcile with the needs of an effective management system.

In order to face and solve these problems the Community needs to engage in an effective dialogue with Member States and Parliament.

It is absolutely crucial that we tackle the coherence issue in a realistic and pragmatic way, which means holding the debate in the appropriate institutional framework, that is, the Council and Parliament.

The lack of concerted action among the 15 Member States themselves and between them and the Community also needs to be addressed.

By focusing the Community's development policy on internationally agreed targets and strategies we will pave the way for better complementarity with the Member States.

This is very much the line also just presented by Minister Amado.

When we talk policies nowadays, we engage in a process of convergence.

This is part of the solution.

We are in the process of formulating new policy guidelines and we need to identify priority areas for Community action.

Everything has become more and more complex.

This is also true of development cooperation.

No single donor is in a position to address the whole spectrum of themes, ranging from macro-economic issues to the regulatory framework or from sectoral policies to a variety of new cross-cutting themes such as gender, environment, good governance and institutional reforms.

It is important to find flexible mechanisms that accommodate a division of labour according to the expertise and capacity of the various donors in each developing country.

This should be done at Member State level and should lead to the formulation of sector policies for Community action.

This is where we want to go.

To identify the EC's priority areas of support, account has to be taken of the Community's specific features in relation to the Member States and to international institutions.

I will mention just a few: our ability to combine development policy with trade policy and to ensure synergies between aid and economic cooperation; our neutrality and defence of overall Community interests; the fact that we represent a critical mass and are able to do relatively large jobs compared to what individual Member States can normally do.

Also, our presence on the ground: basically, I find the biggest value we represent is the very fact that being a successful regional cooperation endeavour ourselves, we are seen as a neutral, welcome partner for this experiment world-wide - something which nobody else can claim to be.

It is vital to make Community policy more effective and to develop a more operational strategic framework.

It is this dual challenge that the Commission has to take up, by framing in the months ahead a proposal for a general policy statement.

We will launch a broad and open consultation process in order to get the views of all the different parties interested.

I see the process not quite but almost as important as the content and we will put all our resources into participating actively and we invite everybody to participate.

Parallel to this we have also embarked on the process of improving coherence and clarifying and bringing to the surface and into the open the real or imaginary problems we are having in this respect.

This will be an ongoing process which I see as a kind of continued quality control effort and I invite Parliament to participate in this ongoing effort to improve the coherence of what we are doing.

Mr President, I would firstly like to thank Mr Amado and Mr Nielson.

I am pleased that Mr Amado talked about the EDF.

The problem, however, should not be sought within this Parliament or the Commission; it is the Council that needs to make a decision on the EDF budget. This sermon, therefore, really belongs in the Council.

Mr President, I thank Mr Nielson.

He has talked extensively about the new Lomé Convention, although this is not really the topic of this morning' s meeting.

We want to talk about coherence.

Ever since the early nineties, the European Parliament, the European Commission and the European Council of Ministers have recognised that this coherence of European policy is leaves something to be desired, especially in the field of development cooperation and in other EU policies.

This problem has been highlighted on several occasions, to whit in 1992, in 1995 and 1997.

The examples are all quoted in a resolution which lies before us.

I have raised questions regarding this issue for years now.

In fact, the obligation for coherence of policy was even included in the Treaty of Amsterdam in 1997.

In 1998, it was agreed that the European Commission should publish an annual report which highlights any improvements.

But what have we seen since then?

Fine words, as is the case again today, but no report.

It is too crazy for words, really.

It is a fact that we are dealing with contradictory policy.

Time and time again, good intentions are formulated but nothing is implemented.

It is, therefore, with good reason that we bring this up here today.

I would like to give you a few examples to illustrate these contradictions.

A number of developing countries grow sugar cane for sugar production.

In the Union, sugar is produced from sugar beet.

In order to prevent this cheap sugar from the developing countries from competing with the more expensive EU sugar, a considerable import levy is imposed on cane sugar.

The result is that the export of cane sugar from the relevant countries to the Union is significantly restricted.

At the same time, we give these countries an enormous amount of development aid.

A Minister from one of the Caribbean islands which produce sugar cane once told me: If you just allowed our sugar access to the European Union, we would not need your development aid at all.

The European Union intends to permit 5% of alternative fats in chocolate in order to harmonise the internal market.

This could just as well be 0% - the internal market would still be harmonised.

By pitching the percentage level at 5%, which is now likely to be the case, it is almost certain that hundreds of thousands of small cacao farmers in developing countries will be put at a disadvantage.

It seems to be heading this way nevertheless. What are we actually doing then?

This is also typical of a policy which makes citizens wonder what Brussels actually does?

It seems that European industry is more important here than our own principles, our own coherences and the interests of the developing countries.

There are also shocking examples in terms of sanctions and embargoes. Why institute an oil boycott against Haiti and not against Burma, where an elected President is imprisoned, parliament has been sent home and some of the MPs have been put in jail or even murdered?

Why not institute an oil boycott against Sudan, where a great deal of the fighting is still going on, with weapons, no less, funded by the oil companies which are based in the same areas where the refugees are?

Here too, Mr Nielson mentioned another good example regarding the new Lomé Convention.

If the new Lomé Convention is simply put into operation, without eradicating all these inconsistencies from the policy, the policy will then be built on shifting sands - to use a biblical expression.

The Council has quoted examples of inconsistency time after time: in agriculture, commerce, in conflict prevention, in the peace operations, in the fisheries sector, migration and environment.

Mr Nielson, what we are waiting for is a good report on these inconsistencies and a number of specific proposals to eliminate these from the policy.

Once again, all your fine examples, your marvellous policy - and I include the Secretary of State in this - will otherwise be built on shifting sands and will not really come off the ground.

This is also at the request of the citizens.

We have been saying this ourselves since back in 1992: this is the topic of this debate.

I hope the message strikes home and I really hope that you will soon produce a report which contains measures.

Mr President, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, following the same line as Mrs Maij-Weggen, I believe that we have a number of representatives here who all feel passionate about contributing to this debate.

The topic touches the very core of the European Union.

Let me begin by specifying precisely what we are debating.

Article 178, Title XX of the consolidated Treaties of the European Union reads as follows: "The Community shall take account of the objectives referred to in Article 177 in the policies that it implements which are likely to affect developing countries" . What are the objectives which each EU policy needs to take into account?

Article 177 specifies these objectives as "sustainable economic and social development of the developing countries, and more particularly the most disadvantaged among them" , the "smooth and gradual integration of the developing countries into the world economy and the campaign against poverty in the developing countries" .

Mr President, these are no arbitrary objectives. These are articles, statutory articles, which form part of the European acquis established by law with which the European institutions and Member States must comply.

Every statutory article should, of course, not just be judged on its regularity, but also on the importance of its contents.

I am of the opinion - and luckily I am not alone in this - that the principle of policy coherence is essential to every government which aims to be a credible servant of its citizens.

The interests of the citizens are only served by a credible and reliable government.

This is important if the government wants to gain the trust of society, and also important from the point of view of effectiveness, for coherence is required in order to use the restricted means efficiently.

We should not make reality out to be more rose-tinted than it really is.

It is up to the government to deal with this fact in a transparent and open manner, without any backhandedness.

The government is obliged to show up any of its dilemmas, and to show where, when and why, problems occur with coherence of policy, rather than sweeping it all under the carpet.

What we are talking about here today is not an issue which can be toyed with at leisure. Poverty in the third world is a harrowing problem that demands urgent attention.

It is only natural that we in Parliament guard the interests of our citizens, but it is also in the interest of our citizens to live in a stable, international environment, in which the goal of human safety is pursued.

This is a moral interest, a safety interest and is, ultimately, even in the interest of our economy.

In whose interest is it really if European taxpayers' money is used to support economic development in Namibia, and if, at the same time, the economic activity of poor cattle farmers in the same country is drastically undercut by rigorous export subsidies, financed by the same tax payers?

We are all acting as if this is not really happening, but we all know that it is.

It is not our task as MEPs to adopt an ostrich policy and bury our heads in the sand.

The general interest of policy coherence is, therefore, a responsibility of the Commission as a whole, of the Council, and of the European Parliament.

This responsibility cannot only be borne by the Commissioner for Development and Humanitarian Aid, however much we like to see him or hear him talk, or by the Development Council or the parliamentary Committee on Development and Cooperation.

What we need here is an integral approach.

After the lucid and closely reasoned explanation of this approach presented by both Mr Amado and Mr Nielson, I would like to note that we are very much looking forward to the proposals, not only by Mr Nielson, but by the entire Commission, in order to make the policy coherent as a whole.

This is why we urge the Commission, in this sharp and clear resolution, to develop specific instruments.

We need to pinpoint, and draw up an inventory of, the problem areas for coherence.

We need to make it evident which problems we are solving and which we have not yet solved.

This is why I advocate a monitoring centre for coherence which makes this apparent.

This is why we need to set up inter-service task groups in the Commission, in the Council and in Parliament which can police the attainment of coherence.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, if our neighbour' s roof is leaking, we can lend him pots and pans to collect the water, but it is, of course, more effective to help him plug the leak in the roof.

The crisis in last year' s Commission has been solved today, but the Commission must now produce a policy in which we get full support for a coherent approach, which, no doubt, the entire Parliament will soon demand in the resolution.

I would wish the Commissioner all the best in his battle within the Commission and wish Mr Amado the same within the Council.

Mr President, let us be clear from the outset: when it comes to cooperation, coherence is far from being the watchword.

The Treaties provide for the European Union to help developing countries to develop but, as the previous speakers have explained so well, there are various distortions to these declarations.

The first area of incoherence is the lack of consultation between the Union and the Member States on individual cooperation policies.

This gives rise to serious malfunctions, because some Community programmes duplicate national programmes, whereas they might have helped other projects about which nothing is done.

And let us not forget that the de facto neo-colonial policy of certain Member States does nothing to help the countries which they are supposedly helping to develop.

The second area of incoherence is aid to authoritarian regimes.

We state that good governance and an end to corruption are mandatory but we continue to pour hundreds of thousands of euros into Swiss bank accounts via the portfolios of a number of Heads of State.

The third area of incoherence is human rights.

We say that we want to protect human rights.

We encourage developing countries to respect human rights.

We even adopt numerous resolutions condemning every violation of human rights.

We ally ourselves with demonstrations and international campaigns.

And yet, at the same time, we allow the arms trade to proliferate and do not even attempt to limit the trade in the most atrocious forms of arms such as anti-personnel mines.

Nor do we do much to really prevent human rights violations.

The fourth area of incoherence in the European Union' s cooperation policy is this: how do you expect to help development by pillaging the natural resources of the people you are helping.

The European Union must leave fish for local fishermen to feed local populations instead of systematically destroying maritime resources through intensive fisheries.

We must leave raw materials so that local manufacturers can process them.

I will not even mention oil; we are all aware of the policy of groups such as Elf and Total in Africa.

Furthermore, and this will perhaps soon be the fifth area of incoherence, we demand respect for biodiversity, for example so that everyone can produce from their own seeds and preserve the richness of nature; but at the same time, and this was apparent during recent negotiations, we force ACP countries to sign TRIPS agreements.

These agreements risk being extended to living organisms, which would mean the death of biodiversity and the return of de facto slavery for small-scale farmers in the south, at the hands of the multinationals.

And yet, and this is the sixth area of incoherence, we do not defend the application of the current Treaties.

On the one hand, we vote for a budget line for the fight against AIDS and, on the other hand, we do nothing to ensure compliance with mandatory licences within the framework of the very same TRIPS, despite the fact that this would allow developing countries to produce their own medicines and halt the AIDS massacre.

Similarly, during the WTO negotiations, at a time when, to quote the second paragraph of the Schwaiger report, "the current trade liberalisation process has not yet brought significant benefits for large parts of the population of developing countries, especially the poor" , the European Union continues to defend the liberalisation of trade and intends to put an end to the system of favouring ACP countries, albeit with a transitional period of several years, instead of strengthening it, especially for the poorest countries.

The eighth area of incoherence is of a political and practical nature.

We are always saying think globally, act locally.

And yet we disregard local development agencies and prefer to negotiate with national governments and subsidise northern NGOs at the expense of local programmes and southern NGOs.

And what about agriculture and the environment? Still more problems, still more areas of incoherence which I might have highlighted, not to mention research, emigration or health.

In short, we claim that we want to help developing countries and, at the same time, we encourage the liberalisation of trade, which we acknowledge runs counter to that very objective.

I say it again, the European Union' s cooperation and development policy is not coherent. and on behalf of the Green Group I call on Parliament, the institutions and the Commission to make a joint effort, at long last, to put some coherence into our policy.

Mr President, I feel that this debate is particularly timely and appropriate, not just because development is in general an important issue, but because it is also a topical one.

Seattle was a failure, and north-south relations were in the spotlight for all the wrong reasons.

The meeting held in that North American city demonstrated that globalisation is having seriously unbalanced and negative effects on poorer countries.

The Tenth United Nations Conference on Trade and Development is being held right now in Bangkok, and is suffering the consequences of that failure.

In the meantime, however, as has already been mentioned, the negotiations on the future of the Lomé Convention have been concluded.

This goes to show just how topical this subject is.

We could also add to the list the next EU-OAU summit which it has finally been agreed to hold in Cairo in April.

However, I would also like to add that any analysis, no matter how superficial, inevitably leads us to the conclusion that something - or even a great deal - is amiss with north-south relations, including those between the European Union and the less developed countries.

You only have to realise that the category of "least developed countries" has grown from 25 to 48 countries over the last 30 years, and now represents 13% of the world' s population, yet this category only accounts for 0.4% of world exports and 0.6% of world imports or be aware of the unfortunate fact that official development aid from rich countries has fallen by around 23% since 1990.

Furthermore, the recent Community budget cuts in this area, for the present financial year, are part of this trend, as well as sending an undesirable and misguided political message.

Michel Camdessus, a fair man who is still director of the International Monetary Fund, said in his speech at the opening of the UNCTAD conference, and I am now quoting, that the international community gives with one hand and takes away with the other. He was of course talking about the aid granted by developed countries to less developed countries.

It may seem ironic that this statement should come from someone in his position, but he did indeed say this, and I heard it with my own ears. This comment certainly seems to me to reflect the current situation, and I accordingly wish to stress that it is vital to rethink north-south relations and break the mould.

In particular, we need to reconsider the role of the European Union in this area, as I am certain that one of the Union' s strategic objectives must be to promote a new and more equitable world order. It is therefore essential to review the present process of globalisation, bearing in mind the underlying approach and dominant interests on which it is based, and to consider the enormous and damaging effect that it is having on the less developed countries, particularly in this context.

A new agreement has been reached with the ACP countries.

This is a positive development in itself, especially given the pressures to terminate it and the fact that various Member States did not wish it to continue.

We will have an opportunity in due course to consider the exact terms of this agreement in greater depth, but meanwhile there is no doubt that the European negotiators were more timid and failed to live up to the proposals that we formulated at the appropriate time, even if the new agreement does include some new and innovative points.

Certain politically important aspects of the new partnership agreement will have contributed to these.

This was without a doubt the result of a complex negotiating process in which both parties made major concessions, and this is certainly true of the European Union, especially in the field of good governance and trade.

But it was above all the result of a stronger ACP group, which obviously found new courage following the events in Seattle.

I particularly wish to stress that a new way of looking at these issues seems to be emerging, especially as regards trade, and it is certainly necessary to tackle this area.

Lastly, we need to go further in our development aid policies towards developing countries.

I have in mind budgetary and financing aspects, indebtedness, assistance in sensitive areas such as food safety, humanitarian, educational and health-related issues, and also fields such as the environment, investment and access to information and new technologies. This also applies to the sphere of trade, where we need to ensure real coherence between development policies and other Community policies, and also between both types of policy and corresponding policies originating in the Member States.

We cannot simply forge ahead with something that in the past has shown itself to be inappropriate and wrong-headed.

Mr President, having listened to the Council and the Commission today, I just had to look at my agenda.

Yes, it does say: 'Coherence of different Union policies with development policy' .

But we have not heard a single word on this subject, and I find that deeply embarrassing.

We have been waiting for a report on coherence for years.

It ought to have been here in writing today and, after having heard Mr Nielson' s speech, I can well imagine that he is up against a lot of powerful opposition in the Commission.

I know that the Commissioner himself has some strong and extremely reasonable opinions on coherence, and these are what I should like to have heard expressed here today.

Because the joint motion for a resolution proposes a range of effective mechanisms for ensuring coherence, I shall use the very short time allotted to me here just to mention one more such mechanism, namely obliging the Commission to carry out an evaluation of new, relevant legislation from this aspect.

I also want to focus on the catastrophic effect the EU' s common agricultural policy has had on developing countries: dumping of beef in Sahel and South Africa, tomato purée in West Africa and milk powder in Jamaica.

The examples are, I hope, all well known. In any case, they are known all too well to the producers in the ACP countries who are affected by these measures and who have to destroy their products because they cannot compete with EU-subsidised products.

European taxpayers contribute EUR 40 billion per year in support of agriculture in the EU.

This is money which is helping to impede the development of the agricultural sector in the developing countries, which accounts for 69% of the total work force there compared with 1.7% in the EU.

Add to this the fact that the agricultural sector accounts for 34% of the developing countries' gross national product, compared with 5.3% in the EU.

There is neither coherence nor human decency here.

Why will neither the Council nor the Commission admit the fact?

Mr President, how policy decisions are arrived at is surely fundamental.

The Prime Minister of the United Kingdom and his Foreign Secretary yesterday made statements on their policy in regard to the voting system within the Council.

They pointed out that the UK, France and Germany far exceed the other countries of the European Union at present in terms of population. They then drew the conclusion that population size should be reflected in the voting system and that the United Kingdom would not surrender its veto.

Is the Council discussing this issue?

Is it prepared to maintain a democratic veto based on population strengths or is it still moving towards a simple majority vote of Council members, rather than a vote reflecting the population in Europe which they democratically represent?

Have the UK representatives indicated to the Council their decision and proposal and what, if any, consideration has been given to it?

As this voting matter is vital to the democratic future of this Union, surely it should receive priority consideration.

How decisions are made is all-important.

Mr President, this morning' s debate is very important.

I therefore thank the Commission and the Council for having made a statement on the coherence of Community policies in relation to development, because this demonstrates a will to make policy in this area more effective.

However, if we are simply carrying out a diagnosis of the incoherences in our policy, we will end up totally frustrated and, furthermore, the result will be negative.

As with the systems of forces which are studied in basic physics, it makes no sense to implement policies which will cancel each other out.

The result of this absurd game is not zero, but rather a minus number, as a consequence of the material, financial and human resources thrown away in a pointless enterprise.

With regard to policy, this minus number is multiplied by the number of results which are not achieved each time one measure cancels out the intended effect of another.

In today' s globalised world, this fact is all the more obvious.

There are no boundaries for Community policies.

I am therefore glad that the Commission and the Council are once again taking an interest in the coherence of Community policies, and that, together with complementarity between national and Community policies and coordination between the services of the Commission, they intend to shape the policy on cooperation in accordance with the development of the European Union.

Both the Commission and the Portuguese Presidency of the Council state, in their respective working programmes, that they wish to give coherence to those policies which have a very important impact on the developing countries, but they do not specify concrete measures aimed at introducing this coherence.

Both institutions identify the most important areas where this idea should be applied.

For example, the Commission, in its long term guidelines, says that the objective of sustainable development must be based on a strong sense of solidarity, supported by a commercial policy which takes common interests into account.

The Commission is addressing a very important area, that is, commercial policy.

However, this Parliament wishes to add policies to aid development, agriculture, fisheries policy, immigration, our position in international financial institutions, the common foreign and security policy and aid for structural reform.

The Council - and Mr Luis Amado has said this this morning - has spoken on different occasions of the need for coherence - the last time, it is true, being in November 1999, and also on other occasions, such as the Development Councils of May 1999 and June 1997 - but with no concrete results.

Since the Development Council is in agreement with what he says - and this is very significant - there is little we can say, as some previous speakers have pointed out.

However, as Parliament, we wish to propose - as others have said and as the resolution states - the creation of an inter-service working group consisting of the people responsible for all the policies mentioned and the establishment of a monitoring centre for the coherence of the different Community policies, which is capable of anticipating the effects of each policy on the developing countries and amongst themselves.

What we really want, however, is to be realists and not hide away from the fact that the achievement of these objectives of coordination, complementarity and, the most complex one, which we are discussing at the moment, coherence, will require a more developed policy than the one we currently have in the European Union.

Let us hope - and we do hope - to be guided by the winds of change created by the Intergovernmental Conference, the reform of the Commission - which will also affect the development services -, this new legislature and the prospects for enlargement, to perfect a more coherent political union.

We therefore hope that the Commission, in the report it is going to present to us on global policy, will also address the question of coherence as an integral element in the efficient use of Community resources and the specific management of public interests.

Mr President, I too should like to thank the Council and the Commission for their reports and, in common with others, express my regret at the fact that coherence policy has not been given more prominence.

But we who sit here in Parliament do not doubt for a second what the reason is.

I should therefore like to discuss something more general and begin with a couple of, in my view, useful figures.

At the beginning of the nineteenth century, real per capita income in the world' s richest countries was three times higher than in the poorest countries. In 1900 it was ten times higher and in the year 2000 it is 60 times higher.

And there is no sign of this trend' s being reversed. On the contrary, it looks as if we have entered an exponential curve which is widening the gap still further.

This is shown by the following figures: the income gap between the richest and poorest fifths was 30:1 in 1960, 60:1 in 1990 and 74:1 in 1997.

These figures are from before the Internet revolution took off.

In other words, there will have to be a quantum leap in development policy if the rich countries, including the EU countries, are not to surround themselves with barriers to prevent immigration on a massive scale.

In a global village, major discrepancies in the world will not, in the longer term, be tolerated by the poorest section of the village.

At some time or another, there will be a revolt, and it will be fully justified.

I would therefore urge the Council' s Presidency to set the promised debate in motion as quickly as possible and, above all, to conclude it in such a way that we all of us, including the people of Europe, realise what globalisation means and understand that a central element will have to be radical changes in the nature and the level of the development aid we provide. The EU on average is far from providing the pledged 0.7%.

It may well be that others are worse, but that does not place us in any better a light.

Above all, however, we should give the countries concerned the opportunity to trade with us.

As far as I could hear - but I may have missed something - the President-in-Office of the Council did not mention the word "trade" at all.

I would just say to the Commissioner that I hope his proposal will be successfully adopted by the Commission and the Member States. I would also ask the Commissioner to give some concrete examples of sectoral interests which are holding matters up, not only in the Commission but also in the Member States.

I should also like to say that, in my view, what would be most effective would be for Parliament to call for proposals from, respectively, the Development Council and the Commissioner for Development. In that way, we should perhaps have a basis for discussion, instead of receiving proposals from all the governments and from all over the Commission, which is scarcely likely to produce results.

I shall conclude with a few words about the Internet revolution.

As Commissioner Liikanen keeps saying on his travels, we have a head start here in Europe in the area of mobile telecommunications.

Let us use this not only for the benefit of our own populations but also for that of the developing countries.

This technology can facilitate that necessary quantum leap forward in development policy to which I referred and, in this connection, the EU can set the agenda, leave its mark on development and honour its global responsibilities.

Mr President, "The EU' s development cooperation leaves a great deal to be desired" .

This is just a quote from a newspaper article which appeared last week, commenting on the Union' s development policy.

Ever since we have attempted to do something about development cooperation, its effectiveness and quality have been called into question.

Hope of improvement threatens to be nipped in the bud if the Commission keeps refusing to look into the mirror. Why was the critical report on the coherence of development policy not disseminated externally?

One of the major conclusions of this report concerned the European policy' s internal conflict.

In terms of trade and agriculture, in particular, the European policy is in conflict with the development policy.

We seem unable to make a serious contribution to the development of the least developed countries.

This has everything to do with the difference of opinion which exists among various countries within the Union regarding development cooperation.

We should no longer view development cooperation as an instrument of external and foreign relations, but as a policy in its own right.

I advocate transparent, joint and efficient development policy.

As long as the European approach to the development issue creates more inefficiency and wastes more money, it remains appropriate to apportion a larger role to the Member States.

Finally, I would like to ask the Commission to send the document I referred to to the European Parliament as soon as possible, so that we can help think of possible solutions in a constructive way.

Mr President, Commissioner, I believe that this is an appropriate initiative and that it makes very good sense.

As various Members have already commented, we often encounter situations where there is an enormous contradiction between our intentions in terms of development and cooperation policy and the damage we inflict with our other sectoral policies, whose objectives run counter to development in those countries.

And we are not just talking about the concrete impact of our common policies, tourism, the environment, agriculture, fisheries and industry.

We are talking in general terms - and this is more serious - about contradictions between our economic and trade policies and our defence policies.

So there is a whole raft of contradictions.

In my opinion, these contradictions are not all that serious in terms of Community policies. They are, if anything, more serious as regards certain objectives and industries in some Member States.

We have to be aware of this.

We often adopt resolutions on peace processes in other parts of the world, as was recently the case with Indonesia, when we protested at the top of our voices only to discover subsequently that some European countries had been supplying them with arms and military equipment.

For me, these are the most serious contradictions in all this, more serious than the contradictions inherent in any incompatibility between sectoral policies.

We obviously know that, even within any one country, there are always contradictions between various policies.

That is a fact of life.

And we must also be aware that there will be contradictions between the various Community policies, in this case development policy.

We have to be aware that these contradictions exist and that we need to minimise them. The underlying reason for presenting this resolution is that the objective of minimising these contradictions is a fair and wise one.

I believe that it is both proper and fitting to set up a centre for monitoring this coherence between Community policies and development and cooperation policy, and that this monitoring centre' s sphere of activity should not be limited just to Community policies, but should also cover Member States' actions and policies, including the actions of economic groups, which I think are also important.

This monitoring centre should draw up an annual report on developments in these policies and on their impact and interaction.

I have left to the end a question that I regard as fundamental and which I think needs to be noted and approved by this House.

Our objective of minimising contradictions between development and cooperation policy and other policies has to be a valid objective, not merely within the European Union, but also at world level, given the increasing globalisation of the economy.

If we want fair world trade we will have to gain acceptance for this principle during the next WTO round of multilateral negotiations, because it would be contradictory if the European Union imposed a rigid but fair discipline on itself, only for the United States and the other major powers to do the opposite and to take advantage of our restraint.

That is why I consider it to be essential - and fair - for these principles to be established at the next WTO round.

Mr President, I would like to restrict my contribution to the link between development cooperation and agriculture.

Over the past couple of years, a considerable share of the funds has been channelled towards the development of agriculture and cattle breeding in the developing countries and, more especially, the Lomé countries.

The results are certainly not what we expected.

What could be the cause of this?

I think that the cause should first and foremost be sought in the lack of clear agricultural policy in the various developing countries, barring a few exceptions.

I think that the Commission could do a great deal there to help this develop.

No farmer, anywhere in the world, will produce something if prices are too low.

The governments in the developing countries are always faced with a difficult dilemma: whom should they support, the farmers or the people in the large cities who want cheap food?

This fine balance must be struck in conjunction with the Commission, and not by the Commission on its own. In most countries where the Commission is active, development aid is also granted by the Member States themselves.

It should not be the case that the policy of the Member States contravenes that of the Commission.

It is up to the Commission' s delegations in the developing countries to assume a leading role in the development of this political dialogue and to ensure that all countries follow this line of approach.

Special attention is also required for the costs of the means of production.

Far too often, artificial fertiliser, veterinary medication and a host of other items are provided to farmers free of charge.

Once the project comes to an end after five years, the policy of free gifts also ends.

I think, therefore, that the cost element should be built in right from the outset in the policy of all projects, and as far as I know, this is not the case by any stretch of the imagination.

Finally, I wonder whether the funds could not be put to better use.

Every year, I notice in the budget of the Commission and in the European Development Fund, that they are far behind in spending the funds.

Mr President, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, Commissioner, we are in actual fact holding a debate amongst the converted, which is a pity.

We should really talk about coherence in the development policy in the presence of Mr Prodi, for example, who has missed a great chance right from the outset, for he has allowed the development cooperation policy to fragment over three Commissioners - and this is better than four, I have to admit - but this does not really make for a coherent policy.

We also note that, as before, there are still various DGs which stifle this policy with often very conflicting procedures and arguments.

The President-in-Office of the Council came up with a good suggestion, namely to budget the European Development Fund.

Parliament would, of course, welcome this with open arms. If this were possible, it would be a huge, historic victory.

Since Amsterdam, three terms have taken centre stage: complementarity, coordination and cohesion.

I believe that very little has been achieved in these three fields.

If a request is made for a report on the progress made on cohesion, if a request is made at all, then drafting such a report cannot be very difficult, unless one simply admits that there is no cohesion at all.

I would prefer it if a report were to be written on the present lack of cohesion, and if a systematic strategy were to be developed to reach a certain level of cohesion, for it is a long way off yet.

One thing shocked me in the speech of the President-in-Office of the Council.

He stated: "Contradictions in policy can lead to balance."

It is indeed the case that what one hand gives can be taken away by the other hand, and vice versa.

But this leads to status-quo and self-deceit, and globalisation as a whole has so far only led to changes, indeed, but changes which have only made poverty worse.

This is supposed to be our priority, would you believe.

I know that we do a great deal of good, but let us start with this very essential aspect.

Mr President, we have already noted that there is no report from the Commission, but I intend to discuss three matters in the light of the objectives which the Council presented in its 1997 opinion.

The first is concerned with conflict resolution.

For many years, I have tried, through the Council and the Commission, to find out why none of the institutions is actively participating in, and working for, conflict resolution in the Western Sahara, which is occupied by Morocco.

The UN has a peace plan.

We ought to seize this opportunity and bring the last colonial episode in Africa to an end.

I also want to take up the subject of migration.

I am anxious about the new stipulations in the partnership agreement with the ACP countries, which might make it easier to expel immigrants, asylum seekers and refugees on flimsier grounds.

I really also want to see the EU pioneer patents on living organisms.

We now know that at least one person in the world dies of hunger every four seconds.

Three quarters of those who die are children under five years of age.

This is not because of a lack of food, but because of what we have talked a lot about today, namely increasing poverty.

Food safety and the guarantee of biological diversity must take precedence over commercial interests.

I believe that patents on living organisms are designed only to control the global food supply, specifically for commercial purposes and for no other reason.

I also want to see something about women in the report I hope the Commission will produce.

Women appear to be completely absent from all areas, especially development policy when, of course, we are not in reality absent at all.

Mr President, the debate we are holding today strongly underlines the need to discuss development policy in much broader terms than are involved in simply measuring the flow of aid.

The level of aid is naturally important, and the level of aid contributed by the rich countries as a whole ought to be increased. This ought to be done with, in particular, a view to combating poverty and through investing in the development of capacity.

However, the level of aid is only one of many instruments which significantly influence the development of poor countries.

A number of colleagues have today pointed to areas in addition to aid which are important and where contrasts and conflicts between different policy areas are very serious indeed.

The latter include trade, agricultural and fisheries policies.

Other important areas are, of course, the flow of private investments, cooperation on research and technology and the way in which the welfare state deals with, and finances solutions to, a variety of global problems which affect us all.

These problems include questions of climate, health issues, biodiversity etc, and the problems are clearly exacerbated by globalisation, that is to say the new economy which is developing.

In this economy, the connection between different policy areas is that much more marked.

In my opinion, what we are discussing here today is partly the EU' s contribution to the debate about the opportunities and risks of globalisation and about the rules there must be in order to give poor countries a decent chance.

The report, or survey, which Mrs Maij-Weggen has demanded, showing how the various policy areas fit together and what the aforementioned conflicts appear to be, is naturally quite crucial.

I cannot help but wonder why the Commission has not done more.

The Commission is new and has to be given time, but the absence of such a survey suggests that there are powerful tensions within the Commission.

I can only hope that Mr Nielsen will be successful in the forthcoming discussions within the Commission.

In addition to a report of this kind, I should like to see a more positive analysis which could be ongoing in character.

An analysis of this kind should look not only at the flow of aid but also give comprehensive consideration to all the different types of aid and transfers of resources which influence poor countries.

These include technology, trade, cooperation in the field of research etc. It should be an extremely constructive contribution to the debate we are conducting.

Finally, Parliament recommends, in paragraph 6 of the draft resolution, that a working party should be established in order to bring about coherence.

I believe it is only a coincidence, but the Commissioner for the Environment is also, of course, to participate in this group.

Let us hope that the debate in which we are now engaged will prove to have been a watershed.

Policy so far has been characterised far too much by a process of giving with the one hand and taking away with the other.

There are a lot of people who will be watching further developments with great interest.

Mr President, in the last couple of days we have heard fine words about the need for greater coherence, coordination and effectiveness in the external aid programmes of the Community and of the Member States.

There is one relatively small area of activity with enormous public visibility which would be a litmus test of the Union' s ability to match words with action.

I am referring to the continuing tragedy of anti-personnel landmines which present an obstacle to so many development programmes, to post-conflict reconstruction, and which ruin the lives of many of the most vulnerable in some of the poorest parts of the world, particularly in developing countries.

Over recent years the Community has spent some EUR 200 million in mine clearance, assistance to victims and related activities.

The Member States have spent similar amounts.

But there is still enormous inefficiency and a lack of will to implement a strategy agreed with other members of the international community to overcome the anti-personnel landmine problem within a finite time span.

Mr Nielson identified the problems of lack of concerted action and the need for better complementarity with Member States.

This has been talked about for years.

The Commission needs to carry out internal organisational changes, strengthen the coherence and effectiveness of its actions, ideally with a properly resourced central mine action policy cell.

It would also need more rapid contractual and implementation procedures and an enhanced multiannual budget line and much improved management of its programmes.

A proper stock-taking of the effectiveness of mine action programmes needs to take place in each of the countries seriously afflicted by landmines.

It seems to me that the landmine issue encapsulates so many of the organisational, procedural, financial management and operational difficulties which have afflicted the Commission and the Union.

Are these afflictions of the past, or will we find that in this relatively compact and limited area the European Union is still unable to meet its aspirations?

Mr President, Commissioner Nielson, the conclusion of the new ACP-EU Convention is an important step towards greater coherence.

And it is to be welcomed that criteria such as human rights, democracy, rule of law, and good governance are more firmly anchored in this new treaty than they were previously, and that earlier colonial relations no longer shape most of our relations to quite the same extent, rather, we now set greater store by these political criteria in this respect.

For these are prerequisite to any development.

If these criteria are not adhered to, then development does not stand a chance

The same goes for Cuba, Mr Modrow.

I welcome the fact that Cuba is getting closer to joining this process. But for this to happen, there are also going to have to be a few changes in Cuba.

After all, we are all familiar with the reports from Amnesty International.

It may well be that you, having belonged to one of the last Communist dictatorships, view the situation somewhat differently to the majority of people in this Chamber, and that you have problems where good governance is concerned.

Nonetheless, these are important criteria for the European Union.

There is a second issue I would like to raise.

Many speakers have cited examples of the extent to which the various policies are not coherent.

In my view, however, the development policy itself needs to be more coherent too.

There is no coherence because there is still no effective coordination with the Member States and there are some projects being carried out by the Member States and the European Union in the developing countries which are very much at odds with one another.

Nor is there coherence vis-à-vis the European taxpayer when we draft a development policy which is accommodated in the Union' s budget but the EDF remains outside it.

Mr President-in-Office of the Council, if in future you succeed in making this EUR 13.5 billion subject to the supervision of the parliamentary Committee on Budgetary Control, and to bodies such as OLAF, then I believe you will raise the level of acceptability.

This, to my mind, is also something that we should call upon the Intergovernmental Conference to do, i.e. establish the EDF firmly in the budget of the European Union.

Mr President, we certainly must concede that, on balance, this text is full of good intentions, but we did not vote in favour of it in committee, nor shall we do so in plenary. We had two reasons for this, both of which gave rise to amendments which I should like to explain here very briefly.

First, the Committee on Development and Cooperation advocates the communitisation of the EDF; clearly that is misguided.

In our view, cooperation is, and should remain, an intergovernmental exercise.

With Europe preparing to enlarge, communitising the EDF would make it easy to hide a lack of commitment behind the screen of the Community budget, quite apart from the fact that we would be wasting a fruitful and promising opportunity of associating our southern partners with our cooperation policy.

Lastly, the Commission has, in the recent past, had trouble managing the funds for development and humanitarian aid transparently, as Mrs Maes has just reminded us so opportunely.

Why should we add to them?

Secondly, we find it most regrettable that Mr Corrie' s report should mention the trade and development agreement with South Africa because, in the final analysis, this report is typical of the amateur diplomacy to which the European Commission is taking ever more frequent recourse.

It is perfectly astounding that the Union could have negotiated an agreement on behalf of the Member States in which a fundamental section is quite simply left blank.

And let me say in passing, it is even more astonishing that the Council allowed it to.

As a result, we are now in the absurd position of negotiating from a position of weakness on vital aspects such as wine and agricultural production within the framework of an agreement which we have already signed.

The part of this agreement which blocks negotiations could mean that the Union ends up paying producers to stop producing sherry, port and a whole host of products which are purely and simply copies under international commercial law. Imagine the potential cost of such a precedent.

It is proof, as if we still needed it, of the fact that immature diplomacy, which defends no interests, unless of course they are individual interests, and is caught between the dogma of free trade and pressure groups and more or less friendly NGOs, is not just inefficient, it is positively dangerous.

Finally, a word on the general thinking behind the Corrie report.

Nowadays, let us face it, the Joint Assembly is seen as an obstacle to free international trade by the dogmatisers in Geneva and Washington.

It was a chance to reiterate that our original and exemplary mode of cooperation with the southern countries should be developed and strengthened.

The Corrie report missed this chance and we must, regrettably, punish it for losing so much.

. (PT) Mr President, by way of both a conclusion and a summary, I would like to highlight three key aspects of this debate.

First of all, many speakers stressed that globalisation accentuates regional imbalances and social inequality, and increases poverty. This suggests that something must be done, failing which tensions will be aggravated and conflicts jeopardising international peace and stability will arise or worsen.

Secondly, it will be important to approach development policies from a different angle in this context, taking advantage of their capacity for correcting imbalances and reducing inequality.

I believe that the importance that everyone has attached to the European Union' s role in international development policies is significant.

Everyone recognises, indeed this was the theme of today' s debate, that, if the European Union is to play a more active and leading role in development policies at world level, it will have no choice but to enhance the coherence of its own various development-related policies.

I note that some speakers also emphasised that responsibility for coherence in EU policies is not a matter for the Council, for the Commission or for Parliament alone. Quite the contrary - it will have to be the subject of a concerted effort in terms of discussion and legislative and institutional preparation, be it on the part of the Commission or of the Council, or even on the part of the European Parliament itself, and some Members have in fact already suggested that a monitoring centre or a working party could be established to monitor the impact of various policies in the specific area of development.

Finally, I would like to emphasise that it is also important - and this is one of the priorities of the Portuguese Presidency' s programme - to note the view that it is necessary to recognise the value of development in the European Union' s policies, and in particular in the context of its foreign policy.

We believe that this is absolutely vital, failing which we will be unable to take any consistent action as regards the coherence of policies, and we cannot do this without giving development policies their rightful place as an instrument for upholding the principles and values underpinning Europe' s status in the international system.

For this reason it may be necessary, as I have stressed, to change the model and move away from the post-colonial model towards a more European approach to development policies.

In this respect I believe - and some speakers here have also commented on this - that the adoption of the new convention, which succeeds the Lomé Convention, is an important instrument of renewal, and represents a new approach to a partnership with such an important group of countries from the south at a time of considerable instability in the international negotiating process, as demonstrated by the first negotiating round in Seattle.

I sense some degree of frustration in many of the contributions to this debate.

I have given you a statement on behalf of the Commission which I think provides a useful background to this discussion.

We will furnish more detailed material relating directly to all the issues concerning coherence.

We are currently working on it in the Commission and when that work is done I will report on it, as many have been asking if it will be possible to see the report on coherence.

I have no doubt that as a result of the increasing political attention attached to these problems - something which has clearly been reflected in the debate today - it will be easier for the Commission and the DG on Development to bring coherence to the forefront of our working agenda.

This also calls for the introduction of further new mechanisms in the Commission system which may very well include, as suggested by some of the political groups in Parliament, the setting up of a special intra-service working group and the establishment of a kind of coherence watch in the Commission.

I have read - and heard in the debate - that coherence is being used as some kind of a miracle formula that takes care of everything.

I think it is important to keep it as a relatively clearly defined discipline of trying to reduce inconsistencies where they really exist, and we certainly do have them.

Much of this has to do with real disagreement between sector interests in each and every Member State, as has been very honestly said here in this House: people more or less identify with their spheres of interest, and all this is legitimate.

I would, however, warn against the illusion that incoherence is the product of some kind of a mechanical deficiency in the system.

This exists, but it is only a small part of what we are discussing.

The major part of it has to do with well known established differences of interest between sexes and so on, and this is the problem.

Mr Mulder mentioned that no farmer will start producing anything if the price is too low.

This is true in our part of the world, but our partners and beneficiaries in Africa have a slightly different perspective.

They farm, not just for a living, but in order to live, and this makes a difference.

Subsistence farming is not based on price calculations, it is based on the hope of rain in the next season.

This does not apply to all farming in developing countries but to the poverty-focusing which we need to deliver better than so far.

From that perspective, what I am saying here is of deep relevance.

Other issues have been mentioned: cattle-farming in Namibia, tomatoes and milk powder in the Caribbean.

We should not be too masochistic.

There is a limit to how useful that is.

All these cases are characterised by the fact that they have been taken care of.

The intervention prices have been regulated, and the problems we had with beef in Western Africa and in Namibia were actually solved by reducing the intervention support.

These are real problems, but they have all been dealt with.

As regards the issue of cacao, chocolate: I repeat that the 5% has to do with creating a basis for a living in the neighbouring countries.

What we are talking about here are the local nuts which are as important to the people collecting them and making a living out of them in Burkina Faso as coconuts for farmers in Ghana.

This is not a clear case of incoherence, it is more a case of a competition between suppliers.

What was mentioned concerning sugar in the Caribbean is more complicated.

In the Overseas Countries and Territories Framework the accumulation of some of these trade aspects represents a complicated problem, but it may be that what we are talking about here has more to do with promoting the interests of some European companies than with generating income in the Caribbean.

In any case, this is a matter which we are currently dealing with.

I am committed to try to create a balance in all these issues and I would mention the achievement of the trade development and cooperation agreement with South Africa.

In all modesty, I would claim that this is something that documents that the Commission is willing to walk or fly the extra mile in order to ensure coherence between the perspective of development cooperation and the perspective of trade interests.

We certainly have done our share to solve that problem, and I sincerely hope that we now will have a soft landing and a peaceful implementation in the forthcoming years of that agreement.

Finally, I thank you again for this debate.

We will come back again with material on these issues, because these problems, in one way or another, are here to stay, simply because development cooperation represents basically doing something in the world that is different from taking care of traditionally-defined trade interests, etc. We have to reconcile those different approaches.

Thank you very much, Commissioner Nielson.

I have received eight motions for resolutions tabled in accordance with Rule 37(2) of the Rules of Procedure.

The vote will take place on Thursday at 12.00 p.m.

Next session of UN Human Rights Commission

The next item is the statement by the Council on EU priorities for the next session of the UN Human Rights Commission on 20 March 2000.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, as you know, the European Union played an active role in the 55th session of the Human Rights Commission held in Geneva in March and April 1999.

It tabled resolutions on the human rights situation in Iran, Iraq, in the Israeli settlements, in Burma/Myanmar, in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and in Sudan, and negotiated statements to be issued on behalf of the chairman on Colombia and on East Timor.

For the first time, the European Union tabled a resolution on the death penalty, which was enormously successful, and led work on a resolution concerning children' s rights, which was a joint initiative with the Latin American group of countries.

The Union will continue to play this role at the 56th session of the Human Rights Commission to be held in Geneva in March and April.

In particular, as agreed at the Human Rights Council Group on 9 February 2000, the European Union intends to table draft resolutions on the Israeli settlements, Iran, Iraq, Sudan, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Burma/Myanmar, a draft chairman' s statement on Colombia, and, possibly, on East Timor, together with a draft statement on the situation in various countries.

The European Union will continue discussions on preparations for the 56th session of the Human Rights Commission at the next meeting of the Human Rights Group in March.

In particular, there will be a discussion of the possibility of tabling a draft resolution on the death penalty.

To date, the group has not reached agreement on the strategy to be adopted in this respect, and in particular with regard to formulating a compromise to be tabled in the last resort in case of any amendments to the contrary, including Article 2(7) of the Charter of the United Nations, which refers to sovereignty.

We have tried to reach agreement in advance on a compromise text, in view of the difficulties that arose at the 1999 session of the Third Committee of the United Nations General Assembly, at which the Member States failed to agree on an amendment introducing a reference to Article 2(7) into the draft resolution sponsored by the European Union on the death penalty.

As you know, at the 55th session of the Human Rights Commission held last year, the United States decided, at a very late stage, to table a draft resolution on China. This draft resolution was defeated by a Chinese no-action motion.

The European Union voted against that motion.

The European Union' s position on the approach to be adopted towards China in the Human Rights Commission was confirmed at the General Affairs Council on 21 March 1999: there was no European Union initiative on China nor was agreement reached to co-sponsor a resolution on China, but an EU vote against the no-action motion.

It is by no means certain that the European Union could have maintained a united front if this resolution had been put to the vote.

The United States of America will be tabling a draft resolution on China at the 56th session of the Human Rights Commission and are putting pressure on the European Union to support this draft resolution.

This initiative has provoked a strong reaction on China' s part: the Chinese authorities are making representations to the countries and institutions of the European Union, in an attempt to persuade them not to support the United States' initiative.

This initiative is being discussed within the Union, but with no hope of a decision in the near future.

It is in the interests of the European Union to keep all its options open for as long as possible, and in any case at least until after the EU-China human rights dialogue meeting is held on 25 February 2000.

In view of changes made to the membership of the Human Rights Commission, we estimate the vote on the no-action motion will be close.

It is therefore important this year, too, that the countries of the European Union should reach a consensus on the position to take in any vote on the resolution.

In this context it is important to note that the European Union regularly opposes requests by China that the human rights dialogue should automatically rule out tabling a resolution at the Human Rights Commission in Geneva.

The European Union unequivocally considers that although it is a very valuable instrument for exchanging views and for taking note of the overall position of the other party, the dialogue should also yield concrete results on the ground, and when this does not happen it may be necessary to present a resolution to the Human Rights Commission, potentially whilst the dialogue is continuing.

The European Union also regularly informs China that the Human Rights Commission is the appropriate body for considering human rights issues, and whether or not it agrees with this initiative, this is in any case legitimate from this point of view.

The next human rights dialogue will take place on 25 February in Lisbon, and will include seminars on legal issues and on women' s rights, and it is expected that representatives from the academic world and from civil society will take part.

The next human rights seminar will be organised by the Portuguese Presidency in May 2000, and, during the last round of the dialogue in October 1999, the Chinese side accepted the European Union' s proposal for technical assistance to support the process of ratifying the United Nations International Pact on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the United Nations' International Pact on Civil and Political Rights, both of which have been signed by the Chinese Government.

The European Union is discussing issues on which it hopes that China will take concrete measures, and on the basis of these discussions the presidency will convey to the Chinese authorities the message that the European Union hopes China will announce positive measures at the session on 25 February.

The presidency will also present to the Chinese authorities a list of individual cases on which it intends to express its serious concern.

The meeting held in Beijing in October 1999 confirmed that, on the one hand, the Chinese authorities were willing to make concessions on issues relating to the dialogue itself, with a restructuring of the dialogue and of discussion of legal forms of repression such as the death penalty and administrative detention. On the other hand, they will not give any ground on the pivotal questions of the single party system and territorial integrity.

Discussions within the European Union about the situation in China following the outcome of the dialogue rounds in 1999 have led the European Union to decide to express its concern about human rights violations in China more firmly; the same applies to the absence of concrete outcomes from the dialogue, while recognising the positive steps that China has made on the international stage.

On various occasions the European Union has reiterated to the Chinese authorities its disappointment with the results of the dialogue, and has stressed that it hoped for better outcomes in certain more sensitive areas.

It was decided that the dialogue should continue, but in a more targeted and effective way, given that China has agreed with the European Union' s proposal to restructure the dialogue by means of better use of experts and to establish a closer link with the seminars.

Lastly, during the next Human Rights Commission there will also be a debate on rationalising the work of the Commission itself.

A working party has been set up with the express task of revising the Commission' s mechanisms. This working party has worked hard to reach agreement that it is essential to enhance the effectiveness of the present mechanisms and to make them more rigorous, especially in the financial field.

The European Union will oppose any spurious attempt to use this reform of the Human Rights Commission' s activities to limit its capacity for intervention by restricting its sphere of influence and its ongoing monitoring of all human rights issues at world level.

Mr President, I would like to thank the presidency for the work it has done to prepare for Geneva on subjects like racism, civil and political rights and the right to development.

As the presidency said, much remains to be done, despite the understandable request by Parliament and many NGOs that the European Union should set out its position well in advance of the Geneva session.

That is easier said than done - we are still discussing some of the toughest issues.

For example, discussion is taking place about many of the matters raised in Parliament' s resolution and it is too early to predict the outcome in all cases.

It is not surprising that the debate is long and difficult.

That does not suggest any lack of commitment to the improvement of human rights but it does indicate the usual concern to get our approach right so that we really make a difference.

However, let me reflect that concern by referring to three controversial issues: the death penalty, Cuba and China.

I am going to be so unwise as to allow one or two personal reflections to creep into my remarks.

We are currently reviewing the options and possibilities for introducing a death penalty resolution in the Human Rights Commission.

This has always been a subject about which I personally have felt extremely strongly, I have always voted against the death penalty.

Spurred on by Amnesty International and others, one of the first decisions I took as Governor of Hong Kong was to abolish the death penalty.

We know what happened recently at the UN General Assembly. We had to freeze our resolution on the death penalty or risk the passing of a resolution that would have incorporated wholly unacceptable arguments that asserted that human rights are not universally applicable and valid.

The New York stage is different from Geneva.

Last year' s debate in New York on sovereignty and humanitarian intervention was such a sensitive topic that it influenced all other issues.

It certainly influenced the debate on the moratorium on the death penalty.

The debate in Geneva, however, is more focused on human rights issues.

We may therefore stand a better chance of making progress there.

I want to address this issue directly because we in Europe are criticised unfairly for not taking human rights there sufficiently seriously.

We are extremely concerned about moves by the Cuban Government over the last year that have further curtailed public freedom, moves like changes in the penal code and the scope of the death penalty.

We are also worried by the recent increase in the number of political detentions.

We are monitoring the human rights situation through the reports of NGOs and the work of our human rights working group based in the EU embassies in Havana.

We have regularly put our criticisms to the Cuban authorities, and this Parliament has done the same.

But I do not believe that the right approach is to try to isolate Cuba.

We want a fair and open society in Cuba, a Cuba which respects the principles of the market, the sanctity of contract and the rule of law.

We want to encourage a process of transition to democracy and respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms.

My views are exactly the same when it comes to the third subject with which I wish to deal, namely China.

Quite simply, I want us to be engaged with China.

It would be self-indulgent and self-defeating, as well as insulting to over a fifth of humanity, to want anything else.

I also want to see a China transformed by peaceful change into a free pluralist society which does not lock up democracy activists or religious believers.

Naturally we should trade enthusiastically with China and hope that we can welcome China into the World Trade Organisation on sensible terms.

It is a misnomer to talk about a World Trade Organisation which does not include China - or Russia, for that matter.

But I do not believe today, nor have I ever believed, that our burgeoning economic relationship with China - manifested, for example, by China' s EUR 25 billion surplus with the European Union - should silence us when it comes to China' s human rights record.

For me the question is not whether we should address the question of human rights in China - we have a duty to do so and a legitimate interest in doing so - but rather what is the most effective way of doing this?

So what should be our attitude towards a Geneva resolution this year?

As the presidency has noted, the Union as a whole is considering its position. But I strongly suggest there are a number of factors of which the Member States ought to take proper account.

First, while some people question whether tabling a Geneva resolution makes any difference, several of the most distinguished Chinese advocates of democracy strongly believe that it is a valuable move, not least because of the message it sends to people in China itself.

That is a point that deserves serious consideration.

Secondly, we will all want to take proper account of what has actually been happening in China in recent months, for instance, the heavy sentences imposed on democracy campaigners, the detention and recent punishments meted out to members of Christian churches and the arrests and sentences of the members of Falun Gong.

Chinese leaders are in no doubt about our position on all these issues and on developments in Tibet.

We have made our views very clear to them.

While we all know that for many people in China there has been a real long-term improvement in their economic prospects and their social and economic liberties, there is a dark side to the picture as well.

Critics of tabling a resolution say that at least we now have a human rights dialogue with China.

That is true and potentially valuable, although I have to say - and I have said to Chinese officials as has the presidency - that there has not been nearly as much content to our dialogue as we would have liked.

Of course the dialogue has enabled us to identify and implement EU cooperation programmes in the human rights and legal spheres.

That is very welcome and I also believe that our village governance programme should help to promote democracy at grassroots level.

Naturally any dialogue as complex as the one on human rights is going to be a long-term process, but I wish I could point to more real gains.

The next dialogue in Lisbon on 25 February will be an important test.

It will show whether the dialogue is producing results or not.

What, finally, do we want to see as the first steps?

Well, for example, we would like to see China move from signing the UN Conventions on Civil and Political Rights and on Social and Cultural Rights toward actually ratifying them.

I wish we were closer to that.

Where does all that leave us this year?

I repeat that Member States will have to make up their minds.

What I hope is, first, that we in Europe will adopt a common position and stick to it, that we will not allow some to be picked off, that our position will not be based on self-delusion or pretence, that it will be a common position and a sensible position.

I know that some people say we must have a better way of pressing our concern about human rights than through tabling resolutions.

But if that is true, then at the very least we need to be more imaginative and honest with ourselves in looking for that way forward.

If we are to rest our position on the human rights dialogue, then we need to be able to convince you, the NGO community and the public at large that it is actually getting somewhere.

That, in my judgement, is the challenge for the next few weeks.

I am grateful to the House for its concern about human rights around the world, and particularly in China.

Thank you very much, Commissioner Patten.

We will now interrupt the debate on the joint statement concerning the next session of the UN Human Rights Commission and proceed to the vote.

I am delighted to welcome a delegation of the Hong Kong Legislative Council to Parliament.

(DE) Mr President, following this vote, I would like to ask the competent Commissioner, Mr Byrne, if, now that he has seen how much support there is in this Chamber, he is prepared to adopt the proposed amendments?

I regret to say that I believe that the thought-out position I advanced yesterday is the correct position.

The comprehensive approach that the Commission intends to adopt on this issue will be brought forward as soon as possible under Article 152 where Parliament will have a codecision function.

That is the appropriate way of dealing with this.

Mr President, in accordance with Article 69 (2), I call for referral back to committee.

The reason is that this concerns the approximation of a legal effect measure, as proposed by the Commission.

We have accepted this but have proposed further approximations of the legal effect measures that affect this directive, in particular the adoption of a text - which has been approved by the Commission overall - for the use and labelling of genetically modified organisms.

We take the view that this should form part of this approximation at this time, but the Commission will not adopt this.

I believe that, in accordance with Article 69 (2), we must endeavour to enter into discussion with the Commission, and I would therefore urge my fellow MEPs to decide in favour of referral back to committee.

(Parliament decided to refer the report back to committee)

Report (A5-0034/2000) by Ms Stenzel, on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs, on the draft communication from the Commission to the Member States establishing the guidelines for Community Initiative Programmes (CIPs) for which the Member States are invited to submit proposals for support under the EQUAL initiative (COM(1999) 476 - C5-0260/1999 - 1999/2186(COS))

Mr President, permit me to say quite publicly to Mrs Stenzel, who is a member of the ÖVP executive, that many MEPs are horrified that you have entered into a coalition with Haider, and that we wish to denounce you for doing so!

(Applause from the left. Heckling from the right)

(DE) Mr Cohn-Bendit, I do not think that the European Parliament has any business intervening to such a huge extent in a country' s domestic politics, in the way that you are doing.

I can speak for my party, which championed Austria' s membership of the European Union in the early days.

As a political force, we serve to guarantee that Austria will continue to embrace European values.

I refuse to allow myself to be ostracised for internal and party political reasons!

This does not reflect the truth of the situation but is pure propaganda.

(Loud, sustained applause from the centre and from the right, protests from the left)

This is perhaps an appropriate moment to welcome to the official gallery, a delegation of four members of the Moroccan parliament, led by Mr Brahim Rachidi, Deputy Speaker of the Chamber of Representatives.

We are honoured by the visit of this delegation which is taking place shortly before the entry into force on 1 March 2000 of the Association Agreement between Morocco and the European Union.

On this historic occasion we welcome these developments in our relations and the prospects for closer ties between our two parliaments.

It is in this spirit that the delegation for relations with the Maghreb countries will be visiting Morocco on 20 to 22 March.

I hope the delegation has an excellent visit to Strasbourg.

Mr President, I just want to take advantage of your welcome to the delegation by pointing out that the House also has the pleasure of welcoming the heads of the Austrian anti-racist associations who are honouring us with a visit.

(The sitting was suspended at 11.50 a.m. for a formal sitting on the occasion of an address by Mr Vaclav Havel, President of the Czech Republic and resumed at 12.50 p.m.)

We shall now continue with the vote on the Stenzel report on the EQUAL initiative (A5-0034/2000).

(A5-0027/2000) by Ms Lienemann, on behalf of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to the adoption of a European Parliament and Council directive on establishing a framework for Community action in the field of water policy (9085/3/1999 - C5-0209/1999 - 1997/0067(COD))

As regards the Commission's position with respect to the amendments tabled by Parliament I wish to confirm what my colleague stated during the debate in this House on Tuesday, 15 February.

In particular, the Commission can accept in full Amendments Nos 6, 16, 21, 28, 31, 33, 34, 44, 45, 46, 48, 52, 53, 65, 67, 68, 75, 76, 78, 80, 84, 85, 88 and 102.

The Commission can accept in part Amendments Nos 8, 18, 27, 29, 42, 43, 47, 54, 60, 62, 93, 94, 104 and 105.

The Commission can accept in principle Amendments Nos 2, 3, 5, 7, 10, 12, 14, 17, 20, 22, 24, 25, 26, 30, 32, 35, 36, 37, 38, 50, 55, 56, 57, 58, 63, 69, 73, 79, 86, 89, 96, 99, 106 and 108.

But the Commission cannot accept Amendments Nos 1, 4, 9, 11, 13, 15, 19, 23, 39, 40, 41, 49, 51, 59, 61, 64, 66, 70, 71, 72, 74, 77, 83, 87, 90, 91, 92, 95, 97, 98, 81(rev.), 100, 101, 103 and 107.

(The President declared the common position approved as amended)

Report (A5-0033/2000) by Mr Andersson, on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs, on the communication from the Commission on a concerted strategy for modernising social protection (COM(1999) 347 - C5-0253/1999 - 1999/2182(COS))

EXPLANATIONS OF VOTE- Lienemann report (A5-0014/2000)

(FR) I welcome the quality and the ambition of this report on LIFE.

I shall briefly remind you that LIFE is a financial instrument used to support environmental policies within the European Union and also in third countries, whether they be neighbouring countries around the Mediterranean, countries around the Baltic Sea or applicant countries.

The Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Protection has proposed many amendments which have, for the most part, been retained in the common position adopted by the Council.

As far as the third phase of LIFE (2000-2004) is concerned, the instrument is to be divided into three sections, LIFE-Nature (47% of the resources), LIFE-Environment (47%) and LIFE-Third Countries (6%).

In my opinion, the most important amendments concern the following:

LIFE' s contribution to sustainable development within the Community and also to the development of Community policy in the field of the environment, particularly regarding the integration of the environment into other policies, as well as to the implementation and updating of legislation relating to the environment;

Improving the efficiency, transparency and methodology of procedures for the implementation of LIFE, procedures for information and the dissemination of such information to the public, and procedures for cooperation between recipients;

The objectives of LIFE: this must have as its main objective sustainable urban development, in close association with the pilot projects carried out under the URBAN initiative, on which I have had the opportunity to speak elsewhere;

The contribution that the projects supported by LIFE make to the sustainability of social and economic activities, and thus job creation.

I consider it crucial that the LIFE instrument should remain open to the participation of candidate countries from central and eastern Europe.

The other candidate countries (e.g. Cyprus, Turkey, Malta) my also take part in LIFE when agreements permitting such participation are signed with these countries.

The stumbling block in the negotiations with the Council lies, of course, in the amount of the total appropriation allocated for the third phase of the LIFE programme (2000-2004).

The Commission proposal, ratified by the Council, is for EUR 613 million, whilst the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Protection considers that the budget should be EUR 850 million.

I support Mrs Lienemann' s firm stance.

The financial allocation has not in fact been upgraded since the programme was created, even when the membership of the EC was increased to fifteen Member States following enlargement.

If the report is adopted in plenary session, then conciliation proceedings will have to be opened, in accordance with the codecision procedure, in order to solve the problem of the amount of appropriations earmarked for the programme.

This type of procedure is common practice since the programmes or legislative measures are too often allocated budgets which do not live up to their ambitions!

Mr President, I voted for this initiative to amend the copyright legislation because I believe it is one of the most important sectors within the remit of the European Parliament.

In my view, products of the mind are far more valuable than tangible products, namely, those that can be seen and touched.

The fruits of the intellect and science, which are intangible, are of inestimable importance. Therefore, the European Community should be more energetic in providing practical encouragement, not just through upholding patents but through concessions and other forms of support for scientists who are striving, through the knowledge and experience they have acquired, to give future generations something better than that which they have today.

. (DA) We oppose, on principle, the European Community' s entering into treaties on copyright law on behalf of the Member States.

We are nonetheless aware that we are concerned here with a sharing of powers between the Member States and the Community. At the same time, we appreciate the fact that the WIPO treaties are a significant step forward in the direction of guaranteeing the rights of distributors and practising artists.

We are therefore voting in favour of the recommendation.

- (DE) The Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance abstained from the vote on this matter because, in the plenary debate of the previous day, Commissioner Bolkestein did not respond to any of my questions regarding EU accession to the WIPO Treaties.

In institutional terms, there has been no clarification of what role the EP is to play in the further development of the WIPO Treaties.

In addition, there is a clear tendency, in matters of international jurisdiction, more and more often to obtain a pure EU jurisdiction.

When it is, then, still not clear to what extent the EP can participate in the decision-making processes, the question of legitimacy arises.

Moreover, the concept of 'author' is not defined in the Treaties.

In this regard, too, the Commission has not answered the question as to what definition it wishes to base its discussions on, and whether it wishes to settle foreseeable conflicts by imposing its own definition of the law on others.

One of the trickiest aspects is the public interest: will ratifying and applying WIPO lead to the privatisation of culture?

And, finally, the matter of the relationship between TRIPs and WIPO must be clarified. Regarding this, too, there has been only silence by way of a response from the Commission.

If nothing helpful is forthcoming in the course of a parliamentary debate planned for clarification and orientation, then we must at least abstain from voting.

. (PT) Food safety issues are in the spotlight following the BSE and dioxin scandals.

GMOs are still the subject of great uncertainty, both in terms of their environmental impact and of their effects on human and animal health.

The precautionary principle must therefore apply in the absence of scientific certainty.

The use of biotechnology needs to be studied in greater depth and not just "packaged" for immediate sale to boost the profits of a few multinationals in this sector.

The profit motive is very much behind the present food safety crises.

This is the context that the rapporteur finds himself working in, making a legal link between the issue of GMOs and feedingstuffs, and noting that the latter "shall be authorised only if ... safe for human health and the environment" .

Furthermore, he considers that "genetically modified additives shall be clearly identified as such on any label or any document, official or otherwise, which is affixed to or accompanies the additive" .

This will facilitate greater control and traceability of such additives and guarantee the consumer' s freedom of choice.

In view of the Montreal Protocol on Genetically Modified Organisms (GMOs), I welcome the fact that the rapporteur has included these issues in his report, and I have therefore voted in favour of it.

Mr President, I would very briefly like to give an explanation of vote, on behalf of the PPE Group on the EQUAL report.

We have followed a nominal list which was identical to that which we had agreed upon beforehand with the Socialist Group.

The Socialist Group has now changed its mind and this is why the report is not as clear as it would have been.

This is why we are abstaining.

We want to ensure that the EQUAL report, which is very important for refugees, the elderly, the handicapped and women, simply goes ahead.

It is regrettable that, due to the procedure, the report has received such unfavourable attention in this plenary session.

I am convinced that the rapporteur' s nationality has played a certain role, which should not be of relevance in this Parliament.

This is actually in conflict with European values and certainly with the parliamentary values which are referred to so often in this Parliament.

These were our reasons for abstaining from the vote on this report.

We want EQUAL to go ahead.

We assent to the main thrust of it, but we deplore the procedure and especially the fact that some groups have exploited this procedure to their advantage.

Mr President, as the representative of the Pensioners' Party in the European Parliament, I abstained in the vote on the EQUAL initiative because, although it provides more support than in the past for projects aimed at combating age discrimination, its proposals are not sufficiently trenchant or specific.

I also abstained for another reason. I think the time has come for the European institutions to stop experimenting and trying to establish best practices for doing what we should do and begin to give European citizens some firm indication regarding what Europe wants Europe to be.

The time has come for concrete measures and for putting theory into practice.

. (DA) We have voted in favour of the report on the communication from the Commission concerning the guidelines for EU initiative programmes (CIP).

Basically, we are opposed to programmes and structural funds of this type but, since the vote is only concerned with how - and not to what extent - these resources are to be used, we have simply adopted a position on the issue.

We think it is important to guarantee equal opportunities for the groups discussed in the report.

I voted in favour of Mrs Stenzel' s report on the EQUAL initiative as I believe that it is essential to continue the work begun under the previous NOW, HORIZON, YOUTHSTART and INTEGRA strands of the ADAPT and EMPLOYMENT initiatives.

The lessons we have learned under these actions must be built on.

It must be seen to deliver.

I welcome the proposed concentration on promoting new ways of combating discrimination and any form of inequality in the labour market.

I also favour the desire to move away from an out-dated format and to bring partners together in search of innovative ways to tackle unemployment.

I deeply regret that only limited funds are available for this initiative.

In the last programming period 9% of Structural Funds were available for Community initiatives.

This means that funds must be used to achieve maximum effect and information on successful partnerships must be widely and rapidly disseminated.

The Employment and Social Affairs Committee adopted several of the amendments I put forward, concerning for example, the emphasis on access to start-up capital, how to exploit new business opportunities in cities, towns and rural areas and the criticism that under the previous initiatives there was inadequate participation by business.

This often meant that good projects did not lead to real job opportunities.

The positive experience of innovative actions of small promoters was jeopardised by their distance from the policy process.

I also stressed the need for prevention.

The involvement of the social partners also needs to be highlighted.

There must be flexibility and the administrative burden must be reduced as a priority.

There must be flexibility also for countries with small budgets.

While there are some aspects of the report which I believe would be better dealt with in a different way, overall I believe the report offers a flexible and sensible approach and should be supported.

(PT) The Commission intends to use the Community initiative EQUAL to replace the Community EMPLOYMENT and ADAPT initiatives and various subprogrammes in these areas, such as NOW, on new opportunities for women, HORIZON, for disabled persons, YOUTHSTART, for promoting the labour market integration of young people, and INTEGRA, for groups threatened with exclusion. Unfortunately, this involves a significant reduction in appropriations.

Accordingly, the Commission will use this initiative to develop what it considers to be new ways of fighting discrimination and inequality of all kinds in the labour market, based on the four pillars of the employment policy guidelines.

This is a great deal to build on such fragile foundations.

However, in order to give this new approach some chance of success, the Commission should have opted for a less complicated proposal, a more simple and direct one, involving the NGOs from the outset, so that partnerships could develop in a balanced way.

The Commission did not do that.

We hope that it will at least revisit the aspects that we have mentioned.

. (FR) We welcome the fact that the European Parliament is continuing its initiatives to fight discrimination and inequality, and the four areas included in the EQUAL programme - employability, entrepreneurship, adaptability and equal opportunities for men and women - would appear to be genuinely relevant.

However, this report, although probably inspired by the best intentions, occasionally takes a direction which I feel is highly dangerous in that it tends to erase notions of citizenship and legality and turns a multiplicity of exceptions into the common law on which the Community approach is based.

Even if one cannot but applaud the decision to adopt specific measures to eradicate all forms of discrimination on the labour market, which might affect asylum seekers whom life has already, by definition, treated badly, we still need to keep a legal conception of this notion: to put it plainly, where there is every reason to help asylum seekers who follow the correct procedure and are duly recognised as such, the same does not apply to the numerous categories listed in the report, namely applicants, those under temporary protection and those denied refugee status and threatened with repatriation, for whom the report makes provision for identical assistance.

There is a risk that the so-called aid measures provided for in the report will spread insidiously and with disastrous results: asylum seekers, of course, plus asylum seekers under temporary protection while their applications are being processed and asylum seekers whose applications have been rejected and who are threatened with expulsion should all, according to the report, be able to benefit from this set of measures, whereas their very status - after all, what is an asylum seeker who has been refused refugee status and who is threatened with expulsion if not an illegal immigrant - should, at least for the last category, exclude them from a policy to integrate them into a Community which does not acknowledge their presence in its midst as legal or legitimate.

Whether we like it or not, a signal of this sort would be a fearful invitation to immigrants who, merely by applying for refugee status, irrespective of whether or not it is granted, would be able to qualify for a range of aid measures designed to help them integrate permanently into the labour market, in a general climate of shortage, in which the legal population, both foreign and indigenous, is cruelly aware of the problem of unemployment.

Consequently, despite its general approach, which cannot but be endorsed, I am unable to support a report which contains in it the seed of a new attack on the concepts of citizenship and republican legitimacy which I hold so dear.

Mr President, some of us in Parliament will remember the successful film, "Cocoon", in which some elderly people drank a special kind of water that made them young again.

In my view, it is, therefore, immensely important to exercise extreme vigilance over the water we all drink and, consequently, to study and approve the provisions referred to here.

For that reason, I approved these measures, but I should also like to express the hope that there will be particularly rigorous monitoring of water purity at the point where it enters our houses, to ensure that it is of the highest level.

In the measures that have been adopted, I note that support for people who purify their water in their own homes has been omitted. I trust that this will be remedied in the future.

(EL) Despite the relative improvement of the first draft of the directive on water policy, following the incorporation of some of the European Parliament' s amendments in the Council' s common position, the directive remains problematic.

Particularly important issues are the following:

the new indexes for water should be compulsory;

provisions should be made for protecting groundwater from pollution;

provisions should be made for purifying contaminated groundwater;

there should be a ban on the discharge of some 400 hazardous substances into water; substances which are not currently monitored;

a system for determining pollutants in water is urgently needed;

the cost of water supply services should include the environmental cost of producing it;

whereas, in general, the provision of water should be priced at cost, special exceptions should be made for areas affected by permanent and extensive drought, in relation to their social and economic circumstances (for example, impoverished regions or social groups);

a shorter timescale is needed for implementing the directive.

Apart from Amendment No 76, which was an error, since I intended to vote in favour, the rest of my votes can be explained by means of the following fictional situation:

Supposed draft environmental directive: "European Parliament and Council Directive establishing the obligation to maintain, during winter, a temperature of no less than eighteen degrees centigrade in the streets, squares and parks of the cities of Europe ".

Guidelines of the Directive: a) each city shall provide the means, in terms of energy and technology, sufficient for this objective to be achieved by 2012; b) the full costs shall be passed on to the inhabitants of each city by means of electricity prices.

Opinion of an MEP from the north of Europe: "This Directive would be unfair since, for example, the cost for an inhabitant of Stockholm would be two hundred times greater than the cost for an inhabitant of Naples ".

Opinion of an MEP from the south of Europe: "Nevertheless, this is a question of competitivity and equality of conditions".

In explaining my vote, I must say that it is positive that there is a Community directive on water, but I believe that environmental dogma will not lead to the construction of Europe, but will lead to legislative caricature.

We cannot give equal treatment to countries which suffer from floods and droughts, such as the Mediterranean countries, and countries with northern levels of rainfall.

Furthermore, it would show a lack of solidarity to make transfers of water, between different river basins, practically impossible in the future.

Once more we must remember that we are undergoing a continental project for political union.

(FR) Drinking, eating, washing, farming - water irrigates each act of our daily life and we treat it, wrongly, as an unfailing and inexhaustible resource.

A simple gesture such as turning on a tap seems to bring water straight from the source.

But the source is threatening to run dry.

Scientific studies are now no more than a formality: water will be the main resource at stake in years to come, starting tomorrow.

But tomorrow will be too late.

We have to lay down the rules of play today, before we all lose.

In adopting the water directive on Wednesday 15 February, the European Parliament confirmed its wish to protect surface water, coastal wasters, inland waters and groundwater.

Europe now has a framework which will allow it to prevent any deterioration in the quality of water, promote its sustainable use, protect eco-systems, help fight floods and droughts and eliminate the disposal of dangerous substances.

We have thrown water a life-belt.

. (FR) It is with the greatest satisfaction that I welcome this ambitious proposal for a framework directive on water policy.

The ecological disaster on the banks of the Danube is a reminder, as if we needed one, that all too often human negligence jeopardises natural resources such as water.

The objective of this proposal for a directive, which dates back to 1997, is to put an end to the fragmentation of previous water legislation and protect surface water, coastal waters, inland waters and groundwater.

It provides a framework within which we can prevent any further deterioration, protect ecosystems, promote sustainable water use, help to fight floods and drought and gradually eliminate the disposal of dangerous substances.

Specific directives will then be adopted within this framework.

The procedure involved in drafting this text was lengthy.

The proposal for a directive was amended twice, first in 1997 and then in 1998.

A technical working party made up of Council and Parliament representatives met in January 1999 to try and reconcile the positions of the two institutions.

However, the Committee on the Environment has tabled numerous amendments, most of which I support.

As far as the timetable and objectives are concerned, the Council' s objective is to achieve good quality surface water within 16 years of the entry into force of the directive, while the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy wants this reduced to 10 years.

The committee is also calling for an end to discharges or leaks of dangerous substances by 2020, the final objective being to achieve zero input by 2020.

The Council hopes to achieve good quality groundwater within 16 years, but the Commission wants no further deterioration in the chemical status of groundwater so that good quality groundwater can be achieved in 10 years.

All the standards and all the objectives relating to protected zones should be achieved within 10 years, not 16.

I must say that I support these reduced deadlines, especially as provision is made for derogations.

As far as costs are concerned, I approve the proposal whereby Member States will have to ensure by 2010 that water pricing policies provide incentives for more sensible use of water resources.

I likewise expect the European Commission to make a clear declaration undertaking to submit a proposal to ensure that water pricing policies reflect the environmental costs and the costs in terms of resources by 2012.

I will close by quoting one of the amendments tabled by the Committee on the Environment, which needs no further comment: "Water is not a commercial product like any other but, rather, a heritage which belongs to the peoples of the European Union and which must be protected, defended and treated as such" .

I wish to put on the official record my concerns with the Lienemann report and also the reasons for my vote.

We have all agreed on the need to put in place proper controls for the protection of our water supplies and also for the users of water.

There is much to be praised in the approach to the problem suggested by the rapporteur.

However, the question of taxation or charges for the use of water is a matter which, under the rules of subsidiarity, should be left to the Member States for decision.

In my belief it is incorrect to use such a crude tool as a common European charge for this issue.

In Ireland all the major users of water, commercial, industrial and agricultural, already pay for their use of water.

This is a decision of national and local government, and this is where all future decisions should be retained.

These are the main reasons for my vote.

The European Union is currently in the process of adopting new EU water legislation to update and to establish a long-term strategy to ensure the supply of clean drinking water and the protection of existing water resources including rivers and coastal waters.

I support the objectives of this community action in the field of water policy. However, I do not support the proposal that domestic water users be charged for water used.

Water, in this context, is a commercial commodity. It is an essential to life itself and people must have free access to sufficient supplies for normal daily life.

We see it as positive that an attempt is being made to reverse the trend towards water degradation, which is most alarming and which governments all too often tend to sweep under the carpet.

We all know that water is a commodity without which mankind cannot live and that it is imperative that its quality should be preserved.

But it is also essential to bear in mind that the various elements of water policy cannot be separated, and that action on this aspect will affect all the others.

The "physico-chemical and ecological quality of water" was highlighted during the debate and in the proposals, and the adverse effects of other aspects was, at best, touched upon marginally.

It is essential to be aware of the widely varying situations in different Member States, such as specific climatic conditions, water regimes and fluctuations in them over the year, the social, economic and ecological effects of applying standards, and also of the failure to do so.

It was because of our concern about these issues that we disagreed with some of the proposals put forward by the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, and in particular those relating to an excessively restrictive timetable and to the scant attention paid to social and agricultural aspects, which are very important for a country like Portugal, which suffers from water shortage problems and also inadequate socio-economic development.

But we also believe that, in many cases, the proposals put forward by the Commission and the Council represent too much of a step backwards, which is why we would like to see a vote balanced between the various requirements in the proposals presented to us.

. (FR) We are disappointed by the Council' s common position on this proposal for a framework directive.

It is minimalist on a number of points, especially with regard to the dates of entry into force of far too many provisions and the number of, and conditions for, implementing the derogations.

However, the main problem is with the definition of the objective which the European Union wishes to pursue with this text.

The objective is of course to create, first and foremost, a clear general framework which will allow the law in this area to be simplified.

However the Union should be seeking, beyond that, to improve the quality of both surface and groundwater.

Public health and the supply of drinking water are at stake, as are biological quality and diversity and the conservation of rural areas and species.

From this point of view, the common position is weak.

I should like to see our Parliament defend a more ambitious position than the Council' s position, but I should also like that position to be equally credible.

The "zero input" and "zero pollution" requirement, including for substances naturally present in water, is not realistic.

I am not one of those MEPs who thinks that it is essential to adopt "extremist" amendments at second reading with the sole aim of gaining room for manoeuvre in preparation for negotiations with the Council of Ministers.

On the contrary, I object to this systematically applied strategy.

Our messages to our citizens and to the Council are muddled and lack credibility.

Overly strict, unrealistic environmental objectives will not be applied because they are unattainable.

Is that the message we want to send out?

There is one other specific point which is dear to me: Member States should be able, if they so wish, to set up trans-national water transfers.

This type of project complies with the principle of regional cohesion and solidarity, which we have always defended, and, as such, should enjoy the widespread support of the European Union in the context of the promotion of trans-European networks and regional policy (through the Structural Funds).

I would like to remind the House that we adopted an own initiative report on the technical feasibility of trans-European water networks two years ago and I would be most obliged if the European Commission could shortly tell Parliament what action it has taken on that report.

(ES) We have seen a report concerned with water quality in Europe transformed into an instrument of commercial war.

We all agree that ensuring water quality is a hugely important objective, above all, given the adverse effects of developing a model of accelerated industrial growth on the natural environment.

It is clear that this model' s logic of private profit has been harmful, and therefore the 'polluter pays' principle is a suitable way of dealing with these consequences.

However, apart from these principles, there is the consideration that water, as a common resource, cannot be subjected to the rules of the market.

Surprisingly, I imagine with the best of intentions, this ecological objective has become an instrument of commercial war by making consumers, and especially the agricultural sector, responsible for the price of installations and the procedures for ensuring water quality.

In fact, water becomes simply one more product subject to the laws of the market.

This means that the neoliberal model now reigns in the field of water.

By failing to distinguish countries and regions where water is abundant, and is therefore not a problem, from regions where drought and low rainfall make it a scarce commodity, stifling the chances of any economic and social development, we are perverting the ecological principle and turning it into a weapon.

In the same way it is somewhat ironic that we are hindering the possibility of sharing this commodity, which is scarce in some areas, while regions where there is abundant water are giving advice on austerity with regard to its use, to those who live in drought areas.

As a result of this lack of sensitivity and solidarity, my vote has been consistent with what I have said, as an MEP from one of the dry Mediterranean agricultural regions - although one with prospects - namely, the Region of Murcia.

On behalf of the European Parliament Labour Party, I wish to indicate that while we have supported the major part of the Lienemann report, we have certain reservations.

The timetable set in the report of 2020 is unrealistic and impracticable, but the timetable set by the Council of 2034 is too far in the distance.

We believe therefore that conciliation will set a more realistic date.

We have voted against Amendments Nos 25 and 72 which would require the achievement of minimal anthroprogenic pollution in all groundwater.

We believe this requirement is unrealistic in view of the very high cost and extremely long timescales involved in restoration to a near pristine standard.

The foregoing is the reason for our vote.

(FR) Water is a renewable but limited natural resource and needs to be properly managed.

The framework directive on water policy will become the cornerstone of Community policy in this area.

It sets environmental parameters close to zero.

But we feel that it would be wiser not to set unrealistic deadlines which neither our governments nor our industries will be able to meet.

We need a timetable, by all means, but a more gradual timetable.

The legal obligation to achieve a zero input situation, i.e. to stop discharges within 20 years, would in fact mean a ban on all identified substances.

Such provisions may well cause serious problems in cross-border areas and in candidate countries, thereby complicating enlargement.

I should like, naturally, to refer to a specific sector to which I am very closely attached, i.e. agriculture, the main water-consuming sector. Agriculture must accept its share of 'polluter pays' charges, and has in fact already started to do so, but account must also be taken of its special characteristics and constraints, especially in arid regions.

As regards the amendments concerning radioactive substances, I am of course in favour of controls, but the question arises of the legal basis, which comes under the Euratom Treaty.

The Group for a Europe of Democracies and Diversities has not been able to vote in favour of the Andersson report.

This does, of course, contain a number of good observations. For example, it is acknowledged on page 15 of the explanatory statement that "the different levels of development and traditions in the field of social security in the Member States make it impossible to bring about uniform harmonisation of the Member States' social security systems" .

Now, the concept of "uniform harmonisation" is one of those muddled expressions which totally obfuscates the integration process in question.

It is also true, as it states in the explanatory statement, that harmonisation could be damaging as "it might place greater demands on weaker Member States at the same time as competitive considerations might exert pressure on more socially developed countries to cut back on social security.

No-one would benefit from this type of harmonisation" .

The situation, however, is that a social model is being established whose real purpose is harmonisation, and uniform harmonisation into the bargain.

Paragraph D points out that "the Union may provide added value by adoption of proper binding and effective convergence criteria" , and the report goes on to emphasise that the development of this convergence process is to be promoted by means of joint talks between the Ecofin Council and the Social Affairs and Employment Councils. Finally, paragraph 7 emphasises that "the social convergence process must be accompanied by an effective and ambitious fiscal coordination" .

And, in this regard, we approach the heart of the matter.

This project, with its social harmonisation, does not constitute social policy.

Instead, it is an extension to the EU' s EMU project, which is of quite special interest to the three countries which remain outside EMU and can rescue themselves from the sinking ship, namely Great Britain, Sweden and Denmark. It is therefore important for us to emphasise that we cannot support a proposal whose essential rationale is to extend the EMU project.

) Mr President, I voted for the Council's strategy for modernising social protection because, in my view, it constitutes a step towards the establishment of European social and pensions legislation, although it does not actually go the whole way.

I was sorry to hear what was said in the previous explanation of vote, since I believe that, in essence, the report aims to provide much better protection for the elderly, despite the fact that, as we all know, the governments of the 15 Member States would like to reduce pensions to the minimum.

I hope that Parliament will soon have the authority to legislate on pensions.

The elderly are waiting for the European Parliament to make it possible for them to live more comfortably and with greater dignity than they do now.

The countries who have made less progress in this field should attain the same level as the countries within the European Union that guarantee better social protection.

(DA) The Danish Social Democrats in the European Parliament have voted today in favour of the report by our Swedish Social Democratic colleague, Jan Andersson, on the Commission' s communication concerning a coordinated strategy for modernising social security.

The starting point for the Commission' s communication is the implementation of EMU which, with its demand for stability and growth, creates the basis for the Member States' being able to maintain their social security arrangements.

The report states that modernisation does not mean a reduction in the level of social protection but, rather, better use of available resources.

We also notice that, according to the explanatory statement, modernisation does not mean harmonisation of social security arrangements, either, and that harmonisation might be downright damaging as it might place greater demands on weaker Member States at the same time that competitive considerations might exert pressure on others to cut back.

No-one would benefit from this situation.

Both in the communication from the Commission and in the report by Mr Andersson, it is emphasised that it is the Member States which have responsibility for and, therefore, also determine the content of, social security arrangements.

Cooperation on these matters within the framework of the EU should create added value, based on the exchange of experiences and the reciprocal evaluation of the way in which policies are developing, the aim being to define best practice.

(SV) We consider that the report contains many practical proposals, which we support, but we are very critical of the convergence approach which permeates the report.

In particular, we oppose the sections which deal with fiscal harmonisation and with the Commission' s becoming involved in telling the Member States what to do (see, for example, paragraph 7).

We wish to emphasise that the sphere of social and social security policy should chiefly be the domain of the Member States, even if the enlargement of the EU requires a greater degree of coordination than there has been in the past.

. (FR) The current difficulties faced by our social security systems derive mainly from a shortage of income as the result of unemployment, poverty and an ageing population rather than from excessive spending.

The policies of the European Union also have much to answer for in this situation.

Of course we need to modernise these systems.

In France, in particular, we need to stop making labour alone fund medical insurance and pensions.

We also need to reform archaic management methods which create injustices, chaos and waste.

More importantly, we need a family policy to promote demographic growth and an economic, monetary and fiscal policy to promote growth and reconquer the internal market so that we can create jobs.

The Commission and the Andersson report are not proposing a social policy; they are giving Brussels exorbitant decision-making powers as regards funding, i.e. as regards the organisation and the provision of social protection services in the countries of Europe, which is why we voted against this text.

Social protection should be an expression, first and foremost, of national solidarity and it comes first and foremost, exclusively in fact, under the jurisdiction of the nation state.

Social protection should be based on the principle of national and Community preferences.

Otherwise it is merely the financial processing, at the expense and to the detriment of European citizens, of the intolerable social situations which result from immigration.

(SV) We have abstained from voting for Jan Andersson' s report on a coordinated strategy for modernising social security.

We are basically well disposed towards the European Union.

As Swedish Liberals, we see European integration as an opportunity to find solutions to cross-border problems such as the environment, trade, movement across borders, human rights and conflict management.

In these areas, Europe' s democracies have a chance to show the world that cooperation leads to peace and increased prosperity.

We also believe in the principle of subsidiarity whereby decisions are to be taken as close as possible to those they affect.

That is why we are actively pursuing the issue of a constitution for the European Union where the distribution of responsibilities is clear for all to see.

It must be perfectly clear to all citizens that the EU will only become involved in those issues it is best qualified to deal with, which is to say cross-border issues.

All other questions ought to be dealt with at local, regional or national levels.

Social policy is an example of an area in which the EU ought only to have limited powers, except where it is a question of freedom of movement for people within the Union.

Each Member State ought to have full responsibility for, and the right autonomously to decide upon, its social security systems.

Health care, child care and care of the elderly are clear examples of areas which are not obviously transnational.

The same applies to labour market policy.

We do not believe that common European legislation in these areas is a solution to the problems involved in designing systems of social security.

For us, it is important that the EU should instead concentrate on just a few areas in which it can really be of use.

That does not, however, prevent the Member States from cooperating and exchanging ideas in the social sphere.

Equality and social security are issues which are traditionally high on our Liberal agenda.

We wholeheartedly support, at national level, many of the ideas presented in Mr Andersson' s report.

(IT) The report gives a clear impression that the concerted strategy for modernising social protection in Europe will be accompanied by an analogous process of cohesion. We therefore view it with interest and hope and commend its intentions.

Numerous policies have already gone in this direction, albeit laboriously, and many more still need to do so before Europe, in terms of subsidiarity, is seen as one house, not only by its own people, but also by those in the candidate countries.

Moreover, the European welfare systems have always played a constructive role in the social and democratic development of each nation. Consequently, if such systems are to continue to sustain development in the future, in light of the economic and employment changes taking place, as well as the requirements of society, modernisation is absolutely essential.

There are three main aspects that need to be highlighted. The first is that economic policy, employment and social protection should be strictly interdependent in a way that is directly proportional.

The second concerns the management of welfare systems and those who operate them.

Nowadays, it is becoming more commonplace, as well as efficient, to operate complementary and integrated protection schemes.

But, in our view, that does not mean that the role of the public authority should be reduced, either as regards the universality or, we hope, the quality of the basic social protection provided.

It is, to a large extent, a principle of justice that imbues both health and pension schemes as well as social assistance, where, in particular, strategic coordination by the public authority is essential, even though it has been modernised.

The third aspect concerns the principle of subsidiarity that underpins the European Union.

Today, a common strategy for social protection is sadly lacking, and the current systems are, in the main, run according to the actions and unity of purpose of individual Member States.

Therefore, any modernisation process has to take account of economic, employment and social protection differences between the various countries, whether Member States or candidate countries.

What is required is that those responsible for the modernisation process, which continues to be closely linked to the promotion of social cohesion despite the underlying differences, should have the will and the know-how to ensure that changes are for the better and not for the worse.

It is, after all, a matter of civilisation, progress and common dignity for the present European Union and a future enlarged community.

(SV) The basic values common to the Member States of the European Union are based upon democracy, human freedoms and rights, and a social market economy.

These values must be given expression in the form of solidarity with the weaker groups in our society and in the world around us.

In accordance with the principle of subsidiarity, it is the Member States themselves which devise their own social security systems.

Inhabitants of countries in the European Union ought, nonetheless, to be able to benefit from a minimum network of social protection, irrespective of which country they live in.

The report seeks "effective and ambitious fiscal coordination" , without going on to define more specifically what this means.

As we see it, such a position constitutes unduly large interference in national fiscal policy and cannot, therefore, be supported.

We are therefore voting against paragraph 7 of the report.

The report emphasises the social dimension of European cooperation, which is something to be welcomed.

It is nonetheless important to clarify what role the EU is to play, and not to play, with regard to social security.

Clarification of this kind is missing from the report, which is unfortunate.

That concludes the explanations of vote.

(The sitting was suspended at 1.55 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m.)

Next session of UN Human Rights Commission (continuation)

The next item is the debate on the Council declaration on the establishing of the EU priorities for the next session of the UN Commission on Human Rights (20 March 2000), including the situation in China.

Mr President, I regret the absence of the Presidency-in-Office of the Council. This is a Council declaration, and I believe that it would perhaps have been useful for them to have been present for the rest of the debate.

I think it is worth reminding you that the inclusion of this item on the agenda clearly reflects the need, which has been expressed by all the political Groups, for Parliament to hold a debate before the next meeting of the United Nations Commission on Human Rights in Geneva, so that it may express its opinion on such a sensitive issue, one which is so dear to this House.

Following the statement of the Presidency-in-Office of the Council and the Commission, I believe we can all agree that the current situation with regard to human rights is far removed from what we would all like to see.

At a European Union level we must recognise that the situation is not completely satisfactory, since, for example, although the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms is a common instrument in all Member States, not all subsequent protocols have been ratified or signed by all of them.

Another clear drawback in this area is the fact that the European Union itself is not a signatory to the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, with all the additional disadvantages that this situation entails.

I hope that these problems can be tackled and dealt with in the context of the current discussion of the European Union Charter on Fundamental Rights.

With regard to foreign affairs, I believe that the majority of points which we have included in the resolution accurately illustrate the real situation and hardly invite optimism, Mr President. Issues such as the abolition of the death penalty, the torture which still goes on in many supposedly democratic countries or the situation of minorities in many parts of the world, demand a clear, visible and effective response from the European Union.

In my opinion, this resolution contains a series of essential points, but I would like to stress one in particular, that is, the need for greater coordination between the European Union and the United Nations.

Mr President, in a world such as this, which is increasingly dominated by the phenomenon of globalisation, and not only in the economic field, our responses, in order to be effective, must be concerted and coordinated.

In order to make our actions effective, we must implement a type of coordination in practice which does not exist at present.

This Parliament therefore advocates the principle that we need to participate in the Commission on Human Rights and other international fora which deal with these issues and, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, this Parliament would like to be able to participate in this type of meeting as soon as possible.

Soon, in May, the European Commission intends to present a communication on the development of the role of human rights and democratisation in the Union' s external relations.

I would like to take this opportunity to ask the Commission to take good note of this need for coordination, which I have just mentioned, and to seek new formulas which will strengthen the role played by the European Union in the field of human rights and, in particular, by this Parliament, especially from the point of view of coherence, recognising the good will of those third countries which accept the inclusion of the democratic clause.

I believe that this should be applied to all areas, in particular also the budgetary area.

Lastly, I must recognise the important contributions made by civil society in this area, as well as the often underestimated role of the numerous non-governmental organisations who act on the ground.

The Union must make every effort to provide all the necessary support for them to carry out their important work.

Mr President, Commissioners, when this House is called upon to debate human rights it is taking a chance, if you will, that is reinforced by the conditions that prevail when we are called upon to discuss such a crucial issue.

The absence of the Council, as well as of the majority of MEPs, shows just how great the divide is between our noble, elevated and worthy formal statements and the concrete reality in terms of our day-to-day policies when it comes to human rights.

I believe that, as a beginning, Parliament is called upon to use the opportunity provided by the Geneva session to narrow that divide. It should adopt an approach that is not just a statement of principle but is an acknowledgement of the true situation and possibly even a pledge of support.

We must get away from the situation where we are only aware of human rights when they hit the headlines or abuses are being punished.

The role of Parliament is to meet the issue of human rights head on, particularly at the level of prevention.

In that sense, we need to be able to export a culture based on legality and respect for the law.

It seems to me that we have finally reached the end of a long period during which a whole raft of treaties appeared and were duly signed.

Nowadays, there are many, perhaps too many, treaties on human rights. If those treaties remain mere expressions, they are no more than useless depositories of people's thoughts.

The time has come to move on to a new and crucial phase, namely a phase in which the provisions of the treaties are applied on a daily and binding basis, although we ought not forget that some basic treaties are still to be transposed.

I refer to the Rome Conference and the fact that 14 of the 15 Member States of the Union have still not ratified the treaty establishing an International Criminal Court.

In my view, we should be evaluating and modifying some of the political instruments we use to measure the status of human rights globally.

We have often employed instruments which, at the formal level, make us feel comfortable, but which, in terms of practical results, are totally ineffectual.

By that I mean the use, and often abuse, of embargoes during recent years, and the over-cautious application of the clause allowing suspension of the agreements between the European Union and third countries, where there have been human rights violations.

In particular, we should be updating the areas where human rights need to be safeguarded.

Globalisation could easily come to be regarded as a harmful process.

Many countries are currently questioning the principle of the universality of human rights.

The belief is widespread that many human rights, including the right to life, contradicted as it is by the death penalty, depend on certain variables, while globalisation, which often has a negative connotation, is in danger of becoming the catch-all for rights, actions and policies everywhere in the world.

We should therefore do what is necessary to update the areas in which we can intervene, with renewed strength, to safeguard human rights.

In that context I would mention the following: social rights, workers' rights, quality of work, the need to ensure respect, where necessary, for all the criteria laid down by the International Labour Organisation, the right to tolerance and to respect - a right to which all minorities are entitled, particularly within the European Union.

I would also mention the right to develop. It is the right of all peoples who, in turn, are the sum of countless individuals each one of whom has the right to develop and to a future that, most importantly, is full of hope and personal growth, within each individual society.

All those aspects should be part of a rationale, a discourse and a contribution which the European Union should bring to human rights.

I hope that Parliament's participation in the Geneva session turns out to be more than just a token presence and that its representatives do more than just listen to and give evidence. First and foremost they should use the occasion to affirm that we regard the aspects I have just mentioned as central to the identity of the European Union and of the European nation, and that we also uphold the principle of the universality of human rights that transcends time and place.

That is what we hope for and is the cordial message that we are sending our governments, even if it goes against their interests.

Mr President, one of the saving features of this Parliament is that here we practise a consistent and active human rights policy: the flag flies high, as Mrs Malmström put it.

At the same time, however, we shut our eyes to the Union' s own problems: to the violence, inequality, and fourth world reality, which is part of everyday life in the EU.

It is absolutely right that we pay serious attention to the violations of human rights that are to be the subject of talks in Geneva.

The rhetoric that we use, however, often smacks of smugness, verging on the sort of narcissism we associate with human rights attitudes in North America.

It is nothing less than hypocritical to condemn the flagrant violation of human rights that occurs in non-EU countries if we are not prepared to extend a helping hand to those genuine refugees and asylum-seekers, whose position is now becoming more difficult in the EU.

Let us, in particular, focus attention on the re-admission clauses, which present a threat to the Geneva Convention and which should be blocked.

Unless we can maintain high standards of human rights with respect to refugees and asylum-seekers, we are not worthy of those European values which make up the European identity, as Vaclav Havel said here today, and among which he particularly mentioned respect for human rights and solidarity.

I worked for many years on the South African Truth and Reconciliation Commission and it was really moving to see how a nation in such difficult circumstances was reaching out for a more open, European-style, pluralistic democratic society.

I fear that we are now moving in the opposite direction, towards European exclusiveness and apartheid.

Mr President, Commissioner, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, in my view, the question which needs to be raised in Geneva this year is certainly not the death penalty.

We have already had three resolutions on the death penalty approved in Geneva.

We failed at the General Assembly last year on a fallacious pretext, I refer to article 2.7, which we are otherwise happy to adopt for all other texts.

The question of the death penalty should therefore be raised at this year' s General Assembly, certainly not at the Geneva session.

As Mr Patten said, and I would like to thank him for the positions which he defended, the crucial point is China.

Unfortunately, the positions taken by the Commission and the Council, or at least the presidency, are more than just a hair' s breadth apart; this is serious, especially in the light of the Council' s macho position on Austria.

In my view, as far as China is concerned, and knowing that the European Union' s policy towards China has been a total failure, allegedly constructive dialogue has got us nowhere or, worse, it has given the Chinese new pretexts for increasing repression and for strengthening religious repression and the repression of freedoms (as Mrs Wallström has said with regard to the Internet) in all sectors, in Tibet, in inland Mongolia, in eastern Turkistan.

There is regression in every sector of Chinese civil society.

It is a fact: China is the major threat, the major threat to us, the threat which we must confront, the threat to peace.

It is the antithesis of democracy and you know as well as I that the Chinese, the Chinese leadership, is Communist first and Chinese second.

Until we have a firm position, we will achieve nothing with the Chinese authorities.

I think we need to seize the opportunity.

We need to associate ourselves with the American initiative.

We need to table a strong text and that text needs to be adopted.

The Fifteen need to start work right now, with all the members of the United Nations; we need, at long last, to issue a firm condemnation and then use that as a basis to gain a negotiating position.

Mr President, I would like to try to put a different perspective to this.

As you know, on Monday an unmanned spacecraft went into orbit around a peanut-shaped asteroid called Eros which is not very far from earth.

Photographs show us that there is no life on the asteroid, but much further out in our galaxy, the Milky Way, there are about 300 billion stars, many with planets.

Beyond the Milky Way there are 300 billion other galaxies with countless stars and planets.

It is probable, therefore, that there is a lot of life out there, and much of it much more advanced than we are.

Bearing in mind that the first television programmes from earth are now 50 light years out into space way beyond the nearest stars, I invite you to imagine with me what life out there in the stars thinks of us as they look at us.

They see a beautiful planet, teeming with life, but they see its atmosphere being polluted and warming up.

They see forests being cut down and deserts spreading.

Of the living creatures, they can see many animals that are treated cruelly, rare ones becoming extinct for ever.

How do they see the currently dominant species - that is us?

Well, they see the planet's resources being unevenly spread.

They see land being fought over, medicine for disease but not in the parts of the world where it is most wanted, books for schools - but not at all in the least-developed areas of our world, 50% of the world's population never making a telephone call in their whole life.

What do they see about the relationships between human beings?

They see us killing each other.

They see us restricting each other's liberties.

They see a never-ending series of local wars.

They see some of our children drafted into the army as soldiers, or treated as prostitutes or slaves.

They see unequal treatment of men and women, of people of different ages, of minorities, of people of different coloured skins, of races, of beliefs, of immigrants, even neighbours.

The UN Convention on Human Rights 50 years ago was an attempt to correct this.

We should salute it - and I think we do.

Only in Europe are human rights enforceable in law.

Here in the European Parliament some of the Members do not want the Charter of Rights, which is being discussed at the moment, to become enforceable in law.

Human rights should be enforceable in law in every country of the world.

That is the goal which we have to work towards.

Much, as Commissioner Patten said, remains to be done.

Finally, if you asked me: What if there is no life out there among the stars, what if we are alone? - which is an equally awe-inspiring thought - I would say: Do not you think we have a responsibility too to make our children behave properly, before letting them go out to populate other planets?

Mr President, human rights are universal, indivisible, interrelated and interwoven.

This well-known phrase, which is taken from the conclusions of the UN World Conference on human rights of 1993, is known off by heart by many.

That is positive. But what about the human rights policy within the EU itself?

Does it reflect this vision of coherence?

In fact, does the European Union have a human rights policy?

This question does not challenge the efforts made by the Member States who wish to bring their viewpoints on foreign policy into line and to display a united front against violations of human rights elsewhere, for example in China.

No, Mr President, I am talking about the lack of human rights policy within the European Union itself.

A new government has come into power in Austria, comprising a political party which has sent out a message of racism and intolerance vis-à-vis minorities.

Human rights, which the EU embraces, are thus under threat, but the reactions to these events have brought to light the fact that there is no coherent framework in which an appropriate reaction can be formulated.

The widely quoted Article 7 of the Treaty, which provides for the repeal of membership rights from a Member State where serious and continuous violations against human rights have been established, is, of course, only a kill or cure remedy, an ultimum remedium, which, in the case of Austria, can only be quoted in the absence of anything more effective, and by way of warning.

There is, therefore a need for a fully-fledged human rights policy for and by the European Union, a policy which promotes and enforces human rights within the EU itself.

Such policy should comprise various components.

Firstly: a regulatory framework is needed, which spells out very clearly the rights which the EU intends to secure for its citizens.

A start is now being made on the drafting of such a charter, but we can no longer put off the question of legal status and the strategic significance of this document or pass it on to learned professional jurists.

This is a political question which, in the short term, requires an answer from the IGC and this Parliament.

Secondly: a range of instruments has to be developed which allow for a flexible response and which do not force us into a situation where we need to choose between a kill or cure remedy or a complete stab in the dark.

The following spring to mind in this respect: the systematic collation of documentation and information, professional forms of observation, the development of information campaigns, the use of cash to support democratic forces in the country concerned, a more creative deployment of the resources which are available through multilateral diplomacy, such as organised dialogue and fact finding missions and such like.

Thirdly: it will need to be made clear for each of the EU institutions where the responsibility for human rights policy lies within the European Union and what the tasks and competences are that this entails.

The Commission and the Council will each have to decide for themselves what these might be.

This Parliament is excluded from this, for our Rules of Procedure stipulate that the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs carries this responsibility.

But I am somewhat surprised that the resolution which should bring this debate on human rights to a conclusion has been prepared in the foreign sector of this Parliament and that the aforementioned Committee, of which I form part, has not been involved in this.

Mr President, this Parliament is fragmented and divided.

For the sake of our credibility, we will have to speak with one voice when it comes to human rights and not act as if human rights within the EU are different from human rights elsewhere in the world.

I think that this will benefit our credibility in the UN Human Rights Committee.

Mr President, what will it take to make the debate on human rights something other than what it is today: an ideological instrument which helps to enslave peoples rather than free individuals?

We must start by going beyond man, who is not the master of the universe, to the source of all genuine rights and civilised values, without which the eternal claim to rights always ends in tyranny and bloodshed.

We need, in the ancient and mediaeval tradition of Europe, to go back to the natural order of the universe, i.e. to the Creation, and beyond that still further, to the Creator' s intention.

Then we shall see that the rights of the child are only respected within a proper family, the rights of workers are only respected in the intermediary bodies which we have recently destroyed and that citizens' rights are only respected within sovereign states.

Secondly, the doctrine of human rights must no longer be exploited, as it is today, as an instrument of ideological warfare in the hands of a cast which claims the right to decree unilaterally who is to be the arbiter of human rights and who is to be deprived of those rights, thereby denying the legitimacy and, if need be, the freedom of those whom the party line has deemed politically incorrect.

'No freedom for the enemies of freedom' was what the advocates of the revolutionary Terror were saying two centuries ago, the advocates of the revolution which proved, alas, to be the mother of all modern totalitarian regimes.

No human rights for the enemies of human rights is what the acolytes of the new world order are saying today, the new world order which reigns almost unchallenged in financial circles, in international institutions, in the media and cultural networks, and in educational institutions, to mention but a few.

What is left, for example, of the right of Austrians to choose their own destiny, if that choice is dictated on their behalf by those who decide what should or should not be done and if their duly and legally elected leaders are received in an insulting manner, as they were recently by you in Portugal, Mr President of the Council.

I do not know if he is still present and can hear me.

What is left of the human rights of those who sympathise with the Vlaamsblok, one of the most important parties in the Flemish region, if tomorrow the Belgian Parliament adopts the implausible, indecent and ignominious bill tabled by its main political rivals, the Volksunie, which seeks quite simply to abolish the party?

What is left of the right to engage in a critical study of history when authors and publishers are persecuted, as the young historian Jean Plantin was just yesterday before the Court of Appeal, in my home town of Lyon - he was the subject of an absurd, arrogant and offensive closing speech by the public prosecutor Jean-Olivier Viout, the smug expression of straitjacketed thinking and intellectual conformism?

It is a strange concept of human rights when peaceful patriotism is fraudulently equated with aggressive nationalism, when legitimate protests against immigration policies are equated with I do not know what form of xenophobia and the vital defence of identities is equated with racism.

What of the human rights of the millions of French people who voted for the National Front and who are deprived of any political representation and vilified daily, as they were on Monday on the television channels of the state to which they are required to pay taxes, when the simple expression of justifiably exasperated views by one of our colleagues, Mr Le Pen, is used as a pretext for iniquitous condemnation, in violation of the law and in violation of all notions of justice, fairness and morals, and when attempts are made, in violation of the clearest legislation, to deprive this representative of millions of our fellow citizens of the mandate which he has been given by their vote, not received as a favour from the government.

In a word, I shall believe your talk about human rights in Europe, fellow Members, when you acknowledge that your political opponents have the same rights as you allow yourselves.

I shall believe your talk about human rights in China when you name the real cause of the problem, i.e. Communism.

Listen to the resounding voice of Solzhenitsyn in his letter to the Americans, in which he says that the main cause of the weakness of Western society is excessive pandering to legal individualism, an individualism which, far from allowing people to flourish, paves the way for future dictatorship, in fact the worst kind of dictatorship, because those whom it enslaves are not even aware of their terrible servitude.

Mr President, the principle of universal human rights is undoubtedly one of the most important political legacies of the 20th century.

The holocaust, fifty years ago, led to the need to lay down a number of fundamental rights and freedoms.

Since the end of the cold war, compliance with human rights has also become a condition for international cooperation.

Leaders violating these principles now face international criticism, sanctions and are even brought to trial, such as ex-dictators like Mr Pinochet have experienced.

These developments are encouraging but do not detract from the fact that the situation of human rights in the world remains very disquieting.

Especially in situations of war, civilians are given less consideration all the time.

Never before in history has humanitarian right been so well developed.

Never before have so many international treaties been ratified by so many countries.

Yet the most basic rules of conduct are being flouted on a massive scale and there are more civilian victims than there were a century ago.

Children are conscripted by force and deployed in battle.

Excesses are no longer the exception, they have unfortunately become the rule.

This applies today to no fewer than thirty conflicts worldwide.

Too late, too selective and too fragmented: this is how one could describe the human rights policy of the international community.

First of all, the policy comes too late.

Both in Rwanda and Kosovo, the UN, despite the many warnings, appeared to be overtaken by events and stood by as a helpless observer of the massacres, as President Havel pointed out this afternoon.

Fifty years later, we are still unable to prevent genocide.

We should therefore direct more attention to monitoring and conflict prevention as a matter of urgency.

Control of the arms trade and improved media control are essential in this.

The human rights policy is also too selective.

The months of NATO bombardments of Kosovo and the mediation attempts in the Middle East are in stark contrast to international apathy with regard to the conflicts in Africa.

I cannot shake off the impression that, when it comes to human rights, despite all the rhetoric, Africa does not feature on top of the agenda of the Portuguese Presidency.

This is something which I very much regret.

The impression that Africans get, namely that they are inferior world citizens, is not unfounded.

I would like to warn against a blurring of standards in the assessment of human rights situations in Africa, where violations are viewed as a necessary evil.

But above all, the human rights policy is too fragmented.

We are unable to draft a common strategy within the international communities or Europe.

The international community is sending conflicting messages to this country.

Britain has re-opened its embassy in Khartoum.

Canada has invited the Sudanese for peace talks.

Europe puts the rebels in the South under pressure to negotiate and at the same time, Americans isolate the regime and support the rebels at military level.

There is a need for more coordination, more exchange of information and a more coherent approach whereby any raised bids are avoided.

Only then can we follow in the footsteps of the founders of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.

Mr President, I would like to start with the fact that if words could solve the problems we could all pack up and go home.

But unfortunately, as we speak today in the safety of this Chamber, human rights abuses are occurring throughout the free world.

Sometimes the more we speak, the less we hear - motions: words; conventions: words; treaties: words - if we are not careful, words themselves become a substitute for real action.

Words framed in inclusive and liberating documents become treaties and conventions which are often paraded as a testimony to a country's respect for and adherence to human rights.

Yet words spoken, written or signed are not in themselves enough.

Look at the signatories to the conventions on human rights and minorities and then compare the treatment received by such minorities, groups and individuals - the list is shameful and shaming.

Can anyone argue with any persuasiveness that women are treated equally and fairly, that children have human rights or that people are not discriminated against because of their religion, belief, gender, disability, age, sexual orientation, opinion, political affiliation etc?

The defamation of minorities in newspapers and other media fuels discrimination.

Even within the EU citizens still suffer human rights violations and a breach of our conventions.

Every day in the press misinformation and misrepresentation are used to deny some minorities equality before the law and to denigrate ethnic minorities.

Quite frankly a hierarchy of oppression has been created.

And so long as people do not have equality before the law, this inequality will lead to discrimination and human rights will be eroded.

In our enlargement process in the EU we have rightly placed the emphasis on human rights and the protection of minorities.

We must not waiver in that commitment. But we must also hold up the mirror to ourselves and recognise our own inadequacies.

Yes, conventions have been signed, but action is needed.

I would recommend to you ongoing audits of human rights practices, eternal vigilance, not just outside our borders but within.

That is why I would welcome an annual Member State report from each individual state which would have to record any charges against it and the action taken.

Because what happens in each Member State happens to every single one of us.

What happens in another part of the world affects us.

Pinochet in Chile is as relevant as Haider in Austria.

Human rights and civil liberties are inextricably linked.

Human rights do not exist in isolation, they are connected to our development policies, our economic policies, our home affairs policies, indeed they are at the very heart of our democratic functions.

I would repeat what Mr Patten said: we must engage, we must inform, educate and thereby effect real and lasting change.

Mr President, "Europe stands for ideals, values and principles.

We must emphasise Europe' s spiritual history.

Together, we must re-establish the values which unite Europe.

Spiritual values have been disseminated from Europe throughout the globe.

We must live with our consciences."

These were the words spoken three hours ago in this Chamber by the President of the Czech Republic, Vaclav Havel.

In an extraordinarily edifying speech, characterised by wisdom, historical knowledge, an understanding of the human heart and insight into Europe' s spiritual and Christian heritage, he pointed to sources of inspiration for our work on human justice and human dignity.

We should be grateful that there are Heads of State like Vaclav Havel in our Europe.

I wish to discuss two matters.

Vaclav Havel stated that, in Eastern Europe, the Communist regimes methodically destroyed civil society: national movements, churches and the independent trade unions.

The same is happening in China in connection with the Falun Gong movement and with the Catholic and Protestant churches.

It is happening with Buddhism in Tibet.

We must never forget to defend civil society.

I also want to mention the death penalty.

Like my own country, Sweden, the EU bases its view of human beings upon the equal, unique and inviolable value of every human.

On the basis of this principle, human beings should always have the chance to redeem themselves.

Try telling that to the governments of the United States, Russia and China.

Mr President, President-in-Office, Commissioner, I believe the approach of EU Member States at Geneva should be to prioritise the situations in Kosovo, Mexico, Saudi Arabia, Sierra Leone and China.

In relation to China, we should not be dissuaded from raising the issue simply because discussions on it may be blocked.

However, it is imperative that the EU speaks and acts as one, and threats of trade sanctions should strengthen rather than weaken our resolve.

However, if full expression is to be given to the decisions which may eventually be taken at Geneva, then the office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights must be provided with the necessary resources.

The financial resources of the United Nations are spread very thinly and because of this many crucial programmes are dependent on voluntary contributions to keep them afloat.

Resources are also needed for promoting practical cooperation and human rights, strategic planning, the establishment of priorities and strengthening communications between the donor community and member states of the United Nations.

To this end the High Commissioner recently launched an annual appeal for USD 53 million to enable her office to carry out these tasks.

The European Union and its Member States should take the lead in providing a significant portion of these funds.

In so doing, we would not only embarrass the United States into shouldering its responsibilities in relation to UN funding, but we would also demonstrate that our commitment to defending human rights is more than simply empty rhetoric.

Mr President, this debate is mainly concerned with the preparations for the forthcoming annual UN Human Rights Convention and the Commission' s and Council' s efforts in this respect.

I would first of all like to say that I am very pleased with the contributions made by Mr Patten and the Minister, and I welcome the fact that both China and Cuba are on the agenda.

Cuba is the last stronghold of dictatorship in South America and we must be mindful of this, with all due sympathy to Cuba.

It is a dictatorship and hence not a democracy.

I would, during my two minutes, like to draw attention to two countries which are close to my heart.

We are naturally delighted that Indonesia is under new rule and that Mr Wahid and Mrs Sukarnoputri are the new President and Vice-President.

We are also pleased that the situation in Timor is slowly moving in the right direction.

But I can report that in the Moluccas, an area just north of Timor, the violence is still not under control.

This has claimed thousands of lives over the past two years.

Tens of thousands of people are on the run.

I know that tomorrow, or the day after tomorrow, an important programme will be shown on Dutch television, in which an appeal will be made for observers. This is with the sole purpose of monitoring what exactly is going on, so that at least a record can be made, not least for the future, for human rights committees, of what has been happening.

My urgent request, which has been echoed many times in resolutions, is the following: could you not confer so that observers can be sent to the Moluccas?

Surely thousands of people killed, thousands wounded and tens of thousands on the run is enough.

My second country - I will be brief as Mr Patten knows this country very well - is Burma.

Surely we cannot just keep silent about Burma.

I have the feeling that that country is gradually being relegated to oblivion.

For ten years now, the elected President of that country has been under house arrest.

And for ten years now, its parliament has been out of action.

Numerous MPs have been killed or have fled the country and only a few are left in Burma.

There are hundreds of thousands of refugees in Thailand and India from Burma and yet it seems that that country is no longer given any attention.

In my opinion, Burma should be put back on the agenda, too, certainly in the wake of Indonesia' s U-turn.

Surely we cannot tolerate the fact that Mrs Aung San Sui Kyi feels completely left in the lurch, even by Europe.

My request is, in fact, to put this country back on the top of the agenda.

Mr President, Mr President-in-Office, Commissioner, economic clout cannot be the only factor that determines the European Union' s status in the world.

One of the EU' s distinguishing features is our systematic approach to human rights, as exercised both within the Union and by our partners.

The European Parliament has been at the forefront of the battle to promote and defend human rights, and it has succeeded in overcoming the limits imposed by self-interest and "national interests" , which are sometimes reflected in the positions adopted by the Member States and even by other European Union institutions.

We can therefore safely say, for example, that the European Parliament has never allowed the situation in East Timor to be forgotten, which could have been the greatest obstacle to finding an equitable solution for its people, who always opposed occupation by Indonesia.

By the same token we have recently opposed arms sales to Indonesia, a stance that the Council unfortunately did not take into account.

But it is not just a question of preventing or putting a stop to sickening instances of aggression perpetrated by individuals or institutions against those in a weaker position.

It is vital that when violations are committed, the perpetrators should not be able to act with impunity, whoever or wherever they may be - in Indonesia or Angola, in Cuba, China or Burma, whether the perpetrators are civilians or soldiers, humble foot-soldier or general or even a minister.

Justice needs to be done in Indonesia.

Justice needs to be done in East Timor.

President Wahid needs our support to cope with the difficult situation he is faced with.

The specific reference in this resolution to East Timor, on the initiative of the PPE Group, is a timely one.

Someone must be held to account for the events that took place there, some of which I saw with my own eyes as a representative of this House; they cannot go unpunished.

It is impossible to talk about East Timor without mentioning the tens of thousands of Timorese refugees living on Indonesian soil in inhumane conditions, under the control of Indonesian soldiers and militias, and being used as bargaining chips.

This is an intolerable situation which must cease as a matter of urgency.

(PT) Mr President, I would like to make a few very brief comments on behalf of the Council presidency, and first to remind you that the work done by the presidency is above all about coordination and about seeking common positions on initiatives that the fifteen Member States are to approve in the Council. Our experience of previous sessions of the Human Rights Commission suggests - precisely by virtue of this coordinating role played by successive presidencies - that the European Union is very much able to uphold its status as a body with its own policy within the Commission, and it is important to maintain this.

I would also like to say that the European Parliament' s participation in the preparatory work is important in establishing coherent European Union positions on various different issues, and that the presidency therefore naturally welcomes all the various suggestions and in particular all the contributions made through the resolutions which have been presented.

I would also like to stress, as many Members have highlighted, that human rights policy is at the heart of Europe' s identity and that respect for human rights should be seen as a fundamental principle for international cooperation by the European Union.

Hence the need for the most coherent European human rights policy possible, which of course means that we need to adopt clear and unambiguous positions where we consider a state of affairs to be unacceptable, and I have in mind, in particular, the references that many Members have made to China.

But we have also duly noted the concerns expressed by many other Members about other countries, notably Indonesia, East Timor, the Moluccas and Burma.

I could not conclude without mentioning Mr Van Hecke' s speech in particular, in which he referred to the human rights situation in Africa and to the role and priorities of the Portuguese Presidency, and questioned the sincerity of the priority we are giving to relations with the European Union. I would simply like to say that the Portuguese Presidency has, in these two short months, organised the first Development Council, admittedly an informal one, whose agenda was rightly dominated by EU-Africa relations.

Indeed it was this subject which led the development ministers of the fifteen Member States to meet in Lisbon for discussions specifically on the new era these relations have entered. Furthermore, I cannot stress enough the significance of our having concluded important negotiations on the new convention to succeed the Lomé Convention, and the fact that, following extremely complex and difficult negotiations, we have succeeded in organising - or making preparations for the organisation of - the first EU-Africa Summit.

For all these reasons I thought it essential to reply directly to Mr Van Hecke' s question on this issue.

Mr President, this has been a very useful debate.

One or two speeches have referred to specific issues which we are well advised to think about very carefully.

For example, Mrs Maij-Weggen referred to both Indonesia and Burma and made some important points about both those countries and the human rights situation there.

What I would like to focus on very briefly are one or two themes which ran through our debate.

One of the very first speakers, Mr Wuori, spoke of the remarks made earlier today by Mr Havel.

It was a remarkable speech and I hope that Mr Gollnisch, who is no longer able to be with us, was able to hear that speech as well.

I also hope that, if there is any life in outer space, as has been speculated by Mr Newton Dunn, it was tuned in to Mr Havel' s speech as well.

Mr Havel reminded us that the Union is not just about markets, about GDP growth, it is a Union of values that is reflected in the Treaties and is reflected in our obligations in the whole area of external assistance, reflected quite specifically in what we are charged to do.

How do we implement what the Treaties say in all those words about development assistance programmes?

One or two honourable Members, Mr Ferber and Mr Cushnahan, spoke about the gap between rhetoric and reality.

Mr Cashman said, which is right in a sense, that words are no substitute for real action.

Of course, words can make a bit of a difference, a point that was made by Mrs Malmström.

She said that she had received a letter from the Chinese Ambassador, a very amiable and highly intelligent representative and servant of his country, to tell her that she was wrong and the European Parliament was wrong in its attitude on human rights in China.

I think after her speech she will receive a cascade of letters from the Chinese authorities.

She will be able to fill a filing cabinet with letters about what is claimed to be the real situation in China.

I think she was reflecting the views of many non-governmental organisations, many people who admire Chinese civilisation but are concerned about what is happening in China today.

Of course it is entirely right that we have to look at action, and the very first speech by Mr Salafranca mentioned two issues apart from Geneva which represent actions, one of which is of course made possible by the generosity of the European Parliament on behalf of the European taxpayer - that is the budget that we are able to spend on human rights activities - about EUR 100 million that is spent through programmes, for which I am responsible, mainly going to non-governmental organisations to promote human rights and to promote democratisation.

We will want to share with Parliament, as vicars say, our views on how that spending programme to support human rights can be best focused and best targeted in the years ahead.

There is also the question which was referred to by Mr Salafranca, who I am sorry is unable to be with us at the end of this brief but useful debate.

There is also the question of our overall policy on human rights and the relationship between human rights and foreign policy.

I want to remind Parliament that the Commission will be publishing, before the middle of the year, a comprehensive, intellectual case for placing human rights at the heart of the development of the common foreign and security policy.

It is immensely important, and if I had not thought that already, having listened to the remarkable speech by Mr Havel earlier in the day I would have certainly come to that conclusion.

It has been a useful debate.

I hope we can have further debates like this.

I hope we can have, in particular, debates about some of the ways in which we translate these good intentions into practice on the ground where it matters, where people are still being tortured, where people are still being raped and are still being denied the sort of civil rights that this House takes for granted, as I do.

I have received 7 motions for resolution, pursuant to Rule 37(2), to close the present statement.

The vote will take place on Thursday.

The next item is the joint debate on:

the Council statement on the position of the European Union on developments concerning Cyprus;

the report (A4-0029/2000) by Mr Brok, on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy, on the proposal for a Council regulation on the implementation of operations in the framework of the pre-accession strategy for Cyprus and Malta [COM(1999)0535 - C5-0308/1999 - 1999/0199(CNS)].

Mr Seixas da Costa has the floor on behalf of the Council.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, on behalf of the Presidency of the Council of the European Union, I would like to present to you certain information about the re-opening of the intra-Cyprus negotiations and recent developments in this area.

I think it will be obvious to everyone that the events in Helsinki at the end of last year and the new era in relations between the European Union and Turkey have created a new backdrop, at Community level, which we cannot ignore when it comes to relations between the two Cypriot communities.

At the beginning of December 1999, the first round of negotiations were held in New York, after an interruption of several years in negotiations between the Cypriot communities in the north and south of the island.

These negotiations took the form of indirect discussions mediated by the UN special representative, Álvaro de Soto.

A further round was held in January this year, starting on 31 January, and a third round is scheduled to start on 23 May in New York. There is a possibility, which has not yet been absolutely confirmed, that continuous and direct discussions may take place, with work continuing until September this year.

These discussions essentially cover four areas: security, the structure of government, territorial adjustments and issues relating to refugees and compensation, as a result of the situation following the partition of the island.

However, agreement has also been reached on the possibility of including other issues, and the representative of the northern part of the island, Rauf Denktash, has suggested three new topics: sovereignty, confidence-building measures and the issue of lifting the embargo on products from the north of the island.

The discussions held so far have essentially resulted in two developments. The first is the possibility of opening up a direct information channel between the European Union and the north of the island, without this necessarily signifying recognition of this part of the island as a legal personality at international level, but as a means of facilitating adoption of the acquis communautaire with a view to eventual accession of the whole island, if a solution can, in the meantime, be found to the broader problem of the partition of the island.

The second development which we regard as important is the statement made by the Secretary-General of the United Nations at the end of the first day' s discussions to the effect that an overall settlement of the situation would involve recognition of the specific situation of the north of the island.

This is the position of the Secretary-General of the United Nations and it will therefore have to form part of our future analysis.

Certain expectations exist about the third round of negotiations, in view of the proposed scenarios being prepared with the involvement of representatives of the United States and the United Kingdom, in particular in the areas of security and the constitutional structure, which it is envisaged will be presented at this round through the good offices of the representative of the Secretary-General of the United Nations. This will take place after the election in the north of the island scheduled for 18 April.

Furthermore, the Portuguese Presidency of the European Union has decided, following the example of previous presidencies, to appoint a representative to establish contacts with the various parties involved in this issue. This representative has already contacted all these parties and has, in close cooperation with the representative of the Secretary-General of the United Nations, been monitoring and assisting with the work of the various rounds.

In particular, we intend that the European Union should maintain a constant profile on this issue, and of course all the more so since Cyprus is a candidate for membership of the European Union with negotiations at a fairly advanced stage. This naturally raises certain expectations and means that the role of the European Union is of some relevance in this context.

The approach that we have been following in these discussions, and our participation in them, essentially turns on taking advantage of a certain desire to alleviate the tensions that exist, based on a conviction - which appears to be widely shared - that it is necessary to continue to negotiate, and that continuing negotiations and maintaining their impetus also give rise to hopes that a definitive solution can be found.

There is also another important aspect which I referred to at the beginning of my statement, and this relates to Turkey' s role in helping the north of the island to prepare for accession.

We believe that it is not only necessary to read the conclusions of the Helsinki European Council with some care and attention, but that we should also take advantage of the willingness of the Turkish authorities to help to resolve this situation.

I was able to talk to Prime Minister Bülent Ecevit about this issue when I visited Ankara myself, and although we are aware of the difficulties and sensitivity associated with Turkey' s particular approach to this question, I believe that there is a window of opportunity that we must not miss.

This window of opportunity involves combining various factors, one of which - and let us be frank about this - is the nature of the relationship between Turkey and the European Union.

This is key as regards the future of this issue.

On the other hand, we think it is important - and this is also linked with the way in which the European Union relates to the heart of this matter - that an exchange of information between the Commission and the Cypriots in the north of the island should be encouraged. This would not, let me make this quite clear, imply any kind of formal recognition.

Nevertheless, we believe, and I think this is also how the Commission sees things, that the whole process of approximation with the acquis communautaire with a view to overall integration of the island in the European Union through accession at some point in the future implies involving the communities in the north of the island as soon as possible. It may also give the European Union access to data enabling it to justify accession, as part of its efforts to assess accession conditions.

Furthermore, this means that we in the Council - and I think that Parliament will join us in this - should encourage the Commission' s involvement in this undertaking.

It is essential for us to send the Commission a message of confidence about its role in this area.

Lastly, I believe - and this is also the presidency' s intention - that we should continue to cooperate actively with the United Nations, given the skilful, intelligent and capable way in which the Secretary-General, and the UN organisation in general, have conducted these discussions, and in particular the way they have endeavoured to help to harmonise the two parties' positions.

As I said at the beginning, the conclusions of the Helsinki European Council last December have had a visible impact on the way the positions of the various parties to this process have developed.

The Nicosia Government has expressed its satisfaction with the Helsinki conclusions, which open up the way to accession to the European Union without solving the partition of the island beforehand.

Nevertheless, I have to say that the same authorities have expressed their concern about the pressure they may come under to resolve the issues raised by partition, which will evidently imply some concessions.

This is related to developments in the sphere of displaced people and the possibility of a new arrangement regarding displaced people should a different solution be found for the island.

On the other hand, the Turkish Cypriots fear - and there is no point in trying to conceal this - that Turkey' s application for membership of the European Union may lead to greater flexibility in Ankara' s position on this.

I believe that, despite the fears that may be felt by the two communities on the island, these points, which could be viewed in a negative light by the authorities on both sides, may in the end justify hopes of an ultimate solution.

It is very clear that this solution will involve one of the most important aspects of relations in this area at present, which is the extremely positive trend in relations between Athens and Ankara and the very important part played in these relations by the Greek Foreign Minister, Giorgios Papandreou, and the Turkish Foreign Minister, Ismail Cem.

We believe that this has created the framework for a positive outcome.

As far as we, the Council presidency, are concerned, we will continue to follow these developments very closely, and we will certainly cooperate with the Secretary-General and his personal representative on this matter.

We will make the Community institutions aware of what we are able to do, and what is possible in general, as regards coordination, not just at political level but also as regards what the Commission itself can achieve in terms of its scope for managing the accession process. In particular, we will make known the flexibility that both parties have demonstrated on this issue.

Mr President, we have listened to the statements by the Council and the Commission and I would like to make the following observations.

Mr President-in-Office of the Council, I appreciate the sensitivity with which you are addressing the issue and your effort to establish contact with the Turkish Cypriot side, but perhaps it would be more clear and more correct if the vocabulary you use did not leave one suspecting that you might be attempting some kind of indirect recognition, even though you stressed that this is not the case.

For example, I would not refer to the government of Nicosia.

It is the Cypriot Government, Mr President-in-Office, not the government of Nicosia.

That government has proposed a way in which the Turkish Cypriot side can take part, and I think it would be right for the Council and the Commission to urge the Turkish Cypriot side to take part institutionally in the framework of the negotiations conducted by the Republic of Cyprus.

On the other hand, the way that the issue of the end of the protocols and the pre-accession strategy has been addressed so far creates some doubts for us.

I cannot understand why the two small countries must be treated differently, nor why a clash was necessary between the institutional bodies. Nor can I understand the pressure applied by Parliament to include the funds in Chapter 7 for the pre-accession strategy.

How can the whole of the European Union treat, in this way, two small countries situated on its periphery? Not only are they countries which the European Union needs, but they are also countries which are fully qualified to operate within the Union and are already considered capable of participating in economic and monetary union.

As the Commissioner said, and I agree with him, it is a matter of political decision.

This is a small political decision which would bring major benefits, especially in helping the two communities effectively to constitute one state, to achieve effective rapprochement - because the two communities were once close - and for the Republic of Cyprus, genuinely, to be rid of occupying forces.

Mr President, we are required under the advisory procedure to debate a proposal for a Council regulation on the implementation of operations within the framework of the pre-accession strategy for Cyprus and Malta.

This proposal is similar to the proposal submitted for other candidate countries and, once it is implemented, will replace the financial protocols which have now expired.

Pre-accession instruments are designed to provide technical and financial support for efforts by candidate countries to meet the demands of the Community acquis.

The Commission' s analysis has in fact shown that, although classified as high income countries by the World Bank, Cyprus and Malta have the same difficulties as the CEECs in transposing Community law due to their lack of administrative and judicial capacity.

It was pointed out, during the discussion of Mr Brok' s excellent report in committee, that both countries can also benefit from the MEDA budget line for horizontal projects of regional interest.

I would be grateful if the Commissioner could explicitly confirm that.

As far as Cyprus is concerned, part of the technical and financial aid provided for in the instruments will be used to bring the Greek and Turkish communities closer together and solve the problem of the partition of the island once and for all.

The declarations made on the Cyprus question by the Council and the Commission were therefore most opportune and I should like to thank the President of the Council and Commissioner Verheugen.

Since 4 July 1990, when Cyprus applied to join the EU, the European Parliament has passed numerous resolutions calling for a political solution in accordance with international law and the relevant resolutions of the Security Council of the United Nations.

In April 1999, Parliament again reiterated its position that the accession of Cyprus should benefit the whole island, and help towards a political solution, but that accession should not be dependent upon such a solution.

In other words, accession should not be held hostage to a political solution.

The two processes are separate processes.

This unequivocal position on the part of the European Parliament gave rise to a certain degree of controversy.

We must therefore welcome the fact that the Helsinki European Council put an end to the speculation and stated in its conclusions, and I quote, that "If no settlement has been reached by the completion of accession negotiations, the Council' s decision on accession will be made without the above being a precondition" .

The position is clear and we must now hope that the improved climate surrounding relations between the European Union and Turkey and between Greece and Turkey will bear favourably on the Turkish Cypriot community and that it will withdraw its refusal to send representatives to the accession negotiations.

The presence of these representatives will not prejudge the final political solution in any way whatsoever.

On the contrary, it will allow the interests of all concerned to be highlighted as and when Cyprus joins the European Union and prepares for a turning point in its history.

Mr President, I want to say that I share the other rapporteurs' delight at the fact that better opportunities are now to be glimpsed for making further progress in Cyprus in the light of the improvement in relations between Turkey and the EU and between Turkey and Greece.

However, I also think that we in the EU should be making a constructive contribution.

I also think - as has already been mentioned - that there are certain problems with the financing arrangements, which we must solve.

There is, of course, the question of pre-accession aid, and this belongs in category seven.

Last year, Parliament made an exception by agreeing that this expenditure should be placed in category four, and the two applicant States are not therefore being treated on an equal footing with the applicant States from Central and Eastern Europe, as they, in fact, should be, according to the declarations from the Helsinki Summit.

Resources should therefore be set aside from category seven, where a review of the financial perspectives must be carried out.

This is the crux of the matter.

The main point is that the money for Cyprus' s and Malta' s pre-accession aid should come from category seven and that there should be a review of the financial perspectives for, if the Council does not endorse this view, it is in reality acting in conflict with its own decisions in Helsinki in December.

With regard to the amount which is quoted in the Brok report (EUR 130 million), I also want to say, on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party, that we must negotiate our way towards finding a sum of money.

The most important thing is that a multi-annual programme be guaranteed, and in the correct category, so that it might be possible to begin making plans where Cyprus and Malta are concerned.

Mr President, the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance support the decision adopted by the European Council in Helsinki according to which the resolution of the conflict cannot be a prior condition for the accession of Cyprus to the European Union.

We should continue to exert strong pressure on the Government of Cyprus, but one section of the population cannot blackmail the wish of the majority. Besides, we have strong doubts as to how representative the government is of that part of the island is.

It is clear that the window of opportunity mentioned by the presidency should be exploited to the full.

But we are also convinced that, despite improved relations between the Turkish and Greek populations, it is not enough.

The conflict in Cyprus will only be resolved through improved relations between the two communities with a view to establishing a federation in the - we hope - not too distant future.

In particular, we should be working towards establishing genuine freedom of movement and resolving the problems of demilitarising and disarming the island.

The European Union should be taking a more decisive role that goes further than merely providing financial support, although that is important, by promoting and guaranteeing reconciliation between the two communities through the setting up of fora and confidence-building programmes.

I must say that Alex Langer's presence here in the European Parliament is sadly missed. His efforts to build peace should serve as an example, to all of us, on how peaceful coexistence can be achieved.

Mr President, the reference to dialogue between the two Cypriot communities under the aegis of the UNO reminds us of the fact that, 26 years after the invasion of the island by the Turkish army, nearly 40% of the territory is still occupied by 35 000 soldiers, heavy weaponry is still being used and over 50 000 colonists are still present, in total violation of the resolutions by the Security Council of the United Nations on this matter.

What can the European Union do, without interfering in internal affairs in Cyprus, to promote a fair and viable solution to this drastic problem in a country which has been associated with the European Community for nearly 30 years and which is due to join the Union within the next few years?

I have listened to the somewhat equivocal talk and silences on the part of the Council which, in my view, need clarifying.

I think that we need, first and foremost, to bear the main point of reference for any international community in such cases in mind, i.e. the resolutions of the United Nations.

The Security Council feels that the solution to the Cypriot problem should be sought within the framework of a two-zone, twin-community federation, in other words a single state, as Mr Verheugen mentioned, consisting of two local administrations elected by the two communities.

Cyprus should be one sovereign state, with a single international personality and single citizenship and this state should be demilitarised.

The international community has thus indicated that it rejects any act accomplished by force.

Secondly, the European Union stands to gain, in my view, by minimising the scope for interpretation of the position laid down by the Helsinki European Council.

The solution to the Cypriot problem cannot be a precondition to Cyprus' s accession to the Union, as Mr Poos has reminded us.

If it were, Turkey would have a sort of right of veto over the accession of Cyprus to the European Union, which is, of course, unacceptable.

Thirdly, we must not, in turn, allow the position taken by the Helsinki European Council to temper our efforts to resolve the Cypriot question before Cyprus joins the Union.

From this point of view, the other decision taken at Helsinki, namely to grant Turkey candidate status, gives the Fifteen new responsibilities as well as new possibilities and its dialogue with Ankara can and, in my view, should, include a determination to ensure that Turkey demonstrates a constructive attitude towards dialogue between the two Cypriot communities which respects international law and which will ultimately lead to a united Cyprus and peace in the eastern Mediterranean.

Mr President, there is a general consensus of opinion that financial aid to Cyprus and Malta is important.

The big question, however, is from what budget heading should this aid be financed?

The Council and Commission have suggested deleting the protocols under category 4.

This is in line with the budget order issued by Parliament in December last.

The rapporteur is now making reference to this and proposes classing Cyprus and Malta under category 7.

The Committee on Budgetary Control has even suggested postponing approval of the Brok report until the Council agrees to increase the financial ceilings for category 7.

This is an extremely risky strategy.

In fact, the financial protocols cannot go ahead without a vote in Parliament.

Cyprus and Malta will thus become the victims of a political game between the Council and Parliament regarding the height of the ceilings.

Moreover, what is the real significance of financial ceilings if they are increased for every new action?

I would therefore advocate that the EUR 15 million in category 4 be dropped, in line with the Commission' s proposal.

A multiannual budget of the Commission later on in the year, may give a decisive answer regarding credits for the coming years.

Mr President, all over the world work is being done to resolve long-standing conflicts and bring together communities divided by history and by old tribal enmities and hatreds.

Now is the time to devote our time and energy to aiding Cypriots from both sides of the "green line" in finding a solution to a conflict which has lasted for far too long.

We all know that special care is needed to ensure that Cyprus is brought successfully into the European Union, and the decisions taken at Helsinki give an added dimension to this debate, with the acceptance of Turkey as a candidate country.

I hope that the decisions taken at Helsinki lead to progress on the Cyprus issue.

I hope this signals a new era of hope for Cyprus.

I hope that Turkey begins to play a constructive role in the Cyprus issue.

I am delighted to hear the words of support from the Council and the Commission for the UN and the work it is doing in encouraging proximity talks between the two communities to encourage reconciliation and the rebuilding of trust between the two communities in Cyprus.

I very much welcome the Commission's support for that bizonal, bicommunal, federal Cyprus for which the UN has campaigned for so long and which both the Greek Cypriot side and the Turkish Cypriot side should be working hard to bring about.

I welcome the renewed warmth in relations between the Greek Government and the Turkish Government.

I hope that has an encouraging effect on the Cyprus talks.

I hope that the accession money available to assist Cyprus is used partly to promote that reconciliation and rebuilding of trust and that both sides of the divided communities in Cyprus accept and use that money in the spirit in which it is given.

We all, throughout the European institutions - in Parliament, the Council and the Commission - should be doing our best to aid Cyprus in its quest to reach a peaceful solution which brings together these two communities which have been divided for too many years.

Mr President, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, Commissioner Verheugen, the regulation on accession aid is not exactly an advertisement for coherent work on the part of the Commission.

Rather, the way in which these aid measures have been cobbled together smacks of amateurism to me.

This applies both in terms of the substance and the financial aspect.

In my view, it will hardly enable us to present the accession activities conducted by the Union to the citizens of Cyprus and Malta as evidence of the fact that it is worth their while joining.

As Vaclav Havel rightly said today, the European Union will be judged on its political qualities according to what it can do for the individual.

As far as the citizens are concerned, it is what a regulation can do for them that matters.

We will not exactly win any awards with this regulation as far as that is concerned.

It is makeshift and contains heteronomous paragraphs, which is no way to set a shining example.

The quality of an aid package is assessed according to the following criteria: is it decentralised, is it transparent, is it accessible to the citizens and does it work?

Nonetheless, as far as the divided island of Cyprus is concerned, overall, this pre-accession strategy is bound up with a major political challenge.

In my view, it is the task of the European Union to employ all instruments, including this one, so as to contribute towards resolving the conflict on the island by political means.

I must take this opportunity to say that it is precisely the amendment submitted by the European Parliament that is so important to me in this respect.

Both the Commission and the Council have been making very optimistic speeches here today as well.

I am delighted that we are all heading in the same direction in this respect.

I believe it would truly be preferable to secure a peaceful resolution to the problems in Cyprus before admitting this country to the European Union.

Mr President, I beg your pardon, but the French interpreter made a small error, on the most sensitive word in the debate, during the translation of what Mr Alyssandrakis just said.

I just want to ensure that there is no ambiguity.

Mr Alyssandrakis was translated as saying "the confederate solution would be best" .

Obviously, he said "the federal solution would be best" .

It is a most important point and needs to be clarified, Mr President.

Thank you very much for the clarification Mr Wurtz.

Mr President, Malta and Cyprus are very different from the countries of mainland Europe.

The Maltese in particular have been very good at surviving in hostile geographical and geopolitical environments.

Their success has relied in great part on their enterprise, their dynamism and their flexibility.

Malta has vibrant light and heavy industry, growing financial services, good agriculture, magnificent tourism and an amazing range of employment opportunities, all of this on an island virtually barren of natural resources.

I am certain, therefore, that an island such as Malta, with its population of 340 000 cannot accommodate the rigidities of the economic and legal structures of the mainland which has a population a thousand times greater.

Thus, when I look at this proposed instrument I do not see a measure to bring two peoples into the fold of Mother Europe.

The situation is more akin to a black hole in space, sucking in masses so powerfully that not even light escapes.

We should not be bribing these island peoples to cooperate in their own destruction, giving them money to absorb laws which are as alien to their culture as a black hole is to Mother Earth.

The EU should leave Cyprus and Malta alone.

It seems to me that the only people in Malta that want this are the political class, and I shall be keeping my fingers crossed that once again the Maltese people are the winners.

Mr President, this is one of the few occasions when, from what the speakers have said in this Parliament, from all sides of the House, there is clearly the greatest convergence of views on the Cyprus issue and, of course, on the pre-accession process for Cyprus and Malta.

This means that we are all aware of the political dimension of the Cyprus problem.

At the same time, however, it means that both the Council and the Commission have a very strong mandate, so that the strength of opinion expressed by all the European parties, and all the peoples, can empower their political ability to address the problem.

Helsinki was an historic event, an historic turning-point and an historic new reference point.

If, for any reason, the balance achieved there should be considered by some to be a point of departure for new negotiations anywhere else, if some people destabilise this totality of facts and equilibrium by their attitude, they will be making a tragic mistake.

What is needed from the European Commission, the Council and everyone else, is a quiet determination, a quiet determination to continue the accession negotiations on both Cyprus and Malta without guile, granted that in the last analysis they are the most mature of all the countries seeking accession, so that this determination can act as a signal to anyone whose view may differ from the view we all agree about.

To this end, the Brok report is a good instrument and it is really a bit distressing that, because this is a joint debate, it is politically overshadowed by the political position of the Council and the Commission and we cannot therefore say more about this good report.

In any event, the outcome is in your hands.

The outcome is in our hands to the extent that we are providing you with decisions, to the extent that we are providing you with options.

Now, as regards the Brok report, Cyprus and Malta are the last of the Mediterranean islands, and, unless I am mistaken, the last islands anywhere in Europe which have not acceded to the European Union.

This has a certain semiological value because the Mediterranean and its islands - and I too come from an island - are the area which most of those who come from northern Europe for their summer holidays get to see, as well as the people who live there.

From that standpoint, Aphrodite' s island, as Cyprus is known, and the pirates' island, as we islanders say of Malta with great affection, are two jewels which should be welcomed into the European Union without delay.

They have healthy economies, high-level economic relations, and in the final analysis they constitute a testing ground for the European Union' s political will.

In conclusion, since I do not think I need to say much, given the unanimity that exists here, I just want to make one brief remark to the President-in-Office. I think that there are some peculiarities in his position.

I hope there has been an interpretation error, and that he will clarify the matter in his follow-up speech.

. (PT) Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I have listened to your comments very carefully, and in particular to the rather emotional comments about Cyprus, especially in defence of the present legal situation in Cyprus, which the European Union specifically acknowledges by recognising the relevant resolutions of the United Nations Security Council.

Mr Wurtz, in no way can it be said that the Council is maintaining an ambiguous silence about this issue: the Council assumes total responsibility for its interpretation of the situation in Cyprus.

Moreover, it was this situation and this interpretation which led the Council to take the decision it took in Luxembourg at the end of 1997, when it decided to take the first steps in the accession process for the Republic of Cyprus to join the European Union.

I hope that honourable Members will realise that, regardless of the more or less emotional statements made about issues of this kind, the day-to-day reality of international negotiations normally forces governments to adopt a somewhat more flexible stance - and when I say governments I mean all governments.

In fact we need more emotional statements to remind us that all these issues have a human side.

But we also need to be aware that it is by virtue of rational political stances, and flexibility in negotiations, that we are able to find solutions to the major disputes which have ultimately led to many tragedies in history.

Regardless of who is to blame - and we are not here to apportion blame, the relevant United Nations resolutions in this area are clear enough - I believe that we should take advantage of the opportunities that the new situation is opening up, in more of a rational way and less of an emotional one.

The European Council in Helsinki had the courage to take certain decisions, and I believe that various aspects of these decisions have already recognised the real value of these opportunities which, as I said at the beginning of my first speech, represent a window of opportunity.

We will not achieve concrete results during this stage of negotiations, which is a delicate and sensitive phase, by exploiting tensions.

No, we should continue to make progress by working discreetly to support the special representative of the Secretary-General of the United Nations with his remit.

The European Union' s position on this is crystal clear, and I do not think it is worthwhile second-guessing particular phrases in the Council' s conclusions or in any other statement.

We do not play at political correctness in this House: we are concerned with fairness at international level and with concrete statements on this issue consistently defined by the Council over a period of time, and which the European Commission has also followed carefully, attentively and pragmatically.

So when we talk now about the need to involve the Northern Cyprus community in exchanges of information, particularly with a view to the eventual accession of the Republic of Cyprus to the European Union, we need to be aware that we are trying to find practical formulas that will enable us to overcome the obstacles standing in the way of a political solution.

We are not trying to deceive anyone and we are in no way trying to use practical solutions to create a model implying political recognition.

I believe that, over time, the Council of the European Union has clearly demonstrated that this is not how it sees this issue.

Decisions have been taken by the Council with a great sense of responsibility.

We believe that Helsinki was very clear in this respect.

The authorities of the Republic of Cyprus itself have clearly recognised that our relations with them regarding their accession to the European Union have been positive.

There is no point in second-guessing or trying to second-guess our intentions.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I would like to thank you all very much indeed for this debate, which all in all I have found to be encouraging and supportive, and it has also shown that there is a great deal of support in this House for the policy of the Member States and that of the Commission.

However, I would be more than pleased to elucidate a few points as requested.

I will turn firstly to matters pertaining to headings 4 and 7.

It is quite simple: a special heading, namely, the famous heading 7, was created in Berlin, as part of the large Agenda 2000 package, for the applicant countries of Eastern and Central Europe, which are currently undergoing a process of transformation, and for these countries alone.

Malta, Cyprus and Turkey were not provided for at this stage.

Mrs Schroedter described this as a lack of coherence.

She ought perhaps to take some time to ask the erstwhile President-in-Office of the Council, who is not exactly a stranger to you, how this presumed lack of coherence has come about.

I have had a little to do with this too.

I do not believe this to be the case. The reason for this decision was, rather, that we wanted to have a special instrument for the Eastern and Central European States which, like Malta and Cyprus, are involved in the accession process, but under different conditions.

Nevertheless, I have said that I understand the arguments that people have been putting forward here and the Commission will endeavour to take account of these aspirations, but since this is all about Agenda 2000 and the Financial Perspective, we will not be able to do this without amending this Financial Perspective.

Hitherto this has been out of the question of course.

By way of clarification: if we transfer it across from heading 4 to heading 7 then this will have no effect on the overall balance of the budget.

If we do this, then heading 7 would be increased accordingly but heading 4 would be decreased by the same amount.

The idea that heading 7 could be added to in this way and heading 4 left alone, is not workable.

Parliament is no more able than anyone else to spend money that it has not got, at least not until we have a printing machine installed in the basement that we can use to print euro notes!

As for the peace process in Cyprus and how it is linked with the accession negotiations, I would reiterate that there has always been a direct connection between the two.

The Commission and the Council have long endeavoured to encourage the two communities in Cyprus to undertake joint projects.

So far, as you know, this has proved unsuccessful, and I have been asked if there have been any signs to the contrary.

Mrs Rothe, I would put it this way: I am convinced that there has been a distinct improvement in the framework conditions for reaching agreements of this kind.

I do not have confirmation of this at present, and nor do I expect it, since we have not yet held direct talks. These will take place at a later date.

The framework conditions have changed in that the Helsinki decisions made a whole range of things possible that were not possible hitherto, and, above all, in that the political strategies employed by the parties concerned have changed beyond recognition.

I have always believed that the old line - i.e. not to admit Cyprus under any circumstances until the political conflict has been resolved - has a weak point in that it does not provide the Turkish community on Cyprus with a convincing incentive to properly involve themselves, for, with this strategy, the Turkish community would not need to do anything but sit back and wait.

There would then be no question of Cyprus acceding to the Union.

As matters stand, Turkey has to take seriously the fact that there is a risk of Cyprus being integrated into the European Union, and this would provide opportunities for prosperity and security for the Greek community whilst the Turkish community, whose level of prosperity is already far lower, would fall even further behind.

Therefore, it is my firm belief that, since Helsinki, there has been far greater incentive to link the accession process with the resolution of the conflict.

Indeed that was the idea behind it.

After only a few weeks, Mrs Rothe, it is still too early to deliver a verdict on this, but in any case, I have no grounds for assuming that the new line will fail.

As yet, we have no grounds for saying that we will actually succeed, but one thing I can say quite clearly is that the conditions that need to be in place for us to take a step forwards have improved considerably.

Finally, of course, the Cyprus question has a role in the discussions with Turkey.

I met the Turkish Foreign Minister in Brussels a few weeks ago and naturally I asked if Turkey could take a positive and constructive stance in relation to this issue.

I would just make one point: we cannot be 100% sure - I am not at any rate - that one only has to press a button in Ankara to set the wheels in motion in Cyprus.

It is very far from being that simple, rather we are going to have to make concentrated efforts, during talks with both communities, to encourage them to reach an understanding.

That is what we intend to do: the necessary measures and programmes are in place.

I must make it clear to you that we need this financial regulation, the one that has yet to be decided on here, before we can even get started.

The financial regulation is the legal framework we need to tackle the priorities established under the terms of the accession partnerships with Malta and Cyprus.

I cannot start anything while there is no regulation in place, because I lack the legal basis for doing so.

If the lamented lack of coherence should happen to have something to do with this point, then I am bound to say that this regulation is a legal framework and nothing more than that.

This legal framework is fleshed out in the priorities set by the accession partnerships that were adopted by the Commission and the Council last year and are now being implemented in the corresponding programmes and project management.

On the contrary, I would say that, although many areas of European policy leave something to be desired in terms of coherence, in this instance I would claim, on behalf of the Commission and the Council, that we have developed a very clear, transparent and coherent policy.

(DE) Mr President, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, now that the Commissioner has explained to us, in an extremely coherent manner, that the erstwhile President-in-Office of the Council and his Minister of State for Europe bore responsibility for the lack of coherence, perhaps you could help the Commissioner and ourselves, so as to enable us to take this decision.

It would be helpful if you could give a positive answer to my questions on the Financial Perspective up until 2004 and on heading B7, or if you could at least confirm that the Portuguese Council Presidency intends to make efforts of this kind to make good the aforementioned lack of coherence, which is something the Commissioner will also seek to achieve on the part of the Commission.

. (PT) Mr President, I am sure that the issue raised by my friend Elmar Brok will be considered by the Council.

I feel that the criticism made of the previous presidency is not appropriate.

I believe that the work done by the previous presidency in defining the financial outlook was excellent, regardless of who was involved in that work.

In any case, the question that this raises is an important one and the Council will not fail to support the proposals that the Commission has presented in this respect.

Mr President-in-Office of the Council, as I understood it, Mr Brok was actually referring to an earlier presidency still.

Mr President, I asked Commissioner Verheugen a specific question about the financing instrument MEDA but he has not provided an answer.

I would urge him to do so for his answer will determine the way in which we decide to vote on the various proposed amendments we have before us.

There was a lack of clarity at precisely the point at which you put the question to me.

This is how matters stand with regard to MEDA: Malta and Cyprus can take part in the national programmes, but not in the country-specific ones, because the incomes are too high.

Thank you very much Commissioner Verheugen.

The vote will take place on Thursday.

The next item is Question Time (B5-0009/2000).

We will examine questions to the Council.

Subject: Controlling access to Community waters for oil tankers In connection with the accident involving the oil tanker ERIKA off the French coast, which produced a large oil slick, what steps does the Council intend to take to control access to Community waters for tankers flying flags of convenience which do not meet Community safety standards?

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, on 24 January the Council considered the consequences of the accident the previous month involving the oil tanker Erika.

At that time, bearing in mind the strength of public feeling about the disastrous consequences of this accident, the Council made known its concerns about the safety of oil tankers and the environmental protection that should go hand in hand with it.

The Council was fully aware of issues of this kind and of the need to take additional measures in this field.

It emphasised the importance of the Council taking new measures within a Community framework and in the context of its own work with international organisations.

As you know, as currently framed, Community legislation requires port authorities to carry out inspections on board all foreign vessels, including those flying flags of convenience, and to detain them if they do not comply with international standards.

There is a directive dating from 1995 on this subject.

With regard to the future, the Council noted that work within the Commission should shortly lead to the publication of a communication on the safety of oil tankers and of new proposals to strengthen controls, together with provisions on the qualifications of inspecting agencies.

There are also plans for a requirement to strengthen the actual structure of oil tankers visiting Community ports.

These dossiers will be progressed by the Transport Council and I can therefore assure you, on behalf of the Council, that we will not fail to give the highest priority to the proposals, which there is every indication the Commission is due to present in this area, which we regard as being a vital part of environmental protection.

This House will of course also be invited to give its views on these proposals, given that these are matters subject to the codecision procedure.

I am pleased that the Council is considering this question.

The President of the Council comes from a country, Portugal, which is directly at risk from just this type of situation.

If we stretched our imaginations, we could envisage a situation where, between now and next summer, an oil tanker may run aground under similar circumstances off the Algarve, wreck the Portuguese summer tourist industry, with a bit of luck the sea currents would carry the pollution towards the island of Madeira - because they move in that direction - and furthermore, wreck tourism in the Canary Islands as well.

Does the President of the Council not think that we should stop talking and implement tough measures in this area, bearing in mind that we now have the means to control this type of oil tanker on the high seas?

Of course, the story of the Erika seems comical.

A French-owned ship, under a Maltese flag of convenience, an Indian crew, a sea-worthiness certificate issued by Italy, in Sicily, with the last inspection carried out in Bulgaria, I think.

The ship was sinking and the captain realised that it was sinking and that it was not even going to make it to the next port.

This kind of situation should not be allowed.

The damage to your country, Mr President, and to mine, Spain, could be horrendous.

Mr Medina Ortega, I naturally share your concerns and I can assure you that a coastal country like my own, the country currently holding the presidency, is naturally very concerned about this issue, all the more so as it does not have any oil tankers of its own.

However, we have to work within the existing legislative framework.

That legislative framework is the 1995 directive, which has a set of regulations with a degree of flexibility which should perhaps be implemented more rigorously.

In this area we have to work with the world as it is, and that means reacting in accordance with the facts of the situation.

In view of the seriousness of such situations, we can congratulate ourselves on the fact that the authorities have at least reacted and undertaken to examine the legislative provisions already existing in this field.

The Commission' s intentions in this area are positive, as it intends to reinforce the application of the 1995 directive.

The Council is minded to give priority to this area, within the Transport Council, and we intend to follow this up as quickly as possible.

We also hope that the European Parliament will be able to examine this issue with equal promptness when it comes before this House under the codecision procedure.

Mr President, in Kotka, in Finland, there is currently a vessel carrying chemicals, which is sailing under a flag of convenience.

The vessel is anchored outside the port, as the condition it is in is a safety hazard for the port and the surrounding areas, and because it cannot be inspected properly, as there is no one who will pay.

Would it be possible for the EU to create a standardised inspection system that would also guarantee payment, out of Community funds, for the inspection of ships that fly a flag of convenience and cannot themselves pay the cost?

- (PT) Mrs Korhola, as you will understand, I do not at the moment have the information I need to give you a concrete reply.

The information that I have is to do with the 1995 directive, which does not include any provisions of that kind.

However, the Council will certainly let you have a concrete reply on the options available for acting in the case you have mentioned.

Subject: High infant mortality levels in Kosovo According to the most recent UN information forwarded to the World Health Organisation, Kosovo has the highest rate of infant mortality in Europe. About 50% of premature babies do not survive and the war has resulted in a massive increase in the number of miscarriages.

Even babies born when due tend to be underdeveloped. In view of the humanitarian aid being given by the European Union and the efforts being made by the head of the interim administration, Mr Bernard Kouchner, what measures will the Council take to defend the rights of the women of Kosovo to motherhood and to protect the health of pregnant women, women in confinement and new-born children?

Mr President, Mrs Karamanou' s question is an extremely serious one, and I would not wish to conceal that fact.

We are perfectly aware of the difficult and dramatic humanitarian situation in Kosovo and of the problem of displaced people in that region - and I mean people who originate from Kosovo - and of the particular effect of this on child health and on mortality rates.

I think it is well known that the European Union has made a clear contribution to the humanitarian aid effort being made by the international community.

As you know, the European Community has contributed a total of EUR 378 million for the province of Kosovo alone, and this has to be seen in conjunction with the contributions made by Member States at national level.

This contribution covers various projects in the fields of health and health systems and of water purification. Furthermore, as you know, the European Union makes a contribution to the United Nations High Commission for Refugees, which came to EUR 66.3 million in 1999.

I think that Mrs Karamanou is aware that, because of the need for division of labour between the international donors, the task of restoring health care in Kosovo has been entrusted to the World Health Organisation.

The reports produced by the WHO indicate that it is fully aware of the alarming infant mortality situation, and it has focused its efforts on improving basic conditions in maternity and general hospitals.

Nevertheless, we are aware that this situation is far from a satisfactory solution and that there are widespread repercussions in other areas of health care, apart from child health.

This is not just a technical situation, it is a political situation, and it goes hand in hand with the need to solve the political situation, because there are aspects to this, and we may as well be open about this, which are associated with the international community' s inability up to now to make a multi-ethnic society function in Kosovo, with tragic effects on attempts to improve health care in that region.

Mr President-in-Office of the Council, I thank you for your answer which supplements what Commissioner Patten said yesterday on the subject.

Yet, the sum of EUR 378 million you mentioned had been given in 1999, was proved by the facts to be quite insufficient to create even rudimentary civilised conditions in Kosovo, especially where the provision of health services is concerned.

Mr President-in-Office, do you not think that the very fact of increased child mortality is an abomination for the continent of Europe, a shameful thing, which should motivate us all, so that the aid we provide becomes more effective and more generous?

Of course, the situation was not idyllic, even before the bombardments, anything but, I should say. However, since NATO' s intervention, there has been a very clear deterioration in the natural and human environment.

So, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, is it not a moral obligation that we should try to create civilised conditions for the long-suffering inhabitants of Kosovo, and above all, keep our promises to them?

Mrs Karamanou, I recognise the fact that all the efforts that have been made in Kosovo in this field have not been enough.

I do not think that any of us has the least doubt about that.

I do not want to link this question with your comments about the period "before" and "after" NATO' s intervention, as we will probably touch on that issue at another point during this Question Time.

Nevertheless, I would like to say that the European Union is aware that the resources it has devoted to Kosovo reflect the financial limitations it has to work within.

We have to remember that we share responsibility in that region with the international community. The European Union has a certain responsibility in view of that particular role, but we cannot undertake to rapidly rebuild structures that were, as you have said yourself, Mrs Karamanou, not the best before the military action in Kosovo.

What is more, I do not believe, Mrs Karamanou, that the military action in Kosovo resulted in such a significant destruction of public health facilities as to have had a direct impact on the current situation. The present position is more dramatic in terms of displaced populations, and in terms of a whole raft of economic factors and of the level of satisfaction with basic health facilities resulting from the overall breakdown in organisational structures in Kosovo' s administration.

This is the basic issue underlying the present situation as a whole.

And if we cannot solve the political problem, which must be done in accordance with the relevant United Nations resolution, then we will not solve the problem of child health, nor the various other problems faced by this region.

I would like to widen the debate and include the situation in Mitrovica.

In cooperation with Europe, the international community rebuilt the hospital there too, but it is located in the northern part of the city, thus prohibiting access to Albanian Kosovars.

This means that medical aid is still denied to the Albanian Kosovars.

This is also happening elsewhere in the country, causing tension between the Albanian Kosovars and Serbs, making for a situation where nobody trusts anybody anymore and where Albanians do not want to be looked after by Serbs and vice versa.

I understand very well what you are saying and you are right: the European Union should work in a wider context of international cooperation.

But where will you place the emphasis?

What will you do to ensure that Albanian Kosovars too can be cared for in a hospital, including that in Mitrovica?

Mr Staes, the situation in Mitrovica is well known.

This is a very special situation with a degree of inter-ethnic tension which fortunately is not matched with such severity in others parts of Kosovo.

I perfectly understand Mr Staes' s concerns.

Nevertheless, I would like to say that Bernard Kouchner' s work in this area has aimed to comply with the objectives of the relevant United Nations resolution, in an attempt to create multi-ethnic facilities which can serve the various communities, including the various aspects of the administration.

I believe that we should not jump to conclusions here about who is responsible, because there are various protagonists involved.

The situation in Mitrovica is appalling, and involves very special tensions, and I believe that the measures taken over the last few hours to create safe conditions in that area are to be welcomed.

Nevertheless, I have to say that, regrettably, we do not have the police resources - and this is connected with the Member States' contributions - to guarantee the follow-up action we proposed to the military action, that is to say the establishment of inter-ethnic coordination mechanisms guaranteeing adequate safety for the various communities, and, in particular, access to hospitals.

Subject: Indictment of NATO before War Crimes Tribunal Human rights organisations, such as the US Human Rights Watch, have already collected significant evidence of NATO crimes in connection with the bombing of Kosovo and Serbia with a view to bringing a case before the War Crimes Tribunal in The Hague.

On the basis of this evidence, some of which has already been lodged with the Tribunal, NATO is accused of 'serious violations of international humanitarian law' and 'wilful murder'.

Does the Council consider that such accusations should be put before the War Crimes Tribunal for a thorough judicial investigation?

In the event of a judicial inquiry into the accusations against NATO, what will be done in respect of the High Representative for the CFSP, who was NATO Secretary-General during the crisis?

Is there any procedure for suspending him from office until the judicial investigation into the accusations has been completed?

Mr President, Mr Alavanos' question naturally gives us food for thought on a wide range of issues.

The Council has already, on various occasions, stated its conviction that the severe measures taken by NATO were both necessary and justified to deal with extremist and irresponsible actions involving clear violations of the United Nations Security Council resolutions.

I am aware that there may be different views about NATO' s action and the legitimacy of that action.

Everyone is free to hold such views.

In my own country, the various parliamentary groups had differing views on this matter.

In any case, the Council' s position is clear in that it considers that the objective of the air campaign carried out by the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia was to put an end to the humanitarian disaster in Kosovo caused by the Belgrade regime.

This objective was fully and formally expressed in the statement adopted by the General Affairs Council in Luxembourg on 8 April.

I must say that these NATO measures were not taken lightly and were only carried out as a last resort when it became evident that all avenues for reaching a negotiated solution had been exhausted and that the Belgrade authorities were concentrating their forces in order to expel the Kosovo Albanians from their land.

I am sure you are aware, Mr Alavanos, that, during her recent visit to NATO headquarters, Prosecutor Del Ponte stressed that the International Tribunal was obliged to examine all accusations presented to it, including those made against NATO, in particular by pacifist groups from Canada.

This compulsory examination was to be carried out in line with accusations submitted.

In any case, I have with me a statement made by Prosecutor Del Ponte according to which NATO is not at present under any investigation by the Office of the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and there is no formal inquiry process concerning NATO' s actions in the Kosovo conflict.

All information received during the past six months, either from individuals or from groups requesting an investigation of NATO' s actions during the Kosovo conflict, have been recorded by the Prosecutor.

Any other information will of course be analysed by the Prosecutor, who will in due course decide whether or not there is cause for action.

Until that time Prosecutor Del Ponte has decided not to examine any of the accusations of criminality made against NATO.

I thank the President-in-Office but I do not agree with him that the purpose of NATO' s intervention was to stop a humanitarian disaster, because we have a humanitarian disaster in Kosovo today, we have the hell of Milosevic, followed by the hell of the KLA and the NATO forces.

If the President-in-Office has noticed, almost half the questions he has had to answer today relate to Kosovo.

Despite this, he too accepted that the inquisition procedure of the War Crimes Tribunal against NATO after applications by Canadian and other pacifist organisations is an open question.

My question, which the President-in-Office did not answer, is this: if this inquisition procedure begins, in which the main or, if you will, one of the main people interrogated and probably found guilty will be Mr Solana, who is today the High Representative of the European Union' s Common Foreign and Security Policy, should it not be, if that happens, if the General Prosecutor of the Tribunal is determined to begin the process, that Mr Solana' s status is suspended at least until it is shown that his hands are clean?

Mr Alavanos, if an action of this kind should be brought against NATO and if this action were to be brought against Mr Javier Solana personally, we would have to bear in mind that Mr Javier Solana held one post at that time and is holding a different one today.

The duties that he exercises today have nothing whatsoever to do with the duties that he exercised during his time as Secretary-General of NATO.

In the absence of any corresponding indication from any international judicial body which could justify any personal accusation against Mr Javier Solana - and there is no sign of this whatsoever - the European Union will not of course make any statement at all on this matter.

Mr President, I believe Mr Alavanos is getting NATO and Mr Milosevic mixed up.

Mr Milosevic should be appearing before the war crimes tribunal and we should be awarding NATO the Sakharov prize.

But I have a quite different question for the Council.

How do matters stand in Kosovo with regard to the rebuilding of the administration, the judiciary and, most importantly of all, the police force?

You mentioned before that we are on the brink of catastrophe there and nothing is being done.

First of all, I would like to say that I agree with the priorities you have identified concerning personal responsibility, Mr Posselt.

With regard to the judicial structure in Kosovo, we have already heard Mr Kouchner, on various occasions, describe the enormous difficulties he is experiencing in setting up administrative machinery and a judicial structure.

As you know, the first steps were taken some months ago.

We are all aware of the difficulties, and particularly the financial difficulties, that Mr Kouchner is facing in setting up this administrative machinery, and, in particular, we are aware of the special difficulty involved in recruiting police so as to ensure day-to-day public safety.

This is a responsibility that the European Union takes very seriously, Mr Posselt, and I would like to mention that, at the General Affairs Council held on Monday, this issue was repeatedly stressed when we were discussing Kosovo.

Statements were made and pressure was brought to bear on the various Member States who have undertaken to make police resources available to honour their commitments.

Some Member States are taking refuge in the fact that they have provided military forces and that they cannot send the police forces, to which they committed themselves, as quickly as they would like.

We are certainly very much aware that this factor is seriously compromising Mr Kouchner' s work and the normalisation of administrative structures in Kosovo, especially as regards judicial structures and police cover.

This is having unfortunate and obvious effects on the scope for controlling inter-ethnic coordination, and we are all conscious that, if measures are not taken in the short term, we may end up with situations involving the kind of tensions that we witnessed just a few hours ago, and that these tensions may be mirrored in other areas of Kosovo.

This is obviously a question which really has to be seen in a NATO context, but, as the European Union shares NATO' s view of these issues, it is not difficult for us to associate ourselves with this.

I would like to make this clear on behalf of the Council, so that there can be no doubt.

Mr Marset Campos, you will be aware, first of all, of how difficult it is to select targets during a military operation, particularly an air-based one, and you will also be aware that there is a category of targets that, whilst they are not military targets as such, are infrastructure targets selected with a view to hindering the smooth running of the military machine.

We are of course entering a grey area here, and you may say, Mr Marset Campos, that these are civilian targets, such as bridges and road and rail infrastructure, whilst others will tell me that they are military targets, because they are targets which support military structures in aggressive campaigns such as those carried out by Mr Milosevic' s forces in Kosovo.

So we do not see eye to eye on how we view certain targets.

Unfortunately, and as everyone recognised during the military action in Kosovo, there were civilian sectors, and in particular infrastructural sectors directly affecting the general public, and even inhabited areas, which were directly affected by NATO air attacks.

This is generally recognised and this happens in all wars, and the Kosovo war was not a clean war, nor a model war, but a war based on the art of the possible.

And, above all, it was a necessary war, and it was not only about what was possible, it was necessary to put an end to an absolutely unacceptable form of aggression which was utterly rejected by the entire international community.

Mr Marset Campos, regardless of how we may see things with hindsight - and it is easy to see things with the benefit of hindsight, if you take no action yourself - I believe that, if we look at what happened in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and at the impunity that the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina led to, and the continuation of that impunity, then we might perhaps see the NATO military action in Kosovo in a somewhat less catastrophic light.

Subject: Turkish blockade of Armenia Given that the European Union is actively promoting social, economic and political relations with Armenia through the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement, signed on 12 October 1999, what steps is the Council taking to persuade the Turkish Government to lift the economic blockade of Armenia?

Has the time come for the Turkish Government to lift the economic blockade of Armenia?

Mr President, I would like to thank the Representative of the Council Presidency for his answer.

Nevertheless, I am a little disappointed that this is viewed from a bilateral angle first and foremost when, ultimately, there is in fact a major tripartite relationship.

We provide partnership funding and there are cooperation agreements in place, in order to help Armenia, and still the aid cannot come into play because Turkey has imposed an economic blockade, and so many things cannot get through to the Armenians at all.

We are negotiating with Turkey as to the possibility of its acceding to the Union and so it is in the interests of all of us that every state that wishes to become a Member should cultivate friendly relations with its neighbours.

Can you not exert greater influence over Turkey, so as to enable there to be peaceful developments in this region, and so as to enable Armenians themselves to develop in the way they need to for there to be progress on the cooperation front?

- (PT) Mrs Schleicher, you are quite right to say that we should use our relationship with Turkey to ensure that that country can play a constructive role in this situation and, particularly, that it becomes part of the solution rather than part of the problem.

We feel that precisely because Turkey has embarked on a new type of relationship with the European Union, and also because Turkey now has to respond to the European Union' s positions on common foreign and security policy issues, we will, to be frank, be testing Turkey' s will as regards the European Union' s priorities in its foreign relations.

Our relationship with Armenia, as evinced by the agreement we signed with that country last year, is of course one element in these foreign relations.

We also feel that, if Turkey wishes to move towards sharing the fundamental values of the European Union and the general framework of the European Union' s relations, regardless of whatever special bilateral conditions may apply to its own relations with any other country, it must in general act in accordance with the basic standards demonstrated by the European Union in its foreign relations.

We are, moreover, convinced that this issue will be one of the priorities of the bilateral relations between the European Union and Turkey in the near future.

As they deal with the same subject, Questions Nos 5 and 6 will be taken together.

Subject: Worsening situation in Kosovo In Kosovo, the genocide of Serbs and other non-Albanian ethnic groups is continuing and worsening to the extent that Mr Bernard Kouchner himself recently announced that the political situation and the level of security in the area were far from satisfactory.

Accusations are also being made of failure to implement UN Directive 1244 since, on the one hand, its provisions concerning guarantees for all the inhabitants of Kosovo are being disregarded and on the other, encouragement is being given to extremist breakaway groups, culminating in the appointment of the former KLA leader H. Thaci as 'interim prime minister' of Kosovo and the designation of the KLA as the 'Kosovo protection force'.

What steps will the Council take in view of the above in order to ensure compliance with UN decisions and, in particular, resolution 1244 and prevent the secession of the province of Kosovo from Serbia?

Subject: Ethnic cleansing of Serbs in Kosovo Since the end of the bombing of Yugoslavia by NATO and the EU aimed at preventing the ethnic cleansing of Kosovar Albanians by Serbia, and since the arrival of KFOR on 12 June 1999, 200 000 Serbs living in Kosovo have been expelled and 768 murdered, constituting ethnic cleansing on a larger scale than that carried out by the Serbs themselves.

During the last few days we have seen Serbs murdered by Kosovar Albanian Mafia-type groups, also with impunity.

What decision will the Council adopt to put an end, once and for all, to this ethnic cleansing and to guarantee respect for the human rights of the whole population of Kosovo, irrespective of race or creed?

I thank the Minister for his response, but I would also like to point out that, statistically, there is now more violence in Kosovo than there was before the NATO bombing.

It is worrying that the bombing has aggravated the situation, and we should recognise that it was a mistake on the part of NATO and the European Union to take such action.

I agree with what the Minister very rightly said about the culpability of Belgrade, but we should also remember that the secret services of the USA, Germany, France, Italy and the United Kingdom have been supplying arms and money to the KLA, a mafia, which has contributed to the problems in the area.

We are therefore all to blame.

I would like to ask him a supplementary question in a wider context.

Do you not think that it would be beneficial to lift the embargo on Serbia in order to normalise the area economically and also to benefit Kosovo as a province of Serbia?

Mr President, I am no friend of Milosevic or his government. Nevertheless I have the gravest doubts about the legitimacy of Nato's action against Yugoslavia over Kosovo, both in terms of the lack of authority from the UN Security Council and because it could have been avoided by not imposing unacceptable terms on Serbia's sovereignty at Rambouillet.

The current situation in Kosovo, which is now ethnically cleansed of Serbs and Roma, speaks for itself.

Should Nato not at the very least acknowledge fault for its deliberate targeting of the Belgrade TV tower and killing over 20 civilian journalists, which remains a severe moral blemish on the conduct of the war and now opens the embarrassment of a possible indictment for war crimes against our Western leaders?

Mr Tannock, with regard to the position adopted by the European Union, we do not have selective interpretations and analyses of what were military objectives, and in particular of the initiatives taken against certain types of infrastructure that were propping up Mr Milosevic' s political system and acting as propaganda for him.

I cannot therefore tell you whether we agreed or not on a specific action carried out by NATO, but it was part of an overall plan with which we do agree.

Some of these actions might have been questionable, and some were regarded as unfortunate by NATO itself, but others were justified for tactical reasons, with the aim of preventing Mr Milosevic from continuing his propaganda campaign within the former Yugoslavia.

In any event, I, on behalf of the Council, do not wish to make a value judgement about any specific military action carried out by NATO.

Mr President-in-Office of the Council, since I know the history of the Balkans, I should like to remind you that, for many decades, the peoples of Yugoslavia lived in peace.

Destabilisation began around ten years ago with the break-up of Yugoslavia, in which the European Union played a decisive part.

Yugoslavia' s crime was that it was the only Balkan country that did not ask to become a member either of NATO or of the European Union.

So whatever remained standing after the air attacks is now being destroyed by the supposedly disarmed KLA, under the very nose of KFOR, whose role as an occupying force is becoming increasingly apparent.

Every day, new crimes come to light against non-Albanian speakers and against the cultural heritage of Kosovo, and there are hundreds of violations of the UN' s Resolution 1244.

In my opinion, the best thing the Council could do would be to cease occupying that part of Yugoslavia and search for a solution acceptable to all sides, with respect for the various national characteristics in the area and especially respect for the principle of non-intervention in the internal affairs of another, independent country.

I respect your understanding and knowledge of the Balkan region, Mr Alyssandrakis, but I find it difficult, quite frankly, to understand how respecting the characteristics of the region can, in terms of political stability, be a solution to the problem. If we look at the democratic stability of the region, it could perhaps be said that it was the break-up of Yugoslavia that caused the current situation, but let us not get involved in interpreting an international development.

Nevertheless, I would like to say that Yugoslavia was what it was, in the sense that the state managed to harmonise some of its people' s ethnic differences to a degree.

It must be pointed out that it did this at a time when its political framework was far from ideal in terms of being democratically representative.

The division of Yugoslavia is probably a historical fact that we shall have to accept, regardless of the mistakes that may have been made along the way.

We do not feel that withdrawing international forces now would be any kind of solution. Quite the contrary, it would be a solution leading to calamity.

Mr President, I was a little disappointed with the answer given by the President-in-Office to my colleague.

It is very important, if we stress that Europe is to be a Europe of values, that we do not go down the road of saying that means justify ends.

If civilian targets were targeted and destroyed, killing civilians is illegal by anyone's standards.

It should not be defended even by those of us who deeply deplore the Milosevic regime.

That, however, is not my question.

My question is about political prisoners held in Serbia now.

There are, I believe, around 5 000 Kosovar political prisoners held in Serbia at the moment.

My question to the President-in-Office is twofold. Firstly, is the Council fully aware of and concerned about the fate of these prisoners?

Secondly, what does it propose to do about them?

Mr MacCormick, first of all, I would like to answer your comments.

I did not defend attacks on civilians.

What I said and what I explained in a previous answer is that there are civilian targets linked with structures which are objects for military action, and you know as well as I do that some military actions not only go for military targets, but also for civilian targets and structures which are connected with military action.

What is a legitimate target is obviously a grey area.

As I said, we are not making value judgements about specific actions.

We are making an overall value judgement about NATO' s action, and this overall value judgement is positive. We agree with the general view of NATO' s action.

With regard to political prisoners in Serbia, Mr MacCormick, it is obvious that, when I say that in Serbia today Mr Milosevic is not acting in accordance with the rules of a decent society at international level, I am referring specifically, not just to the way he acts towards his fellow citizens. I am also referring to the way Mr Milosevic treats political prisoners, and the way he attacks democratic rights and the opposition' s rights of access to the media, and to his attacks on the facilities that should be granted to non-governmental organisations, particularly those protecting human rights.

In spite of everything, all this represents only one of many kinds of highly pernicious action perpetrated by Mr Milosevic on Yugoslavian society, and the European Union is of course inevitably concerned about this situation. This is precisely why the European Union is maintaining all its sanctions until Yugoslavia' s behaviour on the international stage reflects the values that we have to defend.

Subject: Drafting of the Charter of Fundamental Rights The general public welcomes the fact that a Charter of Fundamental Rights is to be drawn up. It is also to be hoped that it will meet the challenges of Europe in the 21st century.

What are the Council's views on the substance of the Charter? What type of rights will the Charter set out (economic, social and cultural)?

Which citizens will it cover (those of the European Union or the citizens of all European countries with a view to enlargement? Will it cover immigrants etc.?)?

Will it set out established social rights in the European Union or will it set a broader agenda?

What means will the Charter use to ensure that it clearly guarantees equality between the sexes?

What are the Council's views on incorporating the Charter into the Treaty on European Union?

I thank the President-in-Office for the concerns and certainties he has expressed about the progress of the work.

You will understand, Mr President-in-Office, that there was a point to my question, because the Council is a political body of the European Union and the citizens of Europe, men and women, want to know how it views the democratic and social model of Europe in the twenty-first century.

As a supplementary question, I should like to ask you whether, as the Portuguese Presidency, you have made provision for the rights of children, as such, to be included in future deliberations and the rights to be incorporated in the Charter.

As I said, Mrs Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou, we are not in control of the procedure for drawing up the Charter of Fundamental Rights.

This procedure falls within the competence of the members of the group, and the matter will only be submitted to the Council if and when consensus is reached on the terms of this charter.

I would nevertheless like to say, with regard to the rights of the child, that we consider this to be an extremely topical issue, particularly for the Council of Europe and in view of the existence of a set of relevant international texts to which we have signed up. This matter should form part of the Charter of Fundamental Rights.

This will certainly be the guideline that my government for one will advocate for the Charter of Fundamental Rights.

Furthermore, we will see if we can do this for a range of other proposals that we have on this issue.

I do not know whether these proposals will meet with a favourable reception or not.

I presume, however, that this is not a particularly controversial matter and we think that it would simply involve bringing together the currently agreed corpus of rights, which even the most elementary justice would suggest should be included in the charter and be shared by the Union as a whole.

I would remind Members that, according to the guidelines for these sittings, questions must be concise and be worded in a way which will allow a brief answer.

You know that there is a Parliamentary delegation chaired by Mr Méndez de Vigo and a Committee on Constitutional Affairs where these issues can be debated at great length.

I therefore ask that both questions and answers be very brief.

Otherwise, we would be in a way undermining the whole process of drawing up the Charter of Fundamental Rights.

I am sure that the President-in-Office of the Council is prepared to answer everything, but I must ensure that this sitting consists of questions and answers.

Mr President, fourteen Member States have imposed bilateral sanctions on another Member State, because a democratically elected government was formed there.

Both parties were once part of the government.

So far there have been no infringements of the law.

Are preventive sanctions reconcilable with the Charter of Human Rights?

Would a right of veto on the part of the President-in-Office of the Council, in respect of the formation of national governments, be reconcilable with the Charter of Fundamental Rights?

Is the call for violent demonstrations reconcilable with the Charter of Fundamental Rights?

Mr Rübig, as President-in-Office, I cannot give you an answer for the simple reason that the statement by the Portuguese Prime Minister on behalf of the fourteen Heads of State and Government of the Member States of the European Union was adopted bilaterally and not by him in his capacity as President-in-Office of the Council of the European Union.

Nevertheless, I would like to say that the various preventive actions taken on a strictly bilateral basis by these Member States was actually a set of actions of what I would call preventive political action at diplomatic level. We feel that they were perfectly justified and seemed to be reasonable in the face of the actions and personalities of a party which, although it has become part of a European Union government, does not strike us as being able to guarantee that it can meet the Union' s aims.

I do not wish to dwell on this subject on behalf of the Council presidency, because my government intervened at the request of, and in conjunction with, fourteen Member States and not in its presidency capacity.

Mr President, I have the honour of being a member of the Convention drafting the Charter so I am not going to ask the presidency to speculate on the contents or whether it thinks the Convention should be declaratory or whether it should have judicial force.

What I would like to know is what will happen to the draft Charter that the Convention draws up?

Will the Council treat it as a document that it has to accept as it stands, or will the Council feel free to amend that document?

Will the Council say just simply yes or no to it or will it be in a position to actually then redraft that draft Charter?

- (PT) The answer is neither yes nor no.

I do not know, Mr Martin. It will depend on the decision taken by the Council.

Subject: Granting of export credit guarantees and its implications for the construction of the Ilisu Dam in Turkey The G8 meeting in Cologne called on the OECD to set up a process for the establishment of common standards for the granting of export credits.

These can be used to distort competition and support questionable projects.

Will the EU take the lead in advancing this process?

The need was demonstrated recently by the statement from the British Government that it is 'minded to grant' an export credit licence to a company involved in the construction of the Ilisu Dam in Turkey.

The World Bank has decided not to fund the project, which will displace 20 000 Kurds, potentially limit the fresh water supply to Syria and Iraq and cause ecological damage.

What is the Council's view of the involvement of European governments and companies in this project?

The process of agreeing these common standards may have started as long ago as 1978 but clearly the fact that the British Government appears to be going ahead with a massively environmentally damaging project suggests that it has not been very successful so far.

I wonder if you would answer a question concerning investment by EU companies in the EU applicant countries.

I ask this because of the issue of coherence, the subject of this morning' s discussion.

On the one hand we ask applicant countries to take on board the environmental acquis and yet, at the very same time, the EU Member States are supporting and encouraging investment in those countries which is itself hugely environmentally damaging.

Can you say whether or not the specific issue of investment in applicant countries has featured in any of the discussions to date to which you have been referring?

- (PT) Mrs Lucas, I was not present at the debate you are referring to.

I would like to say that the Council will only be able to respond to that part of your question in writing, at a later date.

Subject: Environmental problems caused by the Drogheda Port Company development project, and the role of the Court of Auditors A major conflict between environmental conservation and structural development interests has arisen in the area of the Boyne Estuary, Ireland, following a development project of the Drogheda Port Company.

The affected area is designated a Special Protection Area (SPA) under the Wild Birds Directive and is under consideration for a Special Area of Conservation under the Habitats Directive, as it is an area of international importance.

Many local and European associations have strongly criticised the project.

Similar cases occur in other regions of the Union, where EU development funding conflicts with environmental unsustainability of the beneficiary measures.

Is not the Council of the opinion that the Court of Auditors should be given more resources in order to investigate or review similar development measures where environmental conflicts arise?

What kind of measures does the Council plan to take in order to strengthen the review and evaluation powers of the European institutions in similar cases?

. (PT) In response to your question, Mrs McKenna, I would first of all like to highlight the fact that the role of the Court of Auditors was laid down in the Treaty establishing the European Community.

In accordance with Article 246 of the Treaty, the auditing of accounts is carried out by the Court of Auditors which, to this end, studies the accounts of all revenue and expenditure of the Community as well as the regularity and the legality of the underlying transactions. The Court also guarantees proper financial management.

This is indeed also stipulated in Article 248.

The Court of Auditors, therefore, already has all the instruments necessary to carry out its role.

With regard to your suggestion for increasing the Court' s resources, the Council considers that all of the Union' s institutions have, under the Community budget, the necessary financial means for them to be able to properly carry out their respective remits.

In some cases, it would probably be desirable for their financial resources to be increased, but there are budgetary restraints of which I am sure you are aware.

I would like to take this opportunity to remind you that the Budget of the European Union is approved by common agreement between the Council and this Parliament.

The Council therefore, has no means of changing the role conferred on the Court of Auditors by the Treaty.

If extra resources were given to the Court of Auditors it would be money well spent, because it would ensure that EU funding was not going to something that conflicted with environmental concerns.

For years the Council has been blocking the strategic development impact assessment of plans and programmes.

I would ask you, now that you are President of the Council, will you push forward with this extremely important proposal.

Secondly, as there is no mention of Structural Funds in the current draft could you ensure that this would be put back in?

I would like to know what you could do about this as President-in-Office of the Council at the moment because it is the Council that has been blocking this for a long time.

If the Court of Auditors were able to assess regularly the potential conflicts between environmental concerns and structural development, it would be very important because the Court of Auditors could do an extremely good job.

Their reports are extremely detailed and very important.

This is the way to ensure that such conflicts are avoided in the future.

- (PT) Mrs McKenna, a large part of the problem you have raised relates to issues which are the responsibility of the Commission.

It is therefore the Commission that must ensure that certain development projects comply with relevant environmental provisions.

The Commission will have to provide specific answers to these questions.

I do not think that I can give a more complete answer on the specific case that you quoted.

Subject: Statute for Members of the European Parliament The Council and Parliament are going to try to reach agreement on a Statute for the Members of the European Parliament.

One of the matters to be settled is whether Members are to receive equal pay, and where they are to pay tax.

According to media reports the Portuguese Presidency considers that all Members should pay the same tax, to the EU.

This is in conflict with the view taken by some Member States who wish to have the right to tax their Members in their home countries.

Will the Portuguese Presidency clarify its position on this matter?

. (PT) The Portuguese Presidency is particularly interested in this issue, as I suppose that this is the first time a presidency has made resolving the problem of a Statute for Members of the European Parliament a priority in its programme.

The Portuguese Presidency made reaching an agreement on this statute one of its priorities, as furthermore, did the President of the European Parliament, when she stated this at the Helsinki European Council.

We are therefore in perfect and total agreement in our concern to achieve a positive outcome on this matter.

We are therefore taking advantage of this political will in an attempt to define the outlines of a compromise, and we have already begun work on this matter.

It is worth pointing out once more that this compromise will require the unanimous support of the Council, in accordance with Article 190, and the assent of this Parliament, to which it falls to approve this statute.

The Presidency has engaged in intensive discussions with a range of Members of this Parliament and with the group to which Parliament entrusted the task of negotiating with the Council.

I myself had an opportunity to meet this group, for the first time, in parallel with the January part-session, and I am trying to arrange to do so again soon in order to continue these discussions.

These discussions have also recommenced more intensively in the relevant bodies of the Council, and I think that I can say, in a spirit of openness and greater flexibility, and because we all recognise the importance that this has, particularly for the general public, that drawing up this statute is a vital factor in ensuring both the dignity of the functions of Members of the European Parliament and the necessary transparency and good management of public funds.

With regard more specifically to your question, I would like to highlight the fact that it only makes sense to have a new statute if it represents progress in comparison with the current situation and if it ensures that holders of identical posts are as far as possible treated in the same way.

This has, from the outset, been the position of the Portuguese Presidency.

Nevertheless, our role as mediator means that we must take account of all current attitudes in the Council and I am sure you are aware, Mr Sjöstedt, that the tax issue poses problems for certain delegations.

As this is the case, whatever solution is found, I think that it will have to respect both democratic law and be acceptable to all Member States, regardless of their national positions on the matter.

What I can promise with regard to this issue is that the presidency has the utmost commitment to working, for as long as it is involved with this matter, in an atmosphere of total transparency and openness towards Members of the European Parliament. We will also make the utmost effort with members of the Council, particularly with those who had most difficulty in accepting the proposal suggested last year, so as to reach a reasonable compromise solution, and one which would at the same time guarantee the dignity appropriate for a statute for the members of this House.

Mr President, I would thank the Council of Ministers for its answer. I want to ask two follow-up questions connected with the taxation of ourselves as parliamentarians.

My basic view is that one ought to pay tax in the country in which one lives, in which one' s family lives and in which one benefits from public services.

I intended to ask the presidency if there really is an argument for saying that we should not pay tax in our own countries just as other people do.

Is there any argument for our being given a special privilege just because we are parliamentarians?

My second question is about whether the Portuguese Presidency can accept a solution which involves the tax issue' s being solved in different ways for Members of different nationalities, or whether you want a solution which is identical for members of all nationalities.

- (PT) Without wishing to show any lack of respect towards this House and particularly because of the respect that your questions deserve, I would rather not answer the questions you have raised immediately.

We are in the midst of rather sensitive negotiations. This sensitivity is reflected in the way in which the Presidency of the Council of the European Union expresses itself in a specific context in relation to particular situations.

This has an impact of course, because it is read by other members of the Council.

At this stage in the discussion, please forgive me if I cannot give a direct answer to the specific questions that have been put to me. I would ask that we be judged on our results, when we endeavour to reach a more concrete solution in the near future.

I will be happy to come back to Parliament to respond to and clarify the problems which may conceivably occur if a result is not reached, or to congratulate all of you if this result is achieved.

I would like to ask the President-in-Office of the Council, after his few hours working in this Chamber with these Members of the European Parliament, whether he has come to any assessment of what they are worth in terms of pay?

Mr Purvis, as this discussion of salaries in the European Parliament does not relate exclusively to your country and even affects my country, I have a precise idea of what the salaries of the Members of the European Parliament are worth.

I am therefore perfectly aware of this problem.

Mr President, I want to thank you for your answer.

I want to ask a follow-up question which bears some resemblance to the one Mr Sjöstedt asked.

In our country, we pay our tax in the form of local taxes because the services concerned are local. We have extensive services, too.

We have problems stemming from the lack of confidence in politicians and, not least, in European politicians here in Parliament.

How do you think that public confidence in ourselves as politicians would be affected if a situation were to arise in which we obtained the right to use services where we live - education, health care etc - but, at the same time, did not pay any tax and did not contribute?

How do you think a system like that would affect people' s confidence in ourselves as politicians?

Mr President-in-Office of the Council, I do not know whether you are obliged to answer this question since it is really a philosophical question.

However, if you wish to enter into the realms of philosophy, go ahead!

. Mr President, I have no desire to enter into the realms of philosophy.

These are fundamental issues which concern the very shape of the Statute for Members and of its role in the context of political society.

I do not want to enter into this type of discussion because I think that it might, to use a French expression, préjuger the Portuguese Presidency' s views in the course of the negotiations in which it is involved on the Statute for Members.

I would ask you to allow me to refrain from commenting on this matter.

Since the time allotted to Questions to the Council has elapsed, Questions Nos 11 to 35 will be replied to in writing.

That concludes Questions to the Council.

(The sitting was suspended at 7.05 p.m. and resumed at 9.00 p.m.)

Address by Mr Vaclav Havel, President of the Czech Republic

Mr President in office, ladies and gentlemen, I have great honour in extending a warm welcome, on behalf of the House, to the President of the Czech Republic, Mr Vaclav Havel.

I should also like to welcome Mrs Havel, who is sitting in the gallery.

This is not your first visit to our Parliament, Mr President.

You addressed plenary in Strasbourg nearly six years ago, in March 1994, and many of us, who were already European Members of Parliament at that time, still have a vivid recollection of your speech.

In fact, shortly after the Maastricht Treaty was ratified, you spoke in favour of strengthening European values, creating a European ethical dimension and opening the Union to the countries of central and eastern Europe.

In other words, for many citizens, and not just in your country, you personify the European values to which we constantly voice our attachment.

There have been extremely dynamic developments in relations between the Union and the Czech Republic following two European elections and a major new reform of the European Treaties.

An association agreement has been signed and a joint parliamentary committee has been set up by the European Parliament and the Czech Parliament.

Your country filed an official application to join the Union in 1996 and accession negotiations were finally officially opened in 1998.

The process of European integration and enlargement has speeded up impressively since the fall of the iron curtain.

The end of this artificial separation of Europe marked the start of a new era.

We now face an historical challenge with multiple prospects for all the citizens of Europe.

Mr President, you are a symbol of these changes.

You founded and signed Charter 77, the human rights movement which represented and called for fundamental values during a dark period in the history of your people.

A Communist regime sentenced you to five years in prison for defending human freedom and dignity.

But you never lost hope and history proved you right.

Ten years ago, the "velvet revolution" proclaimed Havel na HRAD.

For ten years you represented democratic Czechoslovakia and, later, the Czech Republic, as its president.

Reconciliation with your neighbours was, and still is, a basic objective which you have defended with vigour and perseverance.

You are a first class European.

Today, the Czech Republic is preparing to join our Union.

I am sure that you will agree, Mr President, and experience has shown us, that the process of enlargement of the Union is not without its pitfalls for both parties and the Czech Republic will need to make a great deal of effort in order to meet the accession criteria.

The European Union, for its part, will need to adapt its institutions and policies in order to prepare for enlargement.

It has already taken a big step forward with Agenda 2000.

The next step, i.e. institutional reform, will be taken following the inauguration of the new Intergovernmental Conference, in which the European Parliament will be fully involved.

Our responsibility as members of the European Parliament is to ensure that the process of enlargement takes place in an climate of optimum openness and transparency so that, when the time comes, the citizens of the European Union and the citizens of the Czech Republic will approve the accession of the Czech Republic to the European Union through their elected representatives.

Mr President, it gives me great pleasure to give you the floor.

Mr President, allow me, on behalf of the European Parliament, to extend our warmest thanks for the clear message which you have brought and of which the members have already shown their appreciation.

Thank you. You are right to remind us that a national identity is perfectly compatible with a European identity.

And you have used your personal experience to show us that your European identity was not decreed; it was a spontaneous and natural move.

I have taken note of your words; this is something which we all feel very deeply.

We find you faithful to the principles which have always guided you, which have always guided your actions; your attachment to fundamental values.

You reminded us of your speech in 1994, which you yourself qualify as slightly provocative, but there is such a thing as creative utopia and we have been able to gauge together how far we have come.

And you very opportunely highlighted the role of the civil society, the importance of the civil society, not just in the candidate countries, but in all the countries in the European Union, in restoring our citizens' confidence, in restoring confidence in the social solidarity which we need.

To summarise, perhaps what struck me most in your speech; above all, you wished to remind us that, beyond its economic aspects, the task of constructing Europe is a spiritual one.

We of course look forward most keenly to continuing this task with you.

(The formal sitting was closed at 12.40 p.m.)

The next item is the annual report (A5-0032/2000) by Mr Corrie, on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation, on the results of the activities of the ACS-EU Joint Assembly in 1999.

, rapporteur.- Mr President, I had hoped to be rising at 9 a.m., not 9 p.m., to present this report.

I hope the number of Members in this Chamber is not an indication of the interest in overseas development work.

However, it is normal practice that the report on the work of the ACP-EU Joint Assembly is put before Members of this Parliament and I have the pleasant task of doing that tonight.

Once again, I can report two highly successful Assemblies having taken place, one in Strasbourg and one in Nassau.

In many ways this was the end of an old era and the start of a new one.

The ACP-EU Joint Assembly is a unique organisation in world politics.

Where else do 86 nations come together to discuss matters of mutual concern?

The Strasbourg Assembly was the last chaired by Lord Plumb.

In honour of the tremendous work he carried out over a difficult period the Joint Bureau in Nassau made him an honorary president, and we wish him well in his retirement.

The two Assemblies have been dominated by the negotiations on renewal of the Lomé Convention and I look forward to the signature of a new Convention and its rapid ratification by all the countries concerned.

I remember that at the last mid-term review, when I was rapporteur, the then Commissioner Marin said that review would be the last.

Well, he was wrong, and I pay tribute to Philip Lowe and his team who have worked so successfully behind the scenes to conclude a new Convention in very difficult circumstances.

I was also delighted to hear the report this morning from Commissioner Nielson who has worked untiringly to get the right outcome to the negotiations.

I pay special tribute to him for his success.

I also pay tribute to Mrs Kinnock and her working group for the huge amount of work they put in on the future of Lomé.

I am quite sure that Mrs Kinnock' s report and the one on regional cooperation and integration had a major bearing on the outcome of these negotiations.

I also thank the Working Groups on the small island states and climate change and the Follow-up Group on Fisheries for their excellent reports.

We have had question times to the Council and the Commission and to the ACP Council, and I would like to thank those institutions for their interest in our work.

The main thrust of our work in both Assemblies was poverty eradication.

The resolution passed went so far as to say that poverty amounted to a violation of human rights.

It also emphasised the importance of abolishing gender inequalities and as I travel through Africa and see the work done by women I only wish there were more women in senior government positions and in presidential posts.

We might then see an end to some of the fraud, corruption and mismanagement that seem endemic in some countries and that have to be stopped.

We had, as usual, many debates on countries where there are war situations.

I visited Ethiopia and Eritrea to gain first-hand knowledge.

The OAU is doing its best to broker a peace deal there. But Ethiopia is still calling for clarification on certain issues and the humanitarian situation in both countries is serious.

We were delighted to hear in Nassau that a trade agreement was being reached with South Africa after four years of negotiations.

This highlights the problems of coherence between the EU and the developing nations, which came to a head at the WTO talks in Seattle.

Much work has to be done to convince the developing nations of the advantages of globalisation and world free-trade agreements.

In Nassau, we had two interesting debates on East Timor and Cuba.

Cuba has observer status but I understand has now shown a wish to join the ACP.

All nations from within the confines of the ACP territory who can live up to the requirements of democracy, human rights, governance and an independent judiciary are, I am sure, welcome.

I await with interest developments in Cuba.

When Mr Dalmau, the Cuban Junior Minister for Foreign Affairs addressed the Assembly, he did not hesitate to let his feelings be known.

On East Timor, Mr Da Costa, from the Timorese National Resistance Council, gave a very moving address indicating that East Timor would also like to join the ACP when it becomes a state with a government.

We must give them all our support to reach that goal.

Human rights is such an important issue within the ACP-EU Assembly that Joint Vice-Presidents have been appointed with special responsibilities for monitoring human rights closely and reporting to the Assembly.

A number of cases have been highlighted, including the child soldier issue in Sudan, where many children have been abducted from neighbouring states.

I had the honour of being elected the European Co-President at the beginning of this fifth term and Mr Clair from Mauritius is the new ACP Co-President.

I would like to see a number of changes to our Assembly, particularly after the signing of the new Convention in May.

We must have more equality between our ACP partners and our European members and I want to get rid of the "them and us" syndrome.

Firstly, I would like to see a Joint Parliamentary Assembly of elected members from ACP countries and not ambassadors or government ministers sitting there as delegates.

This I think is the new Convention.

Secondly, the new Convention allows for regional assemblies in the six regions, which would allow us to be much more specific in our work.

These assemblies would report back to the Joint Assembly.

We had a regional debate in Nassau in the Caribbean and this was extremely productive.

We are going to have one in Abuja in West Africa too.

I want the Assembly to stop being just a talk-shop and become a work-shop for the betterment of all the people in developing countries.

I want to see civil society given a louder voice. But to do that we have to see an end to corruption and we have to face this head-on.

We must reward those nations which are making the effort to live by the rules of good governance. Equally, we should come down hard on those who are corrupt or whose constitutions do not allow the pluralist governments that we demand.

I am delighted to see the result in Zimbabwe.

European taxpayers will no longer accept their taxes being fraudulently used.

A new wind of change must blow through Africa and new standards must be set and lived up to.

The Joint Assembly should play a leading role in monitoring the enactment of good governance, human rights and democracy in cooperation with the Commission.

I believe that as equal partners the EU- and ACP-elected delegates are up to that task.

I beg to move acceptance of this report.

Mr President, let me begin by congratulating Mr Corrie on his excellent and comprehensive report.

Our approach to development policy must always be based on respect for human rights and the fight against poverty.

But there is a crass contradiction between fighting poverty and the cuts in development aid appropriations in many Member States and in the EU.

With regard to financing, we must look to the future and provide the Joint Assembly with additional funds so that, for instance, we can send delegations to the ACP states to oversee electoral processes, at their invitation.

In future, the EU must take a far more multilateral approach when it agrees development projects and, furthermore, must coordinate more closely with the individual states in order to improve efficiency and use the funding more effectively.

An example here could be the field of education, which will deserve and need special support in the ACP states in future.

For instance, the very rapidly growing educational and technological potential of the Internet offers entirely new means of helping the developing countries, which at present still have modest resources, to move towards a global approach, as opposed to globalisation.

I see it as a future task of the EU to contribute in this way to the establishment of small and medium-sized enterprises in the ACP states, which can promote self-help.

An example here is the problem in Nigeria, which imports industrial finished products from all over the world and then has to spend substantial resources on product maintenance by foreign workers.

One way forward to promote the setting up of SMEs could be to train the Nigerian population adequately.

It will be easier to take account of the developing countries' very diverse problems, and EU aid could be prepared and implemented in a more targeted manner if, as the report makes quite clear, we take the urgently needed step of optimising our working methods, by introducing the proposed regional assemblies.

Thank you, Mr Zimmerling: If I am informed correctly, this is the first time you are addressing this House.

Congratulations on your maiden speech: It went really well.

Mr President, it cannot be repeated often enough: since 1975, the Lomé Convention has constituted an important pillar of European development cooperation and has a pilot role to play in many respects.

Based as it is on the principle of partnership and equality, and on parliamentary control by the Joint Assembly, it is an example to the world.

Most appropriately, given that this year we are celebrating 25 years of cooperation under Lomé, we will shortly be signing a new and more advanced partnership agreement, which also upgrades the Joint Assembly into a genuine parliamentary assembly on both sides.

So I do not want to look back only to the year 1999. The rapporteur, Mr Corrie, has already done so most expertly.

Much of what concerns us today is the outcome of fundamental processes of transformation in all parts of the world since the late 1980s.

They also had strong repercussions in the developing countries. The after-shocks can still be felt.

ACP cooperation is a dynamic process.

The content of the agreements has progressed steadily between Lomé I and Lomé VI.

At the same time the number of partner states has increased considerably, now standing at 71.

All those involved were particularly moved by the enlargement to Namibia and South Africa.

Cuba has just knocked at the door, and, if Cuba is also accepted into the ACP-EU community, that will be a momentous step and will bring in its wake processes of change in Cuba itself.

So ACP cooperation remains very exciting, and not only because of the new emphases introduced in the new Convention.

Fighting poverty and promoting sustained economic, cultural and social development are important objectives in the endeavour to build up democratic societies, based on respect for human rights, in the ACP states.

That also means strengthening the democratic institutions.

The history of the Joint Assembly provides impressive evidence of a positive trend in that direction.

In the past, the representatives of the ACP countries tended to be government members, government officials or ambassadors; but today at least three quarters of the ACP delegates are elected members of parliament.

We ought to throw a big party when the figure reaches 100% in the near future, which is indeed what the new Convention is aiming at.

Unfortunately there is far too little appreciation of the steady advance of processes of democratisation which, unlike the various crises that arise, largely pass unnoticed.

One special aspect of multilateral cooperation with the ACP states is regional cooperation and integration.

There is one wish on the European Parliament' s long wish list that will be fulfilled: as we have already heard, the Joint Assembly will soon also be able to hold regional assemblies.

Enhanced regional cooperation can help prevent the outbreak of conflicts based on ethnic, economic, social or religious factors, i.e. have a preventive effect.

For the same reason the European Parliament has always called for civil society to be involved in the decision-making processes and in cooperation management, and emphasised the importance of decentralised cooperation.

The enhanced contacts between the Joint Assembly and the social partners provided for in the new Convention are another step in the right direction.

But I am a little sad that the European Development Fund has still not been incorporated in the Community budget.

I hope it does not take another 25 years before we finally achieve that too.

Mr President, I congratulate Mr Corrie on his report.

The Lomé Convention has been an expression of a real partnership between the EU and the ACP countries for over 25 years. That it has continued at all in the face of overwhelming pressure against it from many quarters, including the WTO, is a triumph of sorts.

But of course the new Convention must be measured not by the fact that it exists but by the extent to which it can contribute to the EU commitment to poverty eradication and the achievement of the international development targets.

Measured by this yardstick there are a number of serious shortcomings in the new arrangements. For example, the agreement is particularly disappointing for those ACP countries suffering from short-term fluctuations in export earnings.

During a marathon negotiating session in December a compromise was reached which provided that, in respect of least-developed, landlocked and island states, assistance would be provided in the event of a minimum 2% loss of export earnings rather than the level of 10% for the other ACP states.

But at the final negotiating session the EU claimed that it had never actually agreed to the inclusion of islands and landlocked states among those which would qualify for the support on the basis of the 2% threshold.

This change has been devastating for the Windward Islands in particular which may be the only ACP state which will actually lose massively from the new arrangements.

This seems a particularly perverse outcome since the Windward Islands are one of the smallest and most vulnerable of the ACP states and they are now going to have to pay the highest price for this new Lomé arrangement.

Meanwhile, on the trade side, pressure from the WTO to ensure that any Lomé Convention is WTO-compatible has meant that there is a huge momentum behind the idea of the so-called regional economic partnership arrangements or free-trade agreements.

Non-least-developed countries are likely to face considerable pressure to accept these arrangements.

Yet it is quite clear that even after a transitional period a number of countries will simply be unable to open their markets yet to the chill winds of free trade without wrecking their own domestic economy.

We therefore need to be particularly vigilant to ensure that genuine options are open to those countries which are not yet ready for free-trade arrangements.

We need to ensure that strategies for promoting regional integration within the ACP are pursued in their own right.

Finally, during any new trade round the EU and the ACP states should press jointly for a reform of GATT Article 24 in order to explicitly provide regional non-reciprocal trade agreements between structurally and economically dissimilar groups of countries.

The Lomé Convention is a unique partnership; but if it is to be truly effective it needs to extend beyond the discussions within the context of Lomé and involve a participation of the WTO and a partnership in all other international negotiating fora.

Mr President, what I want to do in this debate is condemn the fate reserved for the poor countries of Africa, the Caribbean and the Pacific.

People have the gall to say they benefit from the Lomé Convention, but even looking at trading relations alone, the Lomé Convention has done nothing to protect those countries; their already feeble share in trade with Europe has been halved.

That reflects the growth of inequality between EU and ACP countries.

The Lomé Convention essentially benefits a few large industrial or financial conglomerates, which continue to pillage those countries and perpetuate their economic dependence, notably on the former colonial powers.

When it comes to so-called development aid, given that underdevelopment in the majority of these countries is getting worse rather than better, development is clearly not what the aid is for, even when it is not just a disguised export subsidy for European manufacturers.

The aid is primarily a windfall for incumbent regimes, and the poor majority does not benefit at all.

Even if it were properly redirected this aid would not be enough to finance the most basic infrastructure for health care, education or drinking water supply.

For some years now the great powers have been reducing the amount of this already derisory aid, and it is the height of cynicism when this is done on the pretext of human rights violations or corruption.

After all, who protects these deeply corrupt regimes, if not the governments of the rich countries?

They turn a blind eye to the masters of corruption, the big groups controlling oil, water supply, or public works. They could clamp down on them since their head offices are here in Europe.

The debate about either extending the Lomé Convention with its quotas and protectionism, or, instead, gradually winding down the special relationship between the European Union and the ACP countries in the name of free trade, is a warped debate between two ways of perpetuating the pillage and impoverishment of those countries.

I protest against an ignoble and inhuman organisation which literally condemns hundreds of millions of human beings to a wretched death to enrich a minority.

A mere fraction of the fantastic wealth accumulated by the big groups could lift these poor countries out of extreme poverty, but, until we have the courage to take on those big capitalist groups, we are just covering up the real problems.

Mr President, I want to thank the Co-President of the Joint ACP-EU Assembly, Mr Corrie. It was no easy task to draw up a report on a complicated forum like the ACP-EU Assembly.

In this speech, I will confine myself to addressing certain points I consider fundamental.

I believe the European Parliament should call for the Assembly to become truly parliamentary, urging all ACP countries to send members of their national parliaments as their representatives, so as to strengthen their own democratic fabric.

My next contribution to the debate is to turn my attention to globalisation and the WTO, which is seen by the ACP countries as an enormous danger to their development.

I do believe the ACP countries need a transition period, but they also need support in the context of the new logic of regionalisation of aid, not only in agriculture and fisheries, but also in the exploitation of mineral and underground resources, some of which are being exploited, with slim economic returns to the ACP countries themselves.

Thirdly, the European Parliament - through a joint working group within the Joint Assembly - must make a major effort to achieve stability in ACP countries' budgets through the selection of budgetary items to permit economic and, above all, social development, and by monitoring income and fiscal policies in force in the ACP countries.

We must put the people of the ACP countries first in our relationship with their rulers, who need to be fully aware that development aid from the European Union is intended for the people and not for the oligarchies that handle all the internal and external resources in some countries.

Fourthly, and finally, the prevention of inter-ethnic conflicts between States must be our constant concern and to some extent this can be achieved either through a strong and authoritative diplomatic offensive or with the proposals I have set out.

Mr President, I agree with the positive evaluation Mrs Junker has just made and I want to add that Mr Corrie has started his term as Co-President of the ACP-EU Joint Assembly with effective and impartial work deserving of our full appreciation.

I shall restrict my speech to one particular act which took place a few days ago, partly as a consequence of events alluded to in the report we are debating here.

I refer to Cuba' s expression of intent, of 2 February, to become a full member of the ACP group of countries.

A Cuban delegation attended the last meeting of the ACP-EU Joint Assembly in Nassau, and Vice-Chancellor Dalmau spoke in the plenary session, engaging in a lively debate, and afterwards held conversations with many of us.

Following Nassau, a delegation from Parliament led by Mr Corrie and the Chairman of the Committee on Development and Cooperation, Joaquín Miranda, visited Havana and a series of very illuminating exchanges of opinion took place.

It is my impression that this mission from the European Parliament was the final push which convinced our Cuban friends that the time had come to move forward on mechanisms of cooperation with the European Union.

We are witnessing events of great political significance and I hope that we in the European Parliament can promote the appropriate favourable view and a generous attitude on the part of the Union, so that Cuba' s aspirations can meet with a positive response as soon as possible.

That is important, for at least three reasons.

First, it is important for Cuba, to bring its people development and prosperity and finally break the United States blockade, which has been repeatedly condemned by the European Parliament and the United Nations.

Secondly, we must bear in mind that Cuba' s application has the support of all the ACP countries.

If the European Union responds positively to the recommendation of our associates, we will be proving our respect and consideration for those associates and this will have positive effects on the whole framework of our cooperation with them.

Nor can we ignore the value of such a decision in demonstrating the consistency and autonomy of the European Union and the fact that it does not bow to pressure from any quarter.

By accepting Cuba into the ACP community we will be demonstrating that our Europe is not involved in the shameful process of 'playing but not paying' , and that, when we get indignant about absurdities like the Helms-Burton Act, we are not being hypocritical but are ready to act and take all the consequences.

The ACP-EU Joint Assembly meets again in a few weeks time and I am sure this subject will be dealt with there.

Ideally the European Parliament' s representatives should be able to support Cuba' s intent at those proceedings, as our parliamentary colleagues from the ACP countries will no doubt be doing.

Of course, Cuba must meet all the standard conditions, just like any other member.

The Cubans know that and I am sure they accept it.

It must also be made clear that Cuba is not going to be asked for more than has been asked of our other partners.

Cuba' s wish to join is welcome and Cuba will be welcome in our circle.

I say that wholeheartedly, but also with the deep conviction that, just as the blockade has produced nothing but poverty and, as a consequence of that, extreme tension and a hardening of the Cuban position, the integration we are supporting here, and the prosperity it will produce, will translate into the détente and openness we all seek and from which all of us, especially the Cuban people, will benefit.

Mr President, I also want to begin by thanking and congratulating the rapporteur, Mr Corrie, for an excellent report which I think very well describes and summarises the work which has been done in the ACP-EU Joint Assembly in the course of 1999.

I do not have very long in which to speak, and I really only want to take up two questions.

The first is about the fight against poverty, which I think is becoming an embarrassment both for the EU and the Member States.

In spite of the fact that, both in the Treaty and at the UN' s meetings in Rio and Copenhagen, there was an undertaking to work to eradicate poverty in the world, the budget for development aid is, in actual fact, being cut back, when the express desire was that exactly the opposite should happen.

We must put a stop to this trend.

We must begin by writing off debts.

We must follow up words with action.

I should like us to take a leading role in this work.

My second question concerns the fact that, in many contexts, we talk about the ACP countries having to learn the principles of democracy.

Paragraphs 2 and 3 of the resolution demand, within the context of the new agreement, that working methods should be developed and optimised.

The ACP countries are to be urged to allow a whole range of political opinions to come up for discussion.

I think that is a very good idea indeed, and I fully subscribe to it.

However, we must also ask ourselves about our own democratic arrangements.

How do these operate within the European Parliament' s delegation to the ACP-EU' s Joint Assembly?

In contrast to how things are done here in the European Parliament and in Parliament' s committees, where rapporteurs are nominated and appointed to produce reports, there are no regulations whatsoever applied within this delegation to the Joint Assembly.

The two large groups share all the reports and consultative documents etc between themselves.

In order to change this undemocratic arrangement, we, the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance, have tabled Amendment No 6 in which we request that the rapporteurs appointed to produce reports and consultative documents, together with the members of working parties, should be appointed in accordance with clear, democratic rules.

In this context, account ought to be taken of the smaller groups, and consideration given to introducing more representative arrangements.

Mr President, Commissioner, firstly, I too would like to congratulate Mr Corrie on the quality of his report, which appropriately reflects the tenor of the debates in the Joint Assembly he so effectively co-chaired.

The eradication of poverty was central to our work and many speakers highlighted the need to preserve an essential tool for achieving that ambitious aim, to whit, preferential agreements between the European Union and the ACP countries within the framework of the Lomé Conventions.

Globalisation, free trade, and the hegemony of the WTO with its internationalist philosophy, were imperilling the very essence of the North-South dialogue.

So we can only applaud the conclusion of a new partnership agreement for development, and personally I am convinced that the work of the last Joint Assembly did have a decisive influence on breaking the deadlock in the negotiations, as did the new climate created by the events at Seattle.

However, while I welcome the renewal of the agreements, what I find most interesting is the new wind blowing through our relationships and finding expression in the balanced nature of the negotiations now drawing to a close.

The European Union seems to me to have finally emerged from the old paternalist, or frankly neo-colonialist, logic where those giving aid are all too eager to start giving lessons, following a formula our friend Michel Rocard is so keen on.

The Union has finally accepted the idea that dialogue cannot be genuine or effective unless it is the expression of a contract which respects the dignity of the partners.

By refusing to allow the idea of good governance to become a tool, in the hands of technocrats, for imposing new sets of conditions, the European Union is demonstrating wisdom and modesty.

We have spent two centuries laying the foundations of a democracy whose fragility is constantly brought home to us by events.

What right have we to try to impose our model on people whose history, values and identity are sometimes so profoundly different from our own?

Personally, I prefer the willingness that is clearly flagged up in these agreements to extend the partnership to new agents - local authorities, non-governmental organisations - which seems to me to represent the only possible way the people of these countries can progressively achieve ownership cooperation.

In short, this is the only way they can emerge from humiliating and childlike dependence on aid and take responsibility for themselves, the proof of success.

Mr President, Commissioner, firstly, I too would like to congratulate Mr Corrie on the accuracy and rigour of the summary in his report.

The European Parliament' s opinion on the activities of the ACP-European Union Joint Assembly has always had a major impact, undeniably contributing to a consistent policy and role for the European Union in development and cooperation.

The important role of the increasingly parliamentary Joint Assembly in strengthening relations between the European Union and the ACP countries needs to be stressed.

In view of this positive action, there is every advantage to be gained from according the Joint Assembly a budget compatible with improving the quality of its work.

We back the rapporteur' s proposal to introduce regional parliamentary assemblies, under the aegis of the Joint Assembly, in the six regions of the Convention: the Caribbean, the Pacific and four African regions.

These regional assemblies would monitor action in their respective areas.

Poverty has been the common denominator of all the debates in the Joint Assembly and its eradication is the priority for the European Union' s development policy.

In line with the resolution at the Nassau meeting, we must concentrate on meeting the poverty reduction targets agreed by the international community.

The next Lomé Convention must specify the investment in education and stimulate regional cooperation and the participation of local bodies.

The participation of local bodies is absolutely essential.

In a wider context, the priorities, as I see it, are to convert poor countries' debt into programmes for poverty eradication and sustainable development, as well as control of fraud and corruption.

We need to make progress with concrete and consistent action.

People in the poor countries are beginning to despair.

I call on the Commission to act on the rapid accession of East Timor to the Lomé Convention as one means, amongst others, of promoting the eradication of poverty and accelerating its economic, cultural and social development, in order to strengthen its internal democratisation.

Finally, I must congratulate the Council Presidency on the coming Europe-Africa Summit and call on all the participants to contribute to solid practical action to promote the development of peace, democracy and the eradication of poverty in the underdeveloped countries of Africa.

The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 p.m.

Stabilisation and association agreement with FYROM

The next item is the report (A5-0031/2000) by Mr Swoboda, on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy, on the recommendation for a Council Decision authorising the Commission to negotiate a Stabilisation and Association Agreement with FYROM (SEC(1999)1279 - C5-0166/1999 -1999/2121(COS)).

Mr President, Commissioner Patten, today we are discussing a country that really has suffered hard times, a country that is, however, moving in a very promising direction, thanks to its own efforts and resolve and certainly also thanks to the support of the international community.

So if the European Union, the Council and the Commission are proposing - and I assume that Parliament will support that proposal tomorrow - the first stabilisation and association agreement in south-eastern Europe, in the Balkan region - I am quite happy to use that term - it is primarily in gratitude for or acknowledgement of the fact that FYROM itself has worked its way into a good position, in economic and, of course, mainly in political terms, in face of the war in the neighbouring region and also in relation to its own minority.

For it is no small thing to have a minority of 33% or even 35% in one' s own country.

That country and its politicians - no doubt with some differences here and there - have always done very good work, and we should recognise that.

The Commission is proposing that we should conclude an agreement jointly with the Council.

Let me make a few comments on aspects on which views may differ somewhat, although, even in this regard, I want to strongly emphasise and acknowledge Commissioner Patten' s activities and interest in relation to FYROM and the region as a whole.

Firstly, there is the regional approach.

I believe that if it is understood properly, the regional approach is both important and necessary.

There has to be a willingness to cooperate.

Provided it is not seen as some kind of constraint but as a willingness to cooperate, as an opportunity that each country should grasp, then this is the right approach.

The problem is that, when we look at FYROM, we can see how very difficult it is to cooperate economically with some neighbouring countries, such as Kosovo and Albania, or to cooperate politically with, for instance, Yugoslavia.

On the other hand, cooperation with Bulgaria, and in particular with Greece, has made good progress and I think we should acknowledge that too.

In this context, the European Union must consider, as it began to do early this week, how to include the neighbouring Yugoslavia in regional cooperation in spite of everything, i.e. without taking back any of our criticism of this terrible regime.

Tomorrow morning I will therefore table an amendment urging that we concentrate the sanctions on the regime itself while easing them somewhat for the people and for the economy in a spirit of economic cooperation.

In that regard allow me to say, since I come from a country through which the Danube flows, that I am grateful that the Commission, i.e. Commissioner Patten and also Vice-President Palacio, with whom I was recently in Budapest, is considering opening the Danube to shipping again. That would provide for a modicum of economic recovery in this region too, which, of course, would be of particular importance to Romania.

In my view, this regional approach, provided it is understood correctly, i.e. as a method of contributing to economic recovery in the region itself, is in fact the right one to adopt.

As I said, it must not be perceived as a constraint nor must it be set as a precondition.

Secondly, let me say quite clearly and plainly that we want to open the way to and offer FYROM accession to the European Union.

In our view, it would be an illusion to think there was any point in FYROM applying for accession right now, but it would also be wrong to delay discussing it until some later date.

FYROM wants to be told here and now that, in principle, accession will be possible when the time is right.

This country is afraid it will be in a sense sidelined.

It sees, in the whole readjustment of aid instruments, a risk that it will no longer be the last carriage of a train heading towards Europe but that this train will continue through Europe while leaving FYROM on a siding.

I think Commissioner Patten understands that too.

So I very strongly urge him to make it clear in the appropriate talks.

Thirdly, I believe that, so far at least, FYROM has shown that it is capable of using the various instruments properly.

Even though there will of course be readjustments here, FYROM will continue to show that many of the tasks that are still being dealt with in Brussels today can in future be handled in Skopje, in the country itself.

I hope that the honourable Members will agree to support these proposals as a sign of goodwill towards FYROM.

Mr President, since the start of the Yugoslav wars, the Republic of Macedonia - I prefer to use this abbreviation - has behaved as a constructive peace-keeper.

We would remind you of the proposals made by the governments of Macedonia and Bosnia and Herzegovina at the time, which had non-violent liberalisation and a non-violent separation from the Yugoslav federal structure in view.

As you can see, our Macedonian friends have always played a very positive role and it is for this reason that it should be pointed out at this stage that Macedonia is not just a pawn in our so-called strive towards stability, but actually took the initiative.

The former President, Mr Gligorov, can take special credit for this, and the current President too has already adopted the profile of President of all Macedonian citizens, so much so that the European Union should only be grateful to have him as interlocutor in the Balkans.

Despite the obvious reasons for any internal tension, both population groups have struck a reasonable modus vivendi and the outlook for reaching a sound solution to the remaining problems is good.

It was, in fact, in Macedonia that I heard at the time about the Roma population actually not having too bad a time there.

I was unaccustomed to hearing this type of comment about the Roma in Europe.

With regard to the problems afflicting Macedonia, higher education for the Albanian-speaking citizens deserves our special attention.

Accessible higher education, with which you have a certain affinity, is an important instrument in the emancipation of population groups. I am speaking from personal experience as someone who attended the Protestant university in Amsterdam.

I might never have studied otherwise.

Such an affinity and this type of higher education is also important in the development of the constitutional state and for the aptly termed mainstream society which needs to be strengthened in countries like this.

The agreement with Macedonia should partly compensate for the damage which this country incurred following the boycott we instituted against Serbia, which is at no cost to us but costs Serbia' s neighbouring states all the more.

It would be beneficial if we could reorganise this, especially vis-à-vis the neighbouring states.

It is only fair that we should regulate aid to Macedonia properly now.

We are therefore quite prepared to support the liberals' amendment to keep aid independent from the donor states' interests, for we need to give industry in Macedonia and the region the best possible opportunities with the aid money available for reconstruction.

I am more than happy to include Bulgaria and Romania in this, as it seems to me a tactical and psychological error only to talk about the five countries of former Yugoslavia, plus Albania.

It is important to us that the economies in the region can stand on their own two feet again, which can quite easily be done with the aid money.

The agreement with Macedonia should be seen as a door opening to the European Union, allowing this country to join, even though this will not be the case in the foreseeable future.

In the meantime, we constantly need to start from the premise in our policy that it is desirable for Macedonian legislation to resemble that of the Member States, and our policy should reflect this, even in the naming of aid programmes for Macedonia.

I would quote the PHARE programme as an example.

Mr President, the name of the republic is still a problem on account of the Greek sensitivities surrounding it.

I assume that the Member States will feel increasingly freer to use the name in their own language which fits the republic.

If certain countries wish to use the words "former Yugoslavia" , then that is their business; others need not feel obliged to copy them.

It will not do to keep us under constant pressure.

Hence my support for the sound report by Mr Swoboda; we have come to expect nothing less of him, and hence also my words of appreciation for the respected Republic of Macedonia.

Mr President, Commissioner, I rise to express the warmth and optimism with which the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party welcomes the start of negotiations with the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.

We are extremely hopeful that, along the lines set out by the rapporteur, Mr Swoboda, this agreement can represent an example to be rapidly extended to the other countries, especially Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Montenegro and Kosovo and, as soon as possible, Serbia.

We are convinced a rapid start to these negotiations and their speedy conclusion is the only way to achieve peace in the region - peace which did not automatically come with the end of the Kosovo war - thus avoiding the recurrence of further disintegration and a return to chaos and violence, with all the consequences of that in terms of continental, if not world, instability.

If the maintenance of peace and security is the basic motivation of the current courageous process of enlargement of the Union to the countries of Eastern Europe, that motivation must be present even more strongly in relations with Albania and the countries of former Yugoslavia. And that means decisively pursuing the kind of parallel enlargement to south-east Europe that the agreements we are discussing represent.

It is in that quasi-provocative spirit that we have presented an amendment suggesting the transfer of responsibility for south-east Europe from Foreign Affairs to Enlargement.

Very rapid and direct involvement of south-east Europe in the life of the European institutions has also led us to suggest that a limited number of observers invited from the national parliaments should be accepted into the European Parliament, and that staff from those countries could work in the Court of Justice and the Commission.

But if the development in the region of a more democratic society and largely market-based economy is to be encouraged, we are convinced that immediate and concrete steps must be taken to intensify the struggle against corruption and to make international aid more effective for reconstruction and development.

With this in mind, we have presented some amendments which I hope Parliament will accept.

First, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia should be offered a customs tariff equal to zero for their exports to the European Union and compensation for the progressive reduction of customs duties applied by Macedonia to European products, on condition that the principle of joint customs control at the frontiers of Macedonia is accepted. Secondly, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia should be encouraged, with adequate financial support, to gradually link its currency to the euro as the first step towards the Europeanisation of the whole Macedonian economy, with the additional aim of eliminating any possible corruption in the banking system.

Thirdly, world aid and assistance coming into the region, and hence into Macedonia as well, should be clearly multilateral, and should not subject the beneficiary country to direct obligations towards the donor country.

Mr President, Commissioner, we hope the agreement can achieve all its objectives but we cannot delude ourselves that peace, stability and prosperity in south-east Europe can be achieved without dealing with the very wide-ranging problems we are trying to eliminate. I am referring to the future constitutional state of Kosovo, the need to involve Serbia in the region' s reconciliation process and - why not? - new discussions on relations between the European Union, NATO and the UN, in the light of the new balance that needs to be found between humanitarian intervention and state sovereignty, which I think calls for a change in the existing UN Charter.

Mr President, Commissioner, the war in Kosovo has knocked everything off balance.

This is certainly true for the relations between the European Union and the western Balkans.

Since then, expectations have been high.

This applies to them and us.

This is true on their part because - whether we like it or not - they are asking us for direct aid and they are wondering what Europe wants from them at the end of the day?

Is there any prospect of membership?

This is very much on their minds.

But here too, within the European Union, expectations are high.

If we do things properly, this may well be a first taster of a genuine common foreign and security policy. Will the Union manage to display a united front and develop a common policy, for the first time, concerning such a difficult regulation?

It also remains to be seen whether the European Union has learnt any lessons from the bad experiences in Bosnia when it comes to providing aid and the slightly better experiences in Kosovo. Can we, based on the experiences in Macedonia and in four other countries, improve on this?

Against this background of extremely high expectations, I do not think that I am exaggerating if I say that this first step, namely the stability and association agreement with Macedonia, is vitally important.

This is not the Union' s only contribution.

The debate on the Stability Pact, the debate on the CARA programme and the financing arrangements in the short term are all pending.

We are now dealing with the stabilisation and association agreements, that is to say a medium-term issue.

This is why I think that this first agreement with Macedonia is so crucial, because it serves as a model.

I am convinced that the four other countries are wondering what is going to happen.

What does the European Union intend to do with Macedonia?

Will it do the same to us?

This first step is so important because of this model function.

Macedonia also serves as a model for another reason.

The rapporteur has already hinted at this in no uncertain terms, namely, the issue of interethnic relations.

There is no need to paint too much of an idealistic picture.

During the presidential elections, it appeared that things were not running too smoothly, but compared to the rest of the region, Macedonia could serve as a model.

We would gain a great deal if we managed to export this model to the rest of the western Balkans with the help of the Macedonians.

This model function also applies to regional cooperation.

I could not agree more with the rapporteur: a balance must be struck between promoting regional cooperation on the one hand and maintaining the openness towards Bulgaria and Greece, and not cutting them off on the other.

Mr President, Commissioner, if we manage this first step successfully, we will have gained a great deal.

If we mess it up, then we will have lost a great deal more.

Mr President, let me begin by saying that I have no problem with approving this very sound report in principle.

I just want to point to one issue which in my view is not considered in the report and which raises a major problem in relation to Macedonia and the effectiveness of EU financial and other support.

I am referring to the sanctions against Yugoslavia.

Do not misunderstand me: I too believe that we need to take effective action against the Milosevic regime.

But firstly, these sanctions have a far-reaching and adverse impact on many of the neighbouring states too, including Macedonia, which find themselves in an extremely difficult economic situation as it is.

Secondly, the entire population of Yugoslavia is being held accountable for the actions of Milosevic and his circle, which is wrong on humanitarian grounds and politically counterproductive.

So I believe that we should take today' s debate as an opportunity to call for a rapid end to the policy of sanctions, as stated in Amendment No 10.

Mr President, we did not need to witness the end the Kosovo conflict to reach the conclusion that, after various wars in the territory of the former Yugoslavia, with their untold negative effects on the stability of the Balkans, a global and durable strategy for the whole region is needed, aimed at guaranteeing peace and stability in south-east Europe.

This strategy, which took shape in the Stability Pact adopted on 10 June 1999 in Cologne, considers south-east Europe as a whole, but simultaneously recognises the diversity and unequal development of the various countries that compose the region.

The European Union' s contribution under the Stability Pact, now converted into what is called the "stabilisation and association process" , represents a development in the regional concept the European Community drew up in 1996 for the five countries of the region: Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Albania. Its most significant aspect was the establishment of political and economic conditions intended to support the implementation of the Dayton peace agreement, and it should therefore contribute to regional stability.

So establishing relations between the European Union and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia on a completely new basis, and offering that country the prospect of full integration into the structures of the European Union through the mechanism of the stabilisation and association process, constitutes an important contribution to stability in the Balkans. The assumption is that the countries are prepared to accept a certain set of conditions.

The expectation is that we send them a politically relevant signal that it is possible for them to join us one day, maintaining respect for their sovereignty of course.

We are not deluding ourselves by believing that, once agreement is obtained, the mandate we are giving the Commission today could constitute a first major step towards peace and stability in that long-suffering region, where the people have already shown they have the right to seek membership of our area of freedom and development.

They have suffered enough, first under the Soviet yoke and then from the high price they paid for being forced to become part of the communist bloc.

The evidence is that the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia is politically and economically capable of establishing new contractual relations with the European Union, going beyond the cooperation agreement in force since 1 June 1998, which in practice targets respect for the acquis communautaire, especially in key areas of the internal market.

It is true that the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia still has a long way to go, but, given the political and economic reforms already made in the context of the cooperation agreement, and with transitional periods accepted for certain domains, the country will be able to fulfil the conditions for a stabilisation and association agreement.

We share the view that its development is a factor for stability in the region, we approve the terms of the negotiating mandate as proposed, emphasising that what is involved is a bilateral agreement with the European Union, and we agree with the rapporteur when he stresses that this is the first concrete application of an integrated long term strategy for south-east Europe, and that the issue is how the Balkans can be structured in the long term in order to guarantee peace and stability.

The various references made to regional cooperation with the neighbouring countries in fact become politically relevant in this context.

This agreement can and must become an example to the other countries in the region.

That is why it is so important.

The point is that underlying this whole process is an effective political will on the part of the European Union to draw closer to these countries.

We are aware that some of them are already undergoing processes of democratic stabilisation, that others still need to affirm the democratic authority of their governments, and that equilibrium in others depends on the military presence in the zone, but they are all countries which now know that, once they have overcome their difficulties, a bridge is available to provide an effective link with the European Union.

Mr President, Commissioner, I am not going to join in the unanimous chorus from my fellow Members.

I think this report is a small masterpiece of hypocrisy.

Paragraph 5 holds up this agreement as an example.

We know there are 13 applicant countries, from Lithuania to Turkey, and just one black hole in Europe, the Balkans, but because these countries are denied the opportunity to become applicants, we want to make them believe that this agreement is a miracle.

Paragraph 11 indicates that symbolic measures can replace the shared political outlook represented by applicant status.

But this is not just a masterpiece of hypocrisy, it is also an aberration, because, if negotiations begin tomorrow, this agreement will be signed in a year and will come into force in three years.

And I defy you to imagine that there will not be membership applications in due form from Croatia, Macedonia and Bosnia, amongst the Balkan countries, three years hence.

A few days ago Mr Racan announced that Croatia' s formal membership application would be presented at the end of 2000.

There are bound to be other applications and this great work, this fine intellectual architecture, will crumble, left behind by events just as we have been left behind by everything that has been happening in the former Yugoslavia for the past 20 years.

This would not be so serious if this region of Europe were not so beset by the problems we are all aware of, problems which are being addressed, but which have not yet been resolved, by the new government of Macedonia. There are the problems of coexistence between the Macedonian majority and the Albanian minority, the connected problems of Kosovo, the notorious economic problems, the problems of being neighbour to a particularly developed mafia in Serbia, and then there is the problem of the Greek veto which must be condemned for what it is.

After nearly 10 years, Greece continues to prevent this country being called by its own name, and I hope the interpreters have not used the term FYROM when I have been saying Macedonia.

It is absolutely absurd. Apart from anything else it is offensive, in my opinion, to the Greek MEPs and the citizens of Greece.

This question needs to be resolved urgently.

Finally, by happy chance, a letter from Mr Georgievski, President of Macedonia to Mr Fischler, dated 8 March, has come into my hands. In it, referring to Article O, now Article 49 of the Treaty, he asks if Macedonia can join the European Union.

Why has the Council not informed us of this?

Why has the Commission not informed us of this formal request from Macedonia?

Mr President, Commissioner, the Balkans are not purely a dark cave, politically speaking.

The decidedly positive developments in the Republic of Macedonia over the past critical years speak for themselves.

The gruesome escalation of ethnic violence in neighbouring Kosovo did not reach its territory.

Paradoxically, but truly, the war in Kosovo Polje generated exactly the opposite effect: the perilous gap of confidence between the Macedonian majority and the Albanian minority became decidedly smaller.

From the point of view of the Macedonian majority, the Albanian minority behaved loyally towards the common state during the international explosion of the Kosovo conflict.

In the eyes of the Albanian minority, the Macedonians and the Macedonian state have more than met their neighbourly obligations in respect of Kosovo' s Albanian majority who were persecuted to the extreme.

This remarkable upshot of the Kosovar war negotiations can therefore justifiably be seen as the internal, political establishment of the Republic of Macedonia the second time round.

Mr Swoboda' s well-balanced and laudable report fits in with this unexpected and delightful upshot on a very practical level.

In brief, the European Union knows what to do in Macedonia: to help this local port of refuge - recently used by scores of war refugees - to fulfil its role properly as a catalyst for the planned Stability Pact in the Balkans.

Mr President, as one who has been concerned with Macedonia for eight years, I have to contradict Mr Dupuis.

What we are doing here is not hypocritical.

We have reached a propitious moment and I think the Macedonians are glad about it.

Please stop being so unpleasant and pouring cold water on everything.

I think we should take a more positive approach here.

Macedonia did not go through a war.

But it suffered from the war in its vicinity and from the sanctions, as it is still suffering from the sanctions that were rightly imposed on the neighbouring countries. It suffered enormously from the influx of refugees during the Kosovo war.

So we must admit that developments in Macedonia have followed surprisingly continuous democratic lines.

This is a country that has difficult inter-ethnic problems to deal with at home, and is resolving them with increasing success. Let me emphasise that we can congratulate Macedonia on its exemplary legislation on ethnic minorities and the way it applies it and that the consistent policy of integrating the 30% of ethnic Albanians in government activity, in government policy and in society, is a precondition for peaceful coexistence in Macedonia.

I am glad to see that the hope Mr Swoboda expressed in his report will be fulfilled early in March, i.e. that we will finally have an EU delegation there and that we, as the European Union, will finally have a greater role to play there.

I believe that the opening of these negotiations on the stability and association process is the logical conclusion of a salutary and positive trend in that country.

As a sign of our political commitment, we must finally show Macedonia in practice that we are indeed rewarding its own welcome regional cooperation by genuinely embarking on regional projects.

Let me name just two small ones: the rapid resolution of the problem of the frontier crossing with Kosovo in Blace and the creation of Corridor 8, from Albania via Macedonia to Bulgaria.

I think Mr Swoboda has drafted an excellent report, and it has my wholehearted support.

Mr President, I too would like to compliment Mr Swoboda on his report.

I think it is a good thing that so many of us are expressing support for the approach he has adopted in it.

The report tackles stability in the region in a structural manner. This is also the purpose of the pending agreement with the Republic of Macedonia which we are debating today.

Although the actual implementation of the Stability Pact has not yet started, the Commission has already developed the new instrument, entitled the Stabilisation and Association Agreement.

This marks the beginning of the treaty-based stabilising process for the countries of the former Yugoslavia.

These countries do not yet qualify for a pre-accession agreement.

The present agreement is a kind of pre-pre-agreement, but with a view to joining in future.

The instrument of joining countries together by means of active treaties is excellent, provided that the agreements stipulated in them are implemented dynamically, so that the required stabilisation can actually be attained.

Macedonia remains a potential minefield and has a history to match.

It does, however, have the ambition to break free from this image.

The new government would like to tackle this matter and the agreement could be an agenda for reforms, including a direct role and equality for the Albanian minority.

More than anything, the country needs peace and quiet now, in order to put its internal house in order and to find the road to greater prosperity.

We, the social democrats, would urge the opposition to back these ideas.

They need to help support the much-praised Macedonian model.

But the country also - and especially - needs external stability. What is the point of having internal stability if the surrounding environment is unstable?

This stability is required in the relations with Yugoslavia, Kosovo, Albania and Bulgaria.

The region should recognise that Macedonia exists and that it will continue to exist.

External stability also means open borders and regional cooperation.

Minorities and majorities need to be given room for human and cultural exchange.

Macedonia' s stability is very much linked with the developments in the neighbouring countries.

The Kosovo problem is well-known and the international community is present there on a massive scale.

It seems that the Albania factor is being underestimated.

The Union considers it untimely to reach a stability and association agreement with this country.

It is the very argument to conclude an agreement with Macedonia and not yet with Albania that cause us so much concern, so much so that a passive stance from the Union vis-à-vis Albania is really not acceptable.

What does the Commission intend to do regarding this issue?

Yugoslavia is just as much a weak link in the stability process and, as such, a threat to Macedonia' s stability.

We need to wait and see what happens there.

The mood in Belgrade is becoming less predictable by the day.

We, however, second the Council' s decision to give the sanctions a different focus.

In this way, at least a serious attempt is being made to give the opposition, which is preparing for a new round of demonstrations, a shot in the arm.

What else will the Union undertake in this respect if the demand from the opposition - bringing forward elections - is met?

What else can we do to support this opposition?

Mr President, Commissioner, Kosovo was hopefully the last occasion on which international law could be interpreted as saying that dictators could persecute minorities in the most repellent way on the grounds that "it is happening within their own nation" .

When the USA and NATO and, finally, also the EU, reacted, it was already late, in fact very late.

A great deal of suffering could have been avoided if the EU, among others, has acted earlier and more decisively.

We, the European Union, therefore have a special responsibility to help, support and rebuild the Balkans now.

Our absolute objective must be to create the prior conditions for all countries in south-east Europe to be integrated with other countries in the EU - economically, politically and in terms of trade.

Fertile soil for the growth of democracy in this war-ravaged part of Europe is best provided through trade and economic integration.

We Liberals are prepared to go a long way and to do so quickly, just as Paolo Costa reported.

It is therefore with great satisfaction that we welcome the proposal that is now being made for a stabilisation and association agreement with Macedonia, and we thank Mr Swoboda for a very good report.

Macedonia deserves our support, especially in view of the self-sacrificial, disinterested work which the people and leaders of Macedonia undertook during the Kosovo war.

Now that Macedonia is prising itself loose from the crushing embrace of Communism and nationalism, it is our duty to act and provide support in no uncertain terms.

We should do exactly the same for the other countries in the Balkans.

This is an urgent duty for the EU.

Mr President, allow me in this context to remind MEPs - especially in view of a discussion earlier this evening - of the fact that the man who is mainly responsible for war, human degradation, murder and driving innocent people from their homes is still governing what remains of Yugoslavia, namely Serbia.

The man who is accused of genocide and who ought to be brought before the war crimes tribunal in the Hague still goes free.

As long as Milosevic is still there and Serbia is not pursuing a democratic path, Serbia constitutes a constant threat to peace throughout the Balkans, including in Macedonia.

Mr President, the agreement being promoted will be the first application of the Stability Pact in south-eastern Europe,

Its terms, which the Swoboda report accepts, are certainly not directed towards peace, but towards greater political and economic dominance of the country, and towards controlling its natural wealth, overexploiting its workforce and continuing to use that country as a springboard against the countries and peoples in the area who are resisting the new order.

All this, in exchange for the promise of future accession to the European Union.

The report accepts these attitudes along with the more general policy of the European Union on south-eastern Europe.

It is characteristic that the report congratulates FYROM on the constructive stance it maintained during the NATO attack, eulogises its pacifist role because it allowed its territory to be used as a base for NATO forces, but, of course, remains silent about the indignation of its people, which was manifested by mass demonstrations during the NATO bombardments.

Finally, because we consider that both the stability pact and the stabilisation and association process the European Union is implementing in countries in that area, will create new problems there, new tribulations for their peoples, and will reinforce the dominant role of the American and European imperialists, we will be voting against the report in an expression of our solidarity with the people of FYROM.

Mr President, Commissioner, one of the most basic aims of the European Union' s stability and association agreement with the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia is to establish stability and peace in the area, and this, of course, presupposes developing and maintaining good neighbourly relations between the countries involved.

I shall not bother you with details of the problem concerning the name FYROM, which as you must know, is the subject of a difference of opinion with Greece and of negotiations between the two countries lasting over four years, under the aegis of the Secretary General of the UN in the context of related Security Council resolutions, but also the conventional obligation of the respective parties pursuant to Article 5 of the so-termed Intermediate Agreement of 1995.

I do, however, think it appropriate to say that, at the forthcoming negotiations and with the conclusion of the association agreement, the European side must point out to the Skopje government the need for it to show appropriate constructive political will, so that it may contribute positively to a successful outcome of the talks in New York.

I should like to hope that such an appeal from Europe, with parallel emphasis on the difficulties that any further indecision would create for completing and implementing the association agreement, would be duly heeded and appraised accordingly by the Skopje government, so that it can respond appropriately, on the one hand, to Greece' s demonstrably conciliatory attitude concerning the specific issue, and, on the other hand, to the more general practical, declared intention and disposition of all the partners in the European Union, including Greece, to facilitate and support FYROM' s progress towards a United Europe.

Mr President, this is because I do not think that the harmonious day to day relations, contacts and communication between FYROM and Greece that have actually been achieved at both bipartite and multipartite level, and this mainly thanks to the practical arrangements of the intermediate agreement, I repeat, I do not think these sufficiently cover the conditions and criteria of good neighbourliness necessary, inter alia, for negotiating and concluding an association agreement.

On the contrary, I think that this demand can only be considered satisfied by a de jure full normalisation of FYROM' s relations with all its neighbours.

That, combined with the essential improvement of certain aspects of the internal situation in that country, in the area of minorities and democratic institutions, would round off the image of political maturity which FYROM has, in fact, presented in other respects and which has made our European family welcome closer relations with it.

Mr President, I found what Mr Souladakis said much more sensible than the statements by other colleagues from his Member State.

So I must say quite plainly that anyone who tries to tie the agreement with Macedonia to resolving the issue of the country' s name, as he does, will not only find Macedonia itself against him but all the other EU Member States too.

Let me also say quite openly that he is thereby doing huge damage to his own country' s interests.

It is in our interest to see stability and peace in the Balkans, and there is a chance of that, although the Stability Pact is in danger of becoming a stillborn entity.

I hope that is not the case, but the risk is there.

That is precisely why it is so urgent for the EU to take a bilateral approach to the individual states and for us to open up definite prospects of EU membership for Macedonia.

So I welcome Mr Swoboda' s excellent report, especially paragraph 12, which quite clearly maps out a European, an EU, prospect for Macedonia.

Without indulging in any illusions, I believe that is important, it has to happen.

We know it cannot happen overnight, but a definite statement to the effect that Macedonia is quite clearly a European country and therefore has the right to be a member of the European Union is a most important, confidence-building measure.

In my view, this is a unique opportunity to strengthen a democracy that has not only established a unique multi-ethnic government in this region but is also strengthening the autonomy of the local authorities, reforming the judicial and economic systems, and doing so under the most difficult conditions, in the aftermath of nationalism, Communism and war.

A few years ago, I had the privilege of inviting the current President and Prime Minister here as private individuals.

At the time they were still finding it very difficult to build on their various contacts here.

I am very happy to see they have kept the promise they made at the time: to build up a profoundly European democracy.

We must thank them for playing this important role in moving towards peace, stability and democracy, at a very critical time last year, as I said, and at a strategically crucial point.

So we are not just the donors here, we were also the recipients, and we owe it to the Macedonians to thank them for fulfilling a crucial European mission at that time.

That is why it is important to negotiate and ratify the agreement promptly, rapidly to upgrade the EU representation to official delegation status, for our Commissioner to visit Macedonia very soon, as I hear he will, and for us to open up a definite prospect of EU membership for this country, as the Swoboda report does.

This has been a very interesting general debate about the Balkans as a whole.

It was none the worse for that, but perhaps I will be forgiven for concentrating very largely on the report because there are some extremely important issues that I want to touch on.

I am delighted to be able to be able to set out the Commission's position on the report.

It is very helpful. It is an excellent contribution by Mr Swoboda and his colleagues.

We are very grateful for his leadership on this issue and for that of some of his colleagues, a number of whom are in the House this evening - Mrs Pack, Mr Lagendijk and others.

I am very pleased that at our overall relations with FYROM are in such a good state.

Perhaps Mr Dupuis will forgive me for using that expression - both he and his interpreter - in the spirit of entente cordiale.

That has been helped by our excellent European Union representative in the country. He has been a great friend to Parliament and a great servant of the Commission.

The imminent commencement of negotiations on a stabilisation and association agreement is the most powerful example of our good relations. So to is the cooperation of FYROM in the rebuilding of Kosovo.

I am grateful to the authorities in Macedonia for their assistance in recent weeks in helping to cope with the considerable difficulties with the power supply in Kosovo.

Like honourable Members I recognise the stabilising role that this country has played during the Balkan tragedy, in particular when it comes to integrating the Albanian minority into the political and social life of the country.

I saw the newly-elected President Georgievski a few weeks ago and I was extremely impressed, as others have been, by his commitment to multi-ethnicity and pluralism.

Let me set out where matters now stand on these negotiations to which - as Mr Lagendijk said - other countries in the region are looking with very considerable interest.

The Council adopted on 24 January this year its negotiating directives for a stabilisation and association agreement with the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. This represents the most important step forward in the stabilisation and association process of the western Balkans region initiated by the Commission in May 1999.

Let me make clear the main elements of those draft directives. They cover the inclusion in the agreement of arrangements establishing a political dialogue with FYROM.

They cover provisions for enhanced regional cooperation including the prospect of establishing free trade areas between the countries of the region, though I must make it clear that there is no question of any attempt to recreate the state of Yugoslavia.

They cover the prospect of the establishment of a free trade area between the European Union and them within ten years of the entry into force of the agreement.

They cover provisions on the movement of workers, freedom of establishment, supply of services, current payments and movement of capital.

They cover a commitment by FYROM to approximate its legislation to that of the European Community, notably in key areas of the internal market; and they cover provisions on cooperation with FYROM in a wide range of fields, including justice and home affairs.

We are now making in the Commission the necessary preparations so that negotiations can start in March.

I am due to visit FYROM in the second week in March. I hope to be able to set the process in motion then, although the formal negotiations will start very shortly thereafter.

At the time of that visit I will also, as recommended by honourable Members and others, be upgrading our representation in FYROM.

The target date for concluding the negotiations is December this year but this will depend to a very large extent on the goodwill and determination of the negotiators.

The agreement could enter into force in three to four years from now, given the time needed for ratification in Member States' parliaments.

I should like to comment very briefly on a number of other points in the draft resolution.

We accept that the agreement should to a certain extent serve as an example for other such agreements, although obviously we will also want to take account of the fact that we are dealing with different countries, each of which has its own identity and its own concerns.

I share the wide-spread concern that we should treat each country on its merits and not shackle everyone to the pace of the slowest in the development of relations with the Union.

That has never been the intention.

The very fact that negotiations are beginning first with FYROM, before all the others, is evidence that we can and do differentiate.

On the provision of regional aid referred to in the report we agree that our technical and financial assistance should go in part to projects having a cross-border or regional dimension.

We agree that there should be an evolutionary clause on the prospect of EU membership contained in the stabilisation and association agreement. It will reflect the European Union's position on its relations with the countries of the western Balkans as set out in the Cologne European Council conclusions.

We strongly agree on the need to decentralise our assistance programmes to the maximum possible extent.

As for the arrangements covering European Union assistance to the western Balkans, Members will be aware that we are drawing up a new regulation to simplify and streamline their management and to put everything under one regulation.

I am aware that there is concern in FYROM and elsewhere at the end of the PHARE programme in these countries and, especially, at the loss of association with the PHARE name. I note with considerable concern what Members say on this score.

I will take another look at the issue, although I should point out that having two PHARE programmes up and running risks real confusion.

I want to stress, however, that whatever the programme is called, our commitment to the integration of FYROM and its neighbours into the European family is stronger than ever.

In general I trust that Members of this House will share my pleasure that Macedonia has reached this stage relatively rapidly.

I hope that the other countries of the region will redouble their efforts to make similar progress.

I look forward to many similar debates to this over the next few years marking, I hope, the success of what we are trying to do in the Balkans which, for me, remains the single most important litmus-test of what Europe is able to do on its own doorstep.

Thank you very much, Commissioner Patten.

The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 p.m.

The next item is the report (A5-0021/2000) by Mrs Frassoni, on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs, on the agreement between the European Parliament and the Commission on the implementation of the new Council decision of 28 June 1999 on comitology (1999/468/EC).

Mr President, comitology is a concept most people do not know how to handle and hardly anyone knows what it means.

It makes them think of secret societies and conspiracies, which is the way things used to be.

In fact, it implies nothing other than fixing the procedures for the exercise of the implementing powers conferred on the Commission.

The procedures for exercising these implementing powers take the form of a limited number of committee procedures.

Up until the Amsterdam Treaty, there were about 20 variations of these committee procedures, which created neither clarity in the implementation of legislation nor transparency for the citizens.

On the contrary, for a long time even the European Parliament was not informed.

For the European Parliament, the first step in the struggle for more transparency in this jungle of committees was to be informed, at least, of all that the European Commission intended to regulate in the context of these various committees.

Agreement was reached in 1988 in the form of an exchange of letters between Lord Plumb and Mr Delors.

A further step towards transparency and the involvement of the European Parliament came with what is known as the modus vivendi of 20 September 1994, which granted Parliament the right not only to be informed but also to intervene in certain cases.

It also gave it the possibility of scrutiny.

With the Amsterdam Treaty, the situation improved decidedly when the number of committee procedures was drastically reduced - as the European Parliament had long wanted - to three procedures, the administrative procedure, the regulatory procedure and the advisory procedure.

Now, following the Amsterdam Treaty, the rights of information and control granted to the European Parliament in the past need to be enshrined anew in an interinstitutional agreement.

Mrs Frassoni, our rapporteur, has done very careful work and identified the questions that have to be clarified in the context of that interinstitutional agreement and the administrative procedures that may have to be changed within Parliament. A key problem is the time factor.

When the European Parliament is informed, it generally has to adopt a position within the very short timeframe of four weeks, should it so wish.

In matters relating to the health and safety of the people of the European Union, the European Commission, as guardian of the Treaties and the only institution with the right of initiative, must be in a position to react very rapidly, if necessary within a few hours or days.

Nevertheless, the European Parliament must retain the right to be informed and where appropriate also to react.

Our rapporteur identifies very useful solutions to these difficulties, which I and my group can only support in full.

I just have one more request. In the German version, paragraph 2 of the resolution has been translated rather misleadingly and I urgently ask for clarification, which I would also like to see in the printed version later.

In my view, instead of "weitergeführt werden müssen" the wording should be "erhalten bleiben müssen" .

The German version is not very clear here.

I would ask for that to be checked again.

For the rest, I warmly thank our rapporteur.

It is a difficult subject and I hope we have managed to make it somewhat easier to deal with now.

Mr President, I congratulate the rapporteur on her report. I must add that it is a welcome change to see Mrs Frassoni in such a conciliatory mood and willing to reach compromises with the other institutions.

When it comes to the IGC, she is one of what the French call "les pures et dures" : no compromise, no deals with the other institutions; we would rather see the whole thing blocked than compromise our positions.

Yet here she is willing to accept the steps forward that have been achieved, which are far from matching Parliament' s original position on the issue of comitology.

Let us remember what is at stake here. Parliament had four main criticisms of the comitology system as it existed prior to the new Council decision supplemented by this interinstitutional agreement.

Firstly, the whole system is obscure.

It is not transparent with hundreds of committees meeting with secret agendas and nobody knowing who is on the committees.

Here is a real step forward, in the new system that has been agreed.

We are to know who is on each committee. We are to know when they meet.

We are to get the agendas. We are to get the documents that are sent to them.

The whole system will be more open and transparent - if still rather complex.

So that is at least a step forward.

Our second criticism is that the system was very restrictive of the Commission. We adopt legislation in the European Union.

We expect the Commission to implement it. And then we have a system designed to hinder the Commission and make it more difficult - especially what was called the "contre-filet" system, under which the Council could block the Commission by a simple majority even when the Council was not capable of finding an alternative to the implementing measure concerned.

Here too there is at least some progress.

The Council will no longer be able to block implementing measures indefinitely beyond the three-month period unless it has a qualified majority to block it, in other words, unless there is substantial opposition among the Member States represented in the Council.

That is a more reasonable system. That, too, is a step forward.

But on our other two criticisms, we are less satisfied.

The first criticism is of the system whereby the Commission is monitored, scrutinised, controlled if you like, only by a committee appointed by Member States or the Council not by Parliament.

The legislative authority, Council and Parliament, should be equal.

We confer implementing powers on the Commission, but then it is only a Council or Member State appointed body that can blow the whistle and say no to the Commission and stop the implementing measure.

True, we are now given the beginning of such a power in this new system.

We are to receive all the draft implementing measures forwarded to a committee at the same time as it is sent to the committee.

We will have the chance to scrutinise, to debate, to question. But we will only have the right to formally challenge the Commission if we think it has gone beyond the delegation that we have given to the Commission in the legislation.

In other words, we can challenge the measure for being ultra-vires but not on its content. And in a democracy, Parliament should be able to challenge the content.

Not that we do so every week.

We are not seeking to immerse ourselves in implementing decisions, but it is a democratic safeguard that we should be able to do so on those few occasions when it really would be necessary.

That is lacking in this new system, or at least is only there in embryonic form.

Finally, our fourth criticism is that if an implementing measure is blocked through the comitology system it is referred back, not to both branches of the legislative authority, but to the Council alone, which has the right possibly to take an alternative measure.

That is not correct. Both branches adopt the legislation - Council and Parliament - that confers implementing powers on the Commission.

If such implementing measures are referred back, it should be to both branches, not to one branch alone.

Overall we have a system which has made some progress.

The supplementary aspects that arise from the interinstitutional agreement with the Commission are welcome, but that could not change the basic decision of the Council.

Even here, we have renounced voluntarily - because this did not happen automatically - the Plumb-Delors agreement as part of the overall compromise.

We have been willing to relinquish the provisions in that. We shall have to be very vigilant on what used to be covered by that agreement and is not fully covered by the new decision.

So it is a step forward.

My group reluctantly accepts it as a step forward.

We are not as enthusiastic about compromising as Mrs Frassoni.

We recognise that there are limitations and the issue will no doubt come back in a few years' time.

If we want a Union that is democratic and transparent to the fullest degree we will have to revisit this subject.

Mr President, first I want to thank the rapporteur, Mrs Frassoni, for her work.

It is never easy working on comitology.

Mrs Schleicher referred to a kind of committee magic, something we have long talked about.

Certainly the process has always been very complex, as a result of historical decisions, and these must eventually be rationalised.

In my opinion, the agreement reached between Commission and Parliament is a clear rationalisation of the process.

From our point of view, it satisfies the fundamental interests of Parliament.

Mr Corbett set out Parliament' s concerns.

He says some of them have been satisfied and others have not.

I would say the ones the Commission was able to satisfy have been satisfied.

Mr Corbett is raising issues the Council decision does not cover, and unfortunately we can go no further on those.

So how far have we come?

There is no doubt that we have reached a fundamental point, highlighted by Mrs Frassoni, given that we now have an automatic information system.

This will facilitate two activities Parliament is especially interested in.

One is knowing how the committees operate, about their composition, agendas, descriptions, and so on, and the other is the right of scrutiny over actual decisions.

I think this is a good agreement.

It is a good agreement which undoubtedly improves the transparency of the process.

From here on things are going to be easier.

But the agreement we are reaching today should not be regarded as a backward step compared with the Plumb/Delors Agreement.

Mr Corbett referred to that, but the new model is certainly much more complex, different because the situation is now different, and, in our opinion, much more coherent.

We have made a start, and we hope the work will produce some excellent results.

We think there are other positive advances too.

To a certain extent we have gone beyond agreements which are already dated and, by realigning old procedures with the new situation, we aim to clear up everything still outstanding from the past.

From the Commission' s point of view, our conclusion is that this is a good agreement, and we want to thank the Members of Parliament who worked on it - especially Mrs Frassoni.

We hope that this new climate means we have achieved the result we were seeking, which is greater transparency and better information about the decisions of the Commission as an executive.

Thank you very much, Commissioner Solbes Mira.

The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 p.m.

Protocol on the excessive deficit procedure

The next item is the report (A5-0013/2000) by Mr Knörr Borràs, on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, on a proposal for a Council Regulation amending Regulation (EC) No 3605/93 on the application of the Protocol on the excessive deficit procedure annexed to the Treaty establishing the European Community (COM(1999) 444 - C5-0174/1999 - 1999/0196(CNS))

Mr President, I am also pleased to welcome the Spanish Commissioner, Mr Solbes Mira, whom I have congratulated more than once, inside and outside this Parliament, on the excellent work he did in Spain on the subject of European convergence.

The proposal for an amendment to this regulation on the application of the Protocol on the excessive deficit procedure, annexed to the Treaty of Maastricht, raises fundamental issues concerning the switch to the 1995 European system of accounts, which, as you know, replaced the previous System of Accounts adopted in 1979, and in particular the emergence of new financial product categories, consistency in the calculation of the ratios of government deficit to gross domestic product on the basis of ESA 95 and, finally, recognising the importance of calculating interest expenditure and the consistency of the latter with this new methodology.

In our view, the main purpose of the proposal for a regulation is to update the definitions and the assessments of some of the economic operations involved in the calculation of deficits, as reflected in the Treaty establishing the European Community, the Treaty of Maastricht, which lays down the maximum percentages which the government deficit must not exceed as a ratio of GDP at market prices in the various Member States.

To date, the Member States have calculated this GDP in accordance with the criteria laid down in ESA 79.

The most recent estimate of the deficit was submitted in September 1999 and it relates to the 1998 financial year.

Therefore, if the regulation is adopted, the estimate which is due to appear in March 2000, the first estimate of the deficit for the 1999 accounting year, will be made using the new system.

We know the Member States have done their duty - if I can use that expression - doing their calculations and preparing their national accounts in line with ESA 95, and they have already published their corresponding estimates.

In addition to incorporating a new methodology, this has meant making slight changes to most accounting aggregates and operations, on account of the aforesaid methodological changes, and also the improved statistical information included in the estimates.

These changes may of course alter the government deficits in terms of the Member States' national accounting.

I will now describe, very briefly, the five areas where the most important changes may occur.

First, the adjustments to the scope of what is meant by 'government institutional sector' under ESA 95.

This is important, since government deficit means the deficit accumulated by all forms of government.

The non-availability of precise criteria for the definition of government deficit would produce distortions in the estimates of the Member States' government deficits.

Secondly, the deficit - or, if applicable, the surplus - means the ESA 95 government sector' s net borrowing requirement or lending ability respectively

Thirdly, government investment means the gross fixed capital formation of the general government sector, as defined in ESA 95.

Fourthly, government debt is defined in accordance with ESA 95, as are the flows or interest stemming from assets/liabilities.

Fifthly and finally, the aggregate to which government debt will relate will be gross domestic product at current market prices, estimated in accordance with the 1995 European System of Accounts' definitions.

To summarise, I consider that this proposal constitutes a satisfactory adaptation of the criteria laid down in the 1995 European System of Accounts, and I therefore approve it in full, as did the committee.

Mr President, the beauty of statistical data is that it is not only reliable but also comparable.

This is of great importance, especially in the light of European unification and the completion of the internal market.

This is why this report is also so politically charged: a report, by the way, on which we would like to congratulate the rapporteur warmly.

It also inspires a few political comments.

The Stability Pact is a given in Europe.

All countries participating in the euro have committed themselves, in the medium term, to striving towards a budget which is either balanced or shows up a slight surplus.

This, of course, does not mean that, if the economic climate is less than favourable, the budget could not fluctuate up or down slightly. It means that, in the long and medium term, there should be a balance or surplus.

The stronger the position of the participating countries, the stronger the euro will be.

As a result, the three percent standard will rarely be exceeded, not even in a bad economic climate. This is the theory behind it, anyway.

We have always been of the opinion that these criteria should be stringently met.

That is of great importance in order to turn the EMU into a success, now and in the future.

Strict compliance with the Stability Pact can thus contribute to a culture of stability within all EMU Member States.

Various Member States have taken one-off measures to be able to meet the criteria.

We are of the opinion that the Member States' budget policy should be strictly supervised, to ensure that the measures continue to be taken in the spirit of the prescribed criteria at all times.

A drop in standards should not be allowed.

We are also of the opinion that a further reduction in the burden and reducing the national debt should be prioritised.

Indeed, we still have not managed to stop passing on the burden to future generations.

(ES) Mr President, many thanks, first of all, to the rapporteur for his splendid work.

It was a subject which called for a large dose of technical skill and I think Mr Knörr has handled it with great precision and professionalism.

I would not presume to be able to summarise the content of our proposal better than he has done; I would just like to add one small point: in addition to adaptation to ESA 95, there are two small technical changes which Mr Knörr knows all about, relating to interest and the valuation of debt in foreign currency.

I just mention that to complete the view of the process.

Secondly, I would like to thank Mr Knörr for his speediness.

He has done really good work in a very short time.

This is an important subject for certain references which we have heard subsequently.

What we are seeking with this legislation is not to make the statistics reliable and comparable - they already are - but to make them more reliable and more comparable.

Obviously, the fact that Parliament has taken its decision so quickly will mean that the March figures can already be calculated on the basis of these new criteria.

That being so, I believe the final result will be better.

The figures will be more reliable and more comparable and I think the concerns some Members have raised about compliance with the stability pact can be better addressed.

It does deal with the substance of the problem some of you have raised.

But we do need to think about how we deal with the substance of the problem.

The stability pact is in place and we will continue to press ahead with monitoring compliance by the various Member States, despite the fact that the results are clearly positive in all the Member States where we have analysed the position as regards the stability of the government deficit.

But we see no reason to lower our guard.

We must press on in that direction because we know it is vital.

So, once again - and finally - I want to thank you for your help in allowing us to measure stability with greater technical certainty and better comparability.

Thank you very much, Commissioner Solbes Mira.

The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 p.m.

Increasing penal sanctions against counterfeiting of the euro

The next item is the report (A5-0020/2000) by Mrs Cederschiöld, on behalf of the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs, on a draft Framework Decision of the Council on increasing protection by penal sanctions against counterfeiting in connection with the introduction of the euro (5116/1999 - C5-0332/1999 - 1999/0821(CNS)).

(SV) Mr President, ladies and gentlemen (all the more welcome for being so few in number), one might have thought that it was an unimportant subject which was to be discussed at this hour, but that is not the case.

It is a definite and concrete issue.

It is about our common currency.

How many people here know that this currency is being counterfeited and that we have a quite unacceptable state of affairs?

We cannot permit our common currency to become weaker through its being counterfeited.

The ECB, ECOFIN, Europol, OLAF and the Commissioner responsible for legal questions have therefore realised that common countermeasures must be taken quickly in order to close the loopholes left by the legislation.

It is easy to forget that it will be possible to exchange the old currencies for twenty years after the new currency has been introduced.

It is therefore important to include these currencies too in the section of the present programme of measures which deals with penal sanctions.

This is something which Parliament has said it wants to see added.

The Council ought to have given Parliament the stipulated three-month period within which to consider, too, the last document produced on this matter, but we are all aware of how urgent it is to have these measures put safely in place.

Because the issue is to be decided upon in March in the Council, Parliament has cause to adopt a position on the proposal now, so that the Member States have time also to take due account of Parliament' s points of view in the decision which has to be made in March.

Any country which began to make difficulties would incur a responsibility for the currency, and that country would be accountable, both morally and economically, if its actions were to contribute to a delay.

A country which acted in that way would bring a lot of ill will upon itself.

On 1 January 2002 the euro will be in circulation.

The whole of the Union must have the same protection, a type of protection which prohibits counterfeiting, not only of currencies in circulation but also of currencies which will be in circulation.

It is important that, in time, there should be a more or less similar-looking form of protection under criminal law in all countries.

The Commission has proposed measures aimed at providing information, together with penal sanctions, preventive measures and the pooling of experience. These measures do, in fact, entail a certain necessary harmonisation in as much as the lowest acceptable maximum penalty for currency counterfeiting is to be eight years' imprisonment.

Trading with counterfeit currencies and the possession of counterfeiting equipment will also become criminal offences.

Quite simply, we are to have a minimum level for the maximum penalty.

The denominations of the euro are well known.

Modern computer equipment can be used to cause a very great deal of damage if we do not protect ourselves.

Parliament has tabled a number of amendments to the present proposal, for example in regard to jurisdiction, the idea being that a person may only be prosecuted and sentenced in the one country for the same crime.

There are also proposed sanctions against companies which are involved in counterfeiting, this being a measure which we would encourage.

The new applicant States are also encouraged to adapt to these regulations.

It has taken two years for the Council and the Commission to produce this proposal.

It is essential that the decision should now be taken in March.

To delay, or perhaps even risk damage to the euro, would be indefensible.

It would also be a betrayal of the people who will be handling the new, unfamiliar notes.

In particular, it is believed that counterfeiters will turn their attention to countries outside the euro zone, where people are less familiar with the new currency.

The protective measures cover these countries too, and the views expressed by these countries have carried a lot of weight.

The present proposal is therefore staunchly inclusive and reciprocal in character, accepting responsibility for a variety of interests in a way which imposes obligations upon others.

The Council must now convene in March and make the relevant decision.

Thank you, too, those who contributed to this matter' s being dealt with swiftly. I am thinking in particular of the Group of the Party of European Socialists.

Mr President, first I want to compliment the rapporteur, Charlotte Cederschiöld, on drawing up this report, which is an excellent point of departure for increasing protection by penal sanctions against counterfeiting in connection with the introduction of the euro. The euro will enter into circulation on 1 January 2002 and will become one of the world' s most important reserve currencies.

Due to its importance on a world scale, the euro will be particularly exposed to the risk of counterfeiting and forgery.

This draft decision therefore lays down a set of minimum standards intended to harmonise criminal law in this field and make its application by each Member State simpler and more effective.

It also provides for the euro to be protected even prior to its circulation, which will fill a gap in legislation in some Member States.

I expressly support the rapporteur as regards the need to extend this protection to national currencies which can continue to be exchanged after they have been withdrawn from circulation.

This means that every Member State must guarantee the establishment of effective, adequate penal sanctions, which act as a deterrent against the offences covered by the draft framework decision.

As to the proposal to establish a maximum custodial sentence of not less than eight years, I do not think that this will raise any problems as far as my country is concerned, even though the maximum sentence for counterfeiting under its criminal code is currently five years in prison, as it has already expressed willingness to make this amendment.

I also call on those few Member States still harbouring reservations to resolve them so that a decision can rapidly be reached on this matter, for the reasons our rapporteur set out earlier when she called for this to be done.

Mr President, this draft framework decision represents the first time a common proposal on crime has been put forward, with legislation to be applied by all fifteen Member States at the same time.

We are therefore making progress towards the aim of developing and confirming the status of the European Union as an area of freedom, security and justice, as expressed at Tampere.

Mr President, I need not repeat what the rapporteur said or the points Mr Coelho made. All that is indeed very true and correct.

It is easy to counterfeit the euro. We are going through a dangerous transitional phase in which a phenomenon has appeared in criminal law that is perhaps unique in monetary history.

It is that a currency that does not even exist yet, that is not in circulation, but exists only as bank deposit money, can nevertheless be counterfeited already. Yet because that currency is not yet in circulation as such, counterfeiting euros does not at present constitute a criminal offence.

It is a highly complex problem.

If we do not act promptly - as Mrs Cederschiöld rightly said - anyone can produce a few counterfeit euros now and possibly not be prosecuted for subsequently putting them into circulation.

Let me say in passing that this may seem an attractive prospect for a number of people.

So what is the European Union doing about it?

It is doing a number of things that are right, as Mrs Cederschiöld has described; but, in the context of these things she described, Parliament must look not so much at the content of the framework decision, not so much at the report drawn up by Mrs Cederschiöld, but more at the procedures that are being applied.

The manner in which the Council, which is by far the most undemocratic institution in Europe, consulted the European Parliament makes a mockery of the concept of democracy.

We received a text for consultation which the Council had been working on for a very long time, incidentally with only partial success - I will come to that in a moment.

Now the European Parliament is supposed to state its position on this complex, difficult and, at times, contradictory Council document in the space of three months.

It is only thanks to the immense efforts of Mrs Cederschiöld and to Parliament' s decision not to stand by its democratic right to conduct its advisory procedure over an adequate period of time and to have all the documents available in all the languages, that we have now managed to give our position by the date set by the Council, so that the decision scheduled for March can indeed be taken.

On a subject as important as counterfeiting and protection against counterfeiting and harmonising the necessary criminal law provisions we cannot really work at the ridiculous pace the Council is demanding of us.

So let me state quite clearly here, on behalf of my group, that we discussed at length with Mrs Cederschiöld whether it is reasonable to work like this.

We concluded that it is not, but given the importance of the issue we nonetheless agreed to accept this procedure.

This framework decision does without any doubt represent some progress.

Only, as Mrs Cederschiöld pointed out, in the end it does not fully achieve the legal certainty the Council wanted because various shortcomings have not been dealt with. They relate to the minimum rules we are seeking to establish, the minimum rules relating to a punishable offence and in particular the application of the same criminal law norms in all Member States, including those that have not yet introduced the euro but where it could theoretically be counterfeited.

One reason they have not been dealt with is that as ever the leopard cannot change its spots, i.e. in the case of this framework decision, which specifically relates to judicial cooperation, the Council once again prefers to adhere to the level of government cooperation.

That is why, and I quote, this framework decision "is confined to supplementing the provisions of the International Convention of 20 April 1929 for the suppression of counterfeiting and its Protocol" , i.e. the provisions of a timeworn international convention that is a good 71 years old.

That means that the legal basis we are now seeking to establish to protect the euro does not derive from Community legislation, as it should, but merely takes the form of provisions supplementing an international convention dating back 71 years.

I leave it to the assembled company in this Chamber to decide whether that can be the future of a European Union based on judicial cooperation.

Thank you for your attention during our night sitting together.

I should like to take over the baton from the previous speaker.

There are a number of questions of principle which are demanding solutions, because the point of departure is, of course, that the regulation of criminal law is a national concern.

Criminal law is part of each individual nation' s own cultural tradition, and it is very difficult to arrive at common definitions of what is to be understood by these basic legal concepts.

I appreciate Mrs Cederschiöld' s work, and my point of departure will be her search - in connection with the Tampere Summit - for common definitions and common regulations regarding what is punishable and what common sanctions can be applied.

She would like to devise these sanctions jointly so as to arrive at a coherent criminal justice system for offences which have particular relevance for the EU.

But the problem is that there is no legal basis for this, and with good reason, because the regulation of criminal law belongs to the sphere of national jurisdiction.

In that context, I want to ask the following question of the Commission' s and the Council' s representatives: is the legal basis which has been invoked adequate?

In my view, it is clearly in conflict with, and far exceeds the scope of, Article 34, paragraph 2, point b where a legal basis is established for so-called framework decisions which are binding upon the Member States in regard to the desired objectives, but in which it is left to the national authorities to determine the form and methods of implementation.

What of course characterises the present draft framework decision is the fact that the Member States' obligations are laid down in detail. There is no freedom of choice regarding methods and implementation.

In my view, this exceeds the parameters of the legal basis.

I should like an answer from the Commission and the Council, for I consider it obvious that Article 31 does not supply the relevant legal basis.

Mr President, Commissioner, let me begin by warmly congratulating and thanking the rapporteur and pointing out that, in her report, she does not just welcome the draft framework decision but also proposes a few changes, which have been referred to by various speakers but which we cannot discuss in detail now, to supplement and improve the text.

It is crucially important to continue the success story of the euro and we must make every effort not to spoil this success story or put it at risk by taking inadequate measures to prevent counterfeiting - and we are well aware of the initial attempts that are being made.

We have all noted that the conversion phase will bring uncertainty and risks with it.

So, in addition to the efforts to combat counterfeiting, to ensure the sound implementation of the provisions, the planned information campaign will of course play a key role and here we still have serious work to do.

We are also concerned with the question of cooperation.

We need to define the precise responsibilities of the ECB, the national central banks, the Commission and Europol pertaining to all matters relating to counterfeiting of the euro.

I also think we should perhaps consider setting up an interinstitutional or EU body in charge of coordinating the cooperation work.

In the same context, we could establish an early warning system functioning round the clock, together with a common information system for the rapid exchange of data between the responsible authorities.

Aside from the report, which we welcome, many questions have arisen that still need to be resolved.

I hope the debate we are holding here will bring some clarification.

Mr President, Mrs Cederschiöld, ladies and gentlemen, how safe is the euro?

That is, after all, a question the people often ask.

And that question will of course become increasingly pressing with the approach of 1 January 2002, the date when they will have euros in their pockets.

For the safety of the euro is not just a matter of the stability and external value of the currency but, in fact, also of protecting the euro against counterfeiting.

That too is a concern of the people, for, as has rightly been said, this will be a new currency for them, new in terms of how it looks and also how it is used.

Of course all the citizens of the EU Member States will also be faced with the novelty of a currency that is valid over such a wider area, and even beyond Europe, as a reserve currency.

They will need time to get used to that too.

So it is clearly necessary to ask what the EU is doing to protect the euro against counterfeiting.

And that is what we are discussing at this late hour.

This really is a subject that is close to the citizen, so it is a pity it is being debated at such a late hour.

Of course, the European Central Bank has been looking into the matter for a very long time.

After all, it is responsible for technical measures to protect against counterfeiting.

As has also been pointed out, in summer 1998 the Commission submitted a communication listing a very wide variety of areas where measures need to be taken, such as information, further training - an important area, cooperation between the euro-states and of course even beyond them, and measures under criminal law.

That is what this framework decision is about.

Mrs Cederschiöld, let me offer you sincere thanks on behalf of the Commission and, above all, let me also thank Parliament for being prepared to give its position in the space of such a short time.

The framework decision aims to ensure that the Member States apply the same definition of counterfeiting offences.

Of course the first condition for uniform action is always to have uniform definitions and, as was emphasised, what we are basically trying to do is to ensure that the euro is protected even before it is physically introduced.

Naturally, the Commission is also glad that the European Parliament' s prompt decision - and I hope the vote will be in favour - means the framework decision can enter into force very rapidly now, so that we can begin to transpose it.

For the Commission has been asked to report, as it will in the first half of next year, on the progress in transposing it in the Member States, on whether the serious nature of this issue is being matched by serious action.

It has been pointed out that this framework decision is in fact a decision in the area of criminal law.

In that respect we must recognise this innovation, this step, even if, as Mr Schulz just pointed out, simply supplementing a rather old convention is not really a particularly bold step.

In reply to the question whether the Commission considers that the framework decision has an adequate legal basis under the Treaty, the Commission believes that the right basis is being applied here.

The framework decision will, however, have to be supplemented by other legal acts in future.

The Commission will submit a proposal for a regulation on cooperation between all the responsible authorities and on cooperation with Europol.

That proposal will establish a duty to cooperate, and a duty on the part of the national authorities to notify Europol of cases of counterfeiting and to present any confiscated counterfeit money to the European Central Bank for identification and classification, so that effective measures can then be taken.

On the question of coordinating the various measures, since early 1998, the Commission, followed now by OLAF, has been working with experts on the subject from the Member States, the European Central Bank and Europol on means of effectively combating counterfeiting of the euro in advance.

As Mr Karas just pointed out, a few weeks ago the Commission submitted a proposal for an information campaign on the euro, to which it proposed allocating as much as EUR 32 million.

That is a volume of funding that can be put to very effective use, a large amount; and of course the information campaign will also focus very strongly on protecting the euro against counterfeiting.

I believe that this debate shortly before midnight will also teach a salutary lesson to all those counterfeiters who believe their hour has come, because they think the EU is no longer awake at this late hour!

Thank you very much, Commissioner Schreyer.

The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 p.m.

(The sitting was closed at 11.50 p.m.)

The Minutes of yesterday' s sitting have been distributed.

Mr President, I should like make a comment in connection with a meeting held last night by various Members of Parliament from all groups.

The purpose of the meeting, which was attended by several Vice-Presidents and Quaestors, together with the architects who designed this building, was to discuss how we could improve our working conditions.

We discovered during the meeting that the lovely white curtain behind you, Mr President, in fact conceals a huge window which, if the curtain were drawn back, would afford a wonderful view over the river.

We were told that the curtain was closed so that you would not have your back to the light and to improve the lighting during debates.

But what is to prevent us, before the sitting is opened or when you close the sitting, opening the curtains and enjoying the apparently magnificent view behind you?

I am more than happy for our House to be illuminated by the brilliance of our debates but a little real sunlight on our bubble of democracy from time to time would not come amiss.

I think it would be a nice idea if you could discuss opening this curtain from time to time with the ushers.

Thank you very much Mr Onesta, I am grateful for any suggestions that will make our Chamber more conducive to human comfort.

I would propose that we carry on in the normal way for the time being.

In the meantime, I will have someone check as to whether it would be a simple matter, technically speaking.

If so, then we will have a trial run for half an hour and see how it looks when the President sits with his back to the light!

(SV) Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, it is my hope that Parliament is prepared now to make a decision to extend and strengthen the financial market in Europe.

As a new Member of the European Parliament, it has been very interesting and instructive for me to be given responsibility for this important matter.

I should especially like to thank my colleagues on the committee for their willingness to find compromises; the President and the Bureau for lending a sensitive ear to this complex issue; the Commission, and especially the Commissioner, for being such worthwhile contacts; the Council; and also the division responsible for servicing the committee, for its selfless work.

There was a good deal of agreement within the committee, apart from on a matter which, too, I hope it will be possible to solve.

The issue of UCITS may appear difficult, technical and a political minefield.

I believe that some people do not even know what UCITS stands for.

Allow me, however, to state very clearly that this is a question which really does affect the citizens of Europe in so far as it relates to how their savings are administered, what options there are available, how competition operates between countries in regard to different forms of savings, savers' demand for security, and the opportunities Europe' s citizens have to save wisely for their old age.

It is a question of weighing demands for liberalisation in the interests of a better market and higher yield against investors' need for protection and security.

In the course of the 1980s, most markets in Europe underwent drastic deregulation.

As a result, the national money and bond markets in particular developed very quickly over a period of a few years.

Collective investment undertakings became an alternative to saving with a bank.

In my own country, more than 60 per cent of Swedes save with a variety of funds.

The security afforded by this type of saving is attributable to the broad range of investment vehicles in which the funds are placed.

The capital and securities market has continued to be developed.

The current Directive on UCITS has become antiquated and outdated.

New types of funds have been introduced in the various Member States which are not permitted to market their units in other Member States.

Obviously, this inhibits competition and innovation and restricts the public' s range of savings options.

The Commission' s proposal with which we are dealing today is in two parts.

The first concerns the product, that is to say the funds.

The other concerns the collective investment undertakings.

The main purpose of the first proposal is to extend the investment opportunities of collective investment undertakings by allowing them to invest in units in other collective investment undertakings, for example units in funds, standardised options and futures contracts and deposits in credit institutions and in certain types of money market instruments.

Special risk-spreading rules are proposed in respect of such investments, involving both quantitative and qualitative criteria.

In addition, the Commission' s proposal puts forward special risk-spreading rules for funds whose aim is to replicate a particular stock index, a so-called index fund.

The committee wishes to make the requirements in relation to the Commission' s proposal more stringent.

To guarantee transparency and prudence, investments in non-harmonised funds should only be allowed on condition that qualitative criteria, for example a transparency requirement and investor protection, are introduced.

In addition, quantitative criteria (risk exposure) should be introduced.

Moving on now, then, to the point where there is (or, I hope, was) a lack of agreement, namely OTC derivatives.

The Commission' s proposal makes a distinction between derivatives dealt in on regulated markets and derivative instruments not dealt in on regulated markets (so-called OTC derivatives).

The Commission' s proposal takes it as read that OTC derivatives are not one of the general types of investment that UCITS deal in, but that they should only be used to achieve efficient portfolio management and to hedge exchange-rate risks.

In recent years, the derivatives market has grown very rapidly in almost all the Member States.

It is therefore important that regulation of derivatives is flexible so that the market is not tied down ahead of future developments.

The definitions 'standardised futures contracts' and 'standardised options' should therefore be combined to form a new definition, 'financial derivative instruments' , which also covers OTC derivatives.

Investment in OTC derivatives, however, should only be allowed on condition that both quantitative and qualitative criteria are introduced.

They are very important in this case.

They must be introduced to guarantee the protection of investors.

The Commission' s second proposal focuses on the bodies which manage UCITS, that is to say management companies.

The rules for management companies, for example the conditions for starting up and conducting business, are brought into line with the existing rules and regulations.

A crucial point is that rules are proposed for so-called simplified prospectuses.

Relevant information must be given to prospective unit-holders in a fund in a language which is readily understandable to investors in the host country.

In this regard, too, the committee is prepared to go further than the Commission.

A question which has also been discussed in the committee is that of the capital contribution to be required from management companies.

There are different views on this.

One of the most important things, for me, personally, is that the common regulations should not cause smaller companies to go under.

During the months that I have been working on this report, one very clear demand has emerged, both from industry and from those who represent the consumer.

The current situation is not good.

Both savers and the industry need modernised regulations for the whole of Europe.

I believe that today' s proposal strikes a good balance between liberalisation of the market and the desire for effective protection for investors.

I just want to conclude by saying that a number of Members of Parliament think that the present proposal goes too far, while others think that I am not sufficiently liberal.

To them I just want to say, as the English expression goes, 'You can' t have it all.'

Mr President, at the outset I wish to place on the official record of the House my thanks for the tremendous work undertaken by Mr Schmidt, our rapporteur.

I was in fact the surrogate father of these reports during the previous Parliament.

We failed over the last six years to get any compromise or agreement with regard to this matter.

In a short space of time Mr Schmidt has managed to bring it forward to this final stage within Parliament.

As the draftsperson for the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market, I also wish to place on record my thanks to the secretariat of both the Legal Affairs Committee and the Economic Affairs Committee for their cooperation on this matter.

I am speaking today wearing a number of hats: firstly, as the surrogate father of this report; secondly, as the draftsperson of the opinion; and most importantly, as one who sees the tremendous advantages which can be gained for the European Union from a harmonised system of UCITS investment to ensure that monies presently being earned in Europe but invested outside the European Union and not put to the benefit of the Union economy can be retained within the economy for the creation of entrepreneurship, employment and also for guaranteeing future pension rights.

There is little disagreement amongst Members with regard to the first proposal.

It puts into place a certain number of controls and mechanisms to ensure that we can have this kind of harmonised regulatory authorities.

However, it is in relation to the second proposal that there is most concern.

I have a number of ideas which should be put across.

Firstly, the idea of an EU passport for management companies is to be welcomed; and the home-state approval rule is also to be welcomed.

However, instead of imposing a new regime, we could have used the Investment Services Directive as the analogy for this regime.

It seems unusual that we failed to grasp that opportunity.

Many Members have been working on the basis of trying to protect their own countries' national interests rather than improving the overall system for Europe.

We will have to revisit this issue again in the near future.

I call on Members to ensure by their votes today or that we can put Europe on a sound footing for the short term, if not for the long term.

Mr President, I must firstly thank the rapporteur, Mr Schmidt, my colleague, Mr Goebbels, and Mrs Villiers and Mrs Lulling from my Group. Despite their differing opinions on some points, they have consistently worked in an extremely constructive manner.

As indicated by the rapporteur, we are discussing probably one of the most important issues that we will ever have to discuss in this Parliament.

Collective investment undertakings have for some time been the primary savings vehicle through which millions of ordinary citizens, without any specialist knowledge, have invested their life savings.

This is the main reason why we must proceed with liberalisation, albeit in a prudent manner.

I say this because the failure of a bank is a problem for which any government can find a solution.

However, the failure and suspension of payments of this type of undertaking would create a political, social and personal problem with incalculable consequences.

There is also a second reason why prudence is needed in the regulation of these undertakings.

I believe in a social market economy based on a successful market operating subject to certain rules intended to guarantee the general interest. Specifically, at the moment, this means the protection of investors.

This basic principle of liberalisation, increased competition and greater investment opportunities, together with prudence to ensure the protection which investors deserve, has determined and inspired my Group' s position on most of the controversial points which have arisen.

Firstly, there is the problem of investment in non-harmonised undertakings falling outside this directive.

It is clear that by extending the proposal under discussion, the options and the range of investments in undertakings for collective investments, those undertakings which remain outside the rules will be obliged to invest in high-risk funds.

It would be wrong to allow the regulated and protected undertakings to invest in other undertakings involved in such risky investments.

Secondly, the problem of derivatives is one which has created the most divisions, both within my Group and between the groups.

We have achieved a compromise solution.

Everyone accepts that investments in derivatives must be legally limited in order to prevent a harmonised fund losing all its assets due to an investment in high-risk products.

It is clear that this risk is greater when the investment is in derivatives not dealt in on a regulated market, namely the famous OTC derivatives.

We have achieved an acceptable compromise solution on this, or so we believe, which I welcome.

As this issue will be returning to this House at some stage, I must highlight the working method used between the Commission and this Parliament.

The texts before us today are old and were already old when they reached this House. This was because they were substantially amended during the Finnish Presidency.

We are therefore faced with two options. We can either return the proposals to the Commission for the latter to present a harmonised text or we can continue the current process.

This second option has won the day and I am pleased about this. However, in the future I hope that the coordination between these two institutions and the Council can be improved so that our work is more understandable and more productive.

Mr President, our objective in setting a framework for unit trusts and other UCTIS is to secure the highest possible safe return for our savers, which is why I want to address the issue of derivatives in my remarks today.

I firmly believe that the prudent use of derivatives can help fund secure, safer, higher returns.

Despite their image of danger, derivatives are usually used by asset managers as insurance.

A contract that, for example, pays a substantial sum if, say, the NASDAQ or the CAC 40 share index falls, causes an extra payment by the investor if the NASDAQ or the CAC 40 share index rises.

Imagine you have spent some months building up a portfolio of shares in companies in which you are confident: they have good management, good prospects and they are good investments.

Then you become worried that the whole stock market is going to collapse, as it did in 1987.

You have the option of selling off everything and getting into cash, but that would be to waste your research into the winners.

It would also incur all the transaction costs of selling your shares and then buying them again after the fall.

The solution is to take out a derivative which pays off if the NASDAQ or CAC 40 falls.

But even with a tailor-made derivative or OTC derivative which would be cheaper, perhaps insuring you against a relative fall in your portfolio against the index, you would still have the portfolio and the shares, but you would have protected yourself against the risks of a collapse.

In exchange, you might also have given up some of the upside of the markets.

In this case, which is perhaps the most common use of derivatives by asset managers, you reduce your potential reward but you also reduce your potential risk.

That is a desirable development in a soundly managed fund.

History demonstrates that investors benefit from a liberal and light-handed approach to regulation.

Heavy-handedness - a prescription of how private sector managers should invest and where they should invest - will merely reduce returns to savers.

Pension funds which suffered from rules on where they could and could not invest, as required by of our government bonds, made returns of 5.2% a year, barely half the 9.5% annual returns made by free funds between 1984 and 1996.

These are of course the returns after deducting all losses.

Do not confuse a real concern for the interests of investors with a populist fear of the new and the innovative and liberal approach that pays off.

This is what we should be concerned about here today.

Mr President, the report presented to us today seeks to complete the free movement of financial investments in Europe, including the most sophisticated forms of investment.

We do not, in principle, oppose this industry.

However, unlike Mr Christopher Huhne, we feel that a continent which has proved incapable of controlling its oil industry properly should not overly deregulate an industry which may, in time, provoke the same type of crisis.

We shall therefore vote cautiously on all amendments limiting recourse to excessively derivative instruments and we shall vote in favour of all amendments which limit the excessive concentration of assets within a single financial group.

But we make no bones about the fact that we shall vote against the text as a whole.

We shall also vote in the future against any proposals to deregulate the financial markets and we call on all the other political groups to do likewise until such time as taxation on investment income is finally harmonised.

For years certain countries, including Great Britain, have been blocking harmonisation and turning their financial centres into tax havens.

They even reject the strict minimum, i.e. the Monti package proposed by the Commission in Brussels.

This attitude is turning Europe into a machine which exempts investment income from tax and shifts the whole tax burden to commercial income, with all the social and even moral consequences which that implies.

We must put an end to this.

By blocking the demands of the financial industry, the European Parliament has the means to ensure that countries which have been turned into tax havens end up with their back against the wall.

Mr President, the 1985 directive introduced a sort of European visa for certain types of UCITS which could be marketed throughout the Union.

Since then, the capital market and transferable securities have not just continued to evolve; thanks to unbridled financial globalisation, they have exploded exponentially and without restraint.

This brings us to the two proposals for directives.

The second proposal, on which the report is excellent, does not require any particular comment.

It aims to strengthen consumer protection and security.

It is a step in the right direction, even if one wonders why in heaven, with what right and with what respect for our citizens, we are further bolstering the monopoly of the English language in all documents distributed throughout Europe.

That is the thrust of an amendment which we have tabled; it favours all the languages of the Community and our agreement to the second directive will depend on it.

The same cannot be said of the first proposal.

We might have been able to agree to the original text insofar as it was informed by a legitimate concern to update current legislation.

However, we are unable to agree to the text of the report, although I welcome the work carried out by Mr Schmidt, for several reasons.

First, it leans too far towards products based on indexes which have no bearing on the real economy; derivatives which will help to swell the financial bubble which Mr Lipietz referred to just now.

Secondly, like him, I think that we should not promote excessive concentration in funds which, in the final analysis, will prove to be a Trojan horse for American pension funds.

There is, of course, no reciprocity in favour of European UCITS.

We shall also vote against the abolition of the facility for the Member States to increase to 35% ...

(The President cut the speaker off)

Mr President, this is a vital issue for Europe.

A Europe that faces an impending pensions time bomb must take every step to encourage saving and maximise the return that the people of Europe can obtain on their savings.

I welcome many of the developments which Mr Schmidt' s report brings us.

UCITS are a success story within the European Union.

They are a safe product, traded cross-border.

But it is time for the legislation to be updated.

Mr Schmidt has done an excellent job here.

It is no secret that I would have much preferred Mr Schmidt' s report not to have been altered so much as it passed through Parliament.

But I appeal to this House to take a balanced and common-sense approach on this issue.

The radical step taken by this report is to allow UCITS to use over-the-counter derivatives.

I appeal to everyone here to evaluate the products which will be used by UCITS.

We are not talking about the use of derivatives for speculation.

We are talking about the use of derivatives to reduce risk and to increase the returns on the savings of ordinary Europeans.

Mr Schmidt is to be applauded for having obtained the support of Parliament for over-the-counter derivatives.

We must not be afraid to go forward, to react to changes in the market.

Yes, we need to continue to ensure that UCITS provide a balanced and protected product for consumers.

The report gives very adequate protection for consumers.

But a number of the amendments go too far in restricting the use of over-the-counter derivatives.

I feel these derivatives will be an addition to the portfolio of unit trusts, which can only help individual people around Europe obtain a high return on their savings.

Thank you very much Mr Kuckelkorn.

Ladies and gentlemen, I have an update for you on the curtain and window situation.

If we open this curtain, then we will find that there is a partition wall behind it which cannot just be removed straight away.

We will therefore have to defer this experiment until the next plenary sitting.

However, I will make sure that we have a go then and see how the land lies.

Mr President, the UCITS directive has been an enormous success since it entered into force on 1 October 1989, mainly thanks to the excellent protection which it offers investors.

The directive and the reputation which UCITS enjoy with investors have allowed the investment fund industry to multiply its assets in the European Union fivefold.

There has been a strong increase in cross-border marketing of investments within the European Union and the directive itself is used as a model for legislation throughout the world.

However, the directive is ten years old and, now that the markets have developed and more and more sophisticated financial products are available, it is somewhat outdated.

The Commission proposals being debated here will give it the face-lift it needs.

I share some of the concerns expressed here, especially by Mr García-Margallo y Marfil, but this face-lift would be even more successful if the funds which simply reproduce a stock exchange index, and which are therefore managed either passively or not at all, and the funds which use an index as a benchmark for an actively-managed fund were treated in the same way, if only to allow medium-sized undertakings listed on the stock exchange but not included in the stock exchange index better access to the capital market.

In addition, investors often have better protection with an actively-managed fund.

My Amendment No 47 is therefore a warning for amateurs.

As far as the proposal for a new provision limiting investments in the same group to 15% is concerned, I would like to stress that, apart from the fact that this limit is too low, the text does not define the concept of a group. This concept does not exist under European law because it is impossible to implement and equally impossible to control in practice.

I shall therefore vote against this proposed amendment.

To conclude, Mr President, allow me to remind the House that the directive needs a makeover which will make UCITS even more attractive, but it does not need to be strapped into a European corset which will squeeze the life out of it.

- (DE) Mr President, the introduction of the euro and the further liberalisation of capital markets has already produced a larger and deeper European financial area, which is helping to open up markets and create price transparency, but also to increase competition.

At the same time, it is important to appreciate the economic importance of financial business dealings, particularly those we are concerned with today.

At the end of 1999 there were almost 15 000 investment funds registered as UCITS with a total value of in excess of EUR 2 billion, thereby accounting for roughly 75% of all funds assets.

Hence the Commission rightly cited the economic importance thereof in its proposals for draft directives, and I must say that I actually have every confidence in the Commission' s proposal.

We are all aware how difficult it is to improve a legal framework for investment funds, and how difficult it is to construct the European passport for management companies around particular standards which are to apply even-handedly across the board.

This therefore represents a step forward in respect of the legal and supervisory stipulations for financial markets and financial products.

It is also my primary concern to optimise consumer protection in this way and I think it is very important for this to be reflected in the Commission' s proposal and that of the European Parliament, as well as in the compromise motions.

However, I do not believe that we can assess the risk associated with the OTC derivatives, and I also think that as a European Parliament it is our duty to inform and impress again and again on consumers - who expect investment funds to be comparable with a traditional savings agreement when it comes to long-term security, and indeed that is why they were known as investment savings - that these products do not bear comparison and that is why we need a minimum level of protection.

Why do we not take our cue from the minimum level of protection afforded by the trade in transferable securities directive, Article 11 for example, which relates to good practice?

I therefore believe that this is another step forward we can take and I think it would also be a positive move if consumers and investors could be made aware of a fund' s name so as to be able to learn something about its risk profile.

Mr President, Commissioner, the proposal for a directive now under discussion brings with it several welcome reforms to the current legal provisions.

The preparatory work has largely consisted of a viable balance between increasing the efficacy and growth of the European investment markets and preserving a sufficient level of protection for consumers who buy fund units.

The greater the trust consumers have in investment market operations, the more consumers will be prepared to invest on the open market.

And the more consumers invest, the brighter the prospects will be in the European business money markets.

It is quite clear that when businesses can more easily have access to their own capital-based finances their financial structure will be more firmly based, and, thus, opportunities for growth and investment will also improve.

Whether or not the money will come onto the equity market in the form of direct investment or via UCITS is not relevant here.

Although in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs we were very much in agreement with the aims of the legislative amendment, the debate we had was not the easiest one.

For me personally at least, difficulties were caused by the directive' s technical division into two different proposals, which certainly did not make it easier to familiarise oneself with this very difficult technical subject.

However, I would like to express my position with regard to a few detailed proposals.

Firstly, I am very satisfied that the proposal for a directive as a whole increases the scope of investment funds for targeting capital at different instruments.

As regards derivatives, I consider the position adopted by the committee justified - unlike Mrs Randzio-Plath, for example.

The directive should not treat over-the-counter derivatives differently from standard derivatives because they are used in many Member States and were also used before.

With regard to Article 5g of the other proposal for a directive, the so-called Article on Delegation, I think the Commission' s original proposal on rules concerning authorisation was better than the one now approved in the committee, so I would support some of Mrs Villiers' amendments to this point.

Mr President, I see two problems with this morning' s debate.

Firstly, when I came to this Parliament many years ago I was told that if you had a difficult job you gave it to a Liberal.

Now I have been told that if you have a difficult debate you know you are in trouble if half the Luxembourg Members are in the Chamber at one time - and they are.

Firstly, I welcome proposal No 1.

It simplifies things and brings things up to date.

I think many of the British Members will be voting against a large number of the amendments in the report.

We support the Schmidt report on proposal No 1, but we regret the fact that the directive sets a lot of quantity limits that restrict the ability to spread risks.

We believe that a more liberal market is the best way forward.

Secondly, we consider proposal No 2 to be very confused.

It is difficult to understand, and we think the Commission would be well advised to look at it again.

If further regulation is needed, we feel that it could be better achieved by other means than those proposed in the directive.

In particular, we disagree with the proposal on capital requirements because if they are put too high they could actually drive some businesses out of the industry altogether.

We ask the Commission to look again at these proposals.

Finally, we would urge Members to vote in particular against Amendment No 41 on capital requirements, because we feel that this would be very bad for the industry.

Mr President, money does not smell, as the Romans would say.

The important thing is for money to generate more money.

This is the only opportunity that we have to see to it that the interests of economists converge with those of people who want to earn money and have their mind set on dollars, like Disney' s Scrooge McDuck, who has dollar signs for eyes, except in this case the symbol is that of the euro.

In this we are combining the interests of these citizens with the interests of pensioners who want to live life in tranquillity.

For example, my brother-in-law, who lives in Rome, started drawing his pension a year ago and every day since - from seven in the morning when he wakes until midnight - he has checked the TV screen to see how the pensions funds and the securities in which he has invested are performing.

Pensioners will, in the future - as is already happening - have enormous sums of money at their disposal.

Indeed, whilst the young are penniless, the elderly have accumulated money and, since they are keen to turn it to good advantage, harbour great hopes for this directive.

If national governments had in their hearts - as the European Union has in its heart with this directive - the proliferation of money earned during the course of a working life, the pensions time bomb would already have been defused.

You too, in your role, Commissioner Bolkestein, have a very great responsibility for the future of the elderly and of pensioners, a future that I hope will improve once we have finalised this directive, by which I mean very soon, as has been proposed by Mrs Villiers and Mrs Kauppi.

(NL) Mr President, could I first of all express my heartfelt thanks to rapporteur, Mr Olle Schmidt, and the members of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, which has principal authority, as well as the rapporteur, Mr Brian Crowley and the members of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market, whom I would like to thank for their thorough and important work on the refinement and extension of the proposals.

Since the approval of Directive 85/611, the investment funds sector has undergone lengthy development and it is now important to modernise the rules.

The aim of the new proposals is to maintain the highest level of protection for the benefit of investors, which is an essential precondition for market integration resulting from the launch of the euro.

Since the average European family puts its savings in investment funds, the proposals contain provisions on prudent management - and I would like to underline this - prudent management as far as investment policy and risk-spreading are concerned.

The two proposals form a coherent whole.

The first proposal extends the number of instruments in which an 'undertaking for collective investment in transferable securities' (UCITS) can invest.

As already remarked in this session, UCITS are key players within the modern capital markets.

Their presence offers the opportunity to a larger number of ordinary investors to participate in these markets, in which the principle of risk-spreading is taken into consideration, protected by appropriate supervision.

Since diverse types of investment are permitted, private investors can also benefit from all the advantages of new investment techniques.

The second proposal expands the role which these important intermediary organisations can play within the EU capital markets in terms of developing the investment funds sector.

By allowing branches to be set up and certain services to be provided on a cross-border basis, these organisations will at long last be able to apply the freedoms of the Treaty of Rome, which they have been denied for all these years.

The Commission welcomes many of the clarifications proposed by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs with open arms and will adopt a large number of its ideas.

The Commission will adopt Amendments Nos - and I am now referring to the most recent numbering - 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 9, 13, 19 and 21 for the first proposal, and 23, 28 and 32 for the second proposal, since these are really very useful clarifications and improvements.

I also value the ideas put forward in Amendments Nos 1, 10, 11, 14, 18 and 20, although the wording needs to be adapted.

I also endorse the rationale underlying the general maximum percentage of the counterparty risk in Amendments Nos 17, 36 and 45.

I can also accept the idea in the second proposed paragraph of Amendment No 47.

All the amendments I have listed so far pertain to the first proposal.

As far as the second proposal is concerned, the ideas of Amendments Nos 24, 25, 29, 30, 41 and some parts of 27, which contain sensible suggestions, can be adopted, again formulated appropriately.

The Commission has suggested adopting the content of these, with certain changes in the wording.

Moreover, I have taken note of the request made by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs to codify the entire text, once it has been approved - Amendment No 7 of the first proposal and Amendment No 22 of the second proposal.

The Commission is in favour of codification and will, in the foreseeable future, once the proposals have been approved and subject to its right of initiative, concentrate its efforts on drafting a codified version.

However, I cannot accept the wording of the consideration as it stands.

The Commission is also of the opinion that a number of the amendments proposed by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs would fundamentally change the content of the first proposal.

This is why the Commission regrets that it is unable to accept the following amendments to the first proposal:

Amendment No 8 because the proposed, general reference to assets 'covered by this directive' , instead of the more precise reference to assets 'mentioned in Article 19 of this Directive' , hinders implementation.

This Amendment could also lead to different interpretations in the Member States, which might well look for similar instruments in other articles of the directive.

Amendment No 16 jeopardises the protection of investors because a blocked security deposit with a third party custodian is a contradiction in terms.

Neither are securities lending transactions via securities clearing houses or exchanges - as opposed to the purchase and sale of securities - automatically covered by these institutions.

We cannot, therefore, adopt the proposed Amendment for this reason.

Amendment No 42 relates to a provision which was not changed by the proposal and which has not caused any problems since the implementation of the directive.

I therefore cannot see any reason why Article 22, paragraph 3 should be omitted and reject the amendment for this reason.

Amendment No 44 cannot be accepted because, if it is prescribed that non-harmonised funds are subject to rules which have been 'imposed by the directive' concerning lending, borrowing, selling from an uncovered position and the third party custodian, this will indeed lead to a situation where very few funds, for example Swiss funds, would be eligible for investment.

This goes against the Commission' s intention to widen the scope of investments, and the wording thereof could contravene GATS agreements.

Amendment No 47 is unacceptable as far as the proposed changes to the first paragraph of Article 22a are concerned, because this proposal completely clashes with the spreading rules of Article 22, especially when the UCITS are obliged to indicate a point of reference in their prospectuses, as discussed in the Council.

The key issue regarding the first proposal, however, is Parliament' s amendment which allows the use of over-the-counter instruments for general investment purposes.

The Commission points out that, according to the national legislation of some Member States, the use of OTC derivatives for general investment purposes is already authorised.

However, the Commission will be suspending its position, given the intrinsically high risks of these investments compared to the more traditional financial instruments.

I believe that OTC instruments could lead to problems, because they are not liquid, the price is difficult to estimate and they entail uncovered counterparty risks.

It seems inconsistent to opt for an extremely prudent approach with regard to investments as non-harmonised funds or deposits and, at the same time, freely to allow investments in clearly more risky OTC instruments.

By rejecting the rapporteur' s Amendment No 39, the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs has aligned itself with the Council.

The upshot of this amendment by Parliament would be that funds are allowed, in theory, to invest in OTC instruments and to trade the rights of participation in their funds across the entire internal market.

In practice, access to other EU markets for these theoretically harmonised funds which invest in OTC instruments can be blocked by applying different national legislative frameworks and protective measures against OTC investments.

This would contravene the fact that EU legislation applies to all funds which invest in OTC instruments.

Given this possibly negative effect on the internal market and the risks inherent in OTC instruments, the Commission cannot accept Amendments Nos 12, 15, 37, 38, 39, 43, 46 and 48 and parts of Amendments Nos 17, 36 and 45 which pertain to OTC instruments.

As far as the second proposal is concerned, I already mentioned that the Commission will take into consideration many amendments.

Despite this, there are some amendments which the Commission cannot adopt: Amendment No 26, which does not seem to observe the order in which licences are granted and activities start; parts of Amendment No 27, especially the part where the prevention of conflicts of interests is deleted, the delegation of tasks is restricted to components of management decisions and the general decision-taking of Member States concerning delegation is repealed; Amendment No 31 because the Commission is of the opinion that the application of Article 44 of the directive in unchanged form has proved adequate for the trading in rights of participation in UCITS.

The application of the provisions of the directive concerning the performance of services in the field of investments in securities, better known as ISD, is therefore unnecessary and could lead to difficulties or confusion.

Amendment No 33 is ambiguous regarding 'the language' of the guest member state, especially when there are various official languages, and it is questionable what will be gained from translations in two other languages.

Amendment No 34 is unacceptable because a simple deletion of the reference to pension funds can create ambiguity as to whether or not a management company can carry out these activities.

I think that pension funds could also benefit from this possibility, provided that management companies are not lumped together with pension funds, but may only carry out part of the management per delegation.

Amendment No 35 cannot be accepted because legally, it cannot command any authority.

Management companies which are denied access to a Member State would need to re-incorporate as a different legal entity in order to be permitted in another Member State.

Amendments Nos 49, 50 and 51, which share the same basis, are not acceptable because they make substantial changes to the consistent approach of the Commission regarding the regulations of third party delegation, and do not offer sufficient security to the competent authorities and investors.

I would like to finish off by commenting on the remarks made by a few Members this morning and, Mr President, with your permission, I will do this in English.

First of all, regarding the remarks of Mr Crowley, who asked whether the second proposal could not simply consist in taking over a pure ISD approach; the objections of the Commission to that proposal would be the following: such an approach would pose difficulties which would arise from two different authorisations which may even involve different authorities and non-consistent sets of rules; moreover there would be no provisions whatsoever on conflicts of interest. For example, a management company might be doing underwriting business and, if not able to sell, it would put the securities in the fund it would manage, or else there might be difficulties in which order business should be executed if the management company did brokering business.

Furthermore the proposal put forward by Mr Crowley would require a change of the ISD which at present - as I am sure he already knows - does not cover collective management business.

Lastly, his proposal would not give any passport to management companies which do not want to render ISD activities.

As regards the question put by Mr Huhne, his reference in the intervention he made this morning is to hedging operations.

But hedging operations are already allowed in the existing Article 21(1) of Directive 611/85 on UCITS.

So what Mr Huhne wants is already possible.

A question has been put by Mrs Villiers who referred to enhancing portfolio management.

That is also something which is allowed under present legislation.

I refer to the same Article 21 I referred to in relation to Mr Huhne' s question.

In her question Mrs Kauppi asks why the Commission has prepared a package of measures distributed in two separate proposals.

The reason is that the first proposal focuses essentially on the product, while the second proposal focuses essentially on the service provider, and on prospectuses for UCITS.

The separation of these two proposals which deal with two different sets of problems would facilitate the negotiating process in the Council.

The Commission has not only to listen to Parliament and take into account parliamentary proposals but, as is well-known, must also deal with the Council.

That is the reason why the Commission has put forward these two separate proposals.

Lastly, Mr Balfe has complained that there are, in his opinion, too many limits in the whole proposal the Commission has put forward.

It seems to us that these limits are justified: firstly, by the need to diversify investments; secondly, because of the vulnerability to the need to reimburse investment at any time; thirdly, in order to avoid an inordinate influence over the investment funds.

These are the reasons why the Commission believes, because of the prudence that has to be exercised in this field, that these various limits are necessary.

The vote will take place at 12 noon.

Mutual assistance in criminal matters between the Member States

The next item is the report (A5-0019/2000) by Mr Di Pietro on behalf of the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms, and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs on the draft Council Act establishing the Convention on Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters between the Member States of the European Union.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, in letters dated 3 August 1999 and 3 December 1999, the Council called on the European Parliament, pursuant to Article 39 of the Treaty, to deliver its opinion on a draft convention between the Member States aimed at guaranteeing improved mutual assistance in criminal matters.

It is thus, as you can see, a very important draft, that will effectively serve to provide the Member States of the Union with a more comprehensive and consistent instrument for mutual assistance.

In actual fact, there are still certain differences of opinion within the Council over the type of convention, and over certain provisions contained therein.

Some of these differences have already been ironed out, but others persist.

The spirit of the proposal is nevertheless to equip those responsible for applying the law - primarily the judiciary, but also the citizens concerned - with a valid operational instrument to fight crime, which respects fundamental guarantees as regards defence and general principles of human rights.

It is for this reason that, despite the many omissions in the text, the provisions set out therein could - and I say could, Mr President - be accepted on condition that they are suitably amended in order to ensure they can be implemented by those responsible for applying the law and are acceptable to the citizens.

The Commission has proposed various amendments to this end, all of which aim to systematically restructure the Council proposal by suggesting a series of technical adjustments that will render the text harmonious and consistent as regards the amendments proposed. The amendments can be summarised as follows: they place greater emphasis on fundamental rights of defence, introduce a range of technical modifications needed to make a whole series of obscure and inconsistent passages more comprehensible, and delete the section relating to the remote interception of telecommunications, an area which still requires not only increased technical awareness but also acceptance on the part of the governments of the various Member States of the Union.

The proposal, as formulated by the Council and subsequently amended by the Commission, provides for a convention based on three titles: the first lays down guidelines for ensuring the consistency of procedures and formalities for letters rogatory; the second lists a whole series of specific requests for mutual assistance and defines the formalities and procedures which must be followed in relation to these specific types of mutual assistance; the third and last provides for and codifies the procedures via which telephone conversations conducted by citizens in a State other than the one instigating proceedings can and must be intercepted.

Mr President, international cooperation is certainly needed in order to tackle both cross-border crime and crimes which are committed in one State, but the evidence for which is to be found in another.

It is nevertheless necessary to reach agreement as soon as possible on a new convention which will also take other, even more delicate issues into account: the whole issue of double jeopardy, that of specialities, and that of the credibility of one Member State of the Union in respect of the judicial authorities of other Member States of the Union.

These are thus extremely important questions, which we hope that the Council will see fit to take up when formulating a new opinion.

As regards other aspects of this subject, Mr President, I would refer you to my written report.

- (ES) Mr President, I want to start by saying that I am speaking on behalf of the Group of the European People' s Party which I represent on this issue.

I should like to draw attention to the fact that the Council is not present today.

By contrast, I welcome the attentive presence of Commissioner Vitorino, as has consistently been the case since his appointment. This leads me to another point.

This House has only prepared one report on this Convention. It was in fact consulted on a text which was not the text being worked on by the Council and which did not contain points which had already been agreed.

I condemn this, as well as the Council' s absence.

These are serious matters on which this House must act.

We are about to advance into new territory where attitudes and symbols are of great significance.

A political community is reflected in the justice which it hands out.

This is why this report is so important.

It represents a step towards the area of freedom, security and, particularly, justice to which we all aspire.

It is also an important step towards European natural justice. This will be built on mutual confidence between the Member States and their respective legal systems and on the confidence of the European people in any European court.

It will also be built on scrupulous respect for fundamental rights and freedoms and on the guarantee of fair trials in particular.

It is in this respect that this House has significantly - and in my opinion rightly - altered the balance proposed by the Council by firmly and decidedly supporting a reinforcement of these guarantees of fair trials in all the amendments.

Mr President, as the rapporteur said, this House has concentrated on the particular issue of phone tapping in order to remove this from the Convention.

On behalf of the Group of the European People' s Party, I have tabled an amendment to the motion for a resolution which asks the Council to produce a text on this issue as soon as possible.

The regulation of phone tapping in the Council document was incomplete and therefore inadequate.

Yet a lack of regulation is also inappropriate and may lead to abuses in the telecommunications field. In fact, we are aware that these are already happening widely.

The other point which I must highlight and on which we have also worked extensively is the use of video conferencing with regard to accused persons.

Again on behalf of the Group of the European People' s Party, I have asked the Council to produce a convention as soon as possible in order to clarify and supplement the regulation of this issue, which is frankly unsatisfactory.

Apart from a few exceptions, the Members of the Group of the European People' s Party will vote in favour of the committee' s amendments, and of course our own.

Mr President, it is our opinion that one facet of the construction of Europe hinges on the construction of a common judicial system, for the Europe that we want to build, which comprises administrative law, civil law, both substantive and procedural, and criminal law, both substantive and procedural.

The Convention on Mutual Assistance and Criminal Matters, which we are examining today, is but a stitch in the great fabric of the corpus iuris of Europe, which has its natural foundation in fundamental human rights and freedoms.

Thus it is that legal cooperation and cooperation on criminal matters must also strictly respect fundamental rights, principles which lie at very root of our culture and our civilisation: I am thinking of fair trials, and more particularly of the rights of the defence, of the impartiality and integrity of judges, of the length of legal proceedings, for which my country, Italy, unfortunately has the worst record in terms of the number of sentences handed down, of the cases pending before the European Court of Human Rights.

Restrictions on fundamental rights cannot and must not be applied to the field of law unless they are justified in that they are associated with an actual or presumed violation of criminal law.

The report that the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights has substantially amended with regard to its original formula, taking up many of the amendments we have presented, still leaves room for a certain confusion, in relation to the way in which the interception of telecommunications and video conferences are to be regulated.

The news received in recent weeks on the way in which modern technologies facilitate interceptions mean that greater attention must be paid to this issue: we would not want our reality to be even more harsh and troubled than the dark scenes depicted by Orwell.

This is only the beginning of a great project in the field of law, which should advance hand in hand with the growth the type of Europe we want to see.

Mr President, committee amendments and political group amendments may be tabled in plenary, but not amendments from individual Members.

Mr Schulz should be aware of this.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I fully understand the frustration of Mr Di Pietro who, in a short space of time, has had to carry out an extraordinary amount of work in order to be able to submit this report to us today.

Crime in the European Union has increased to such an extent that we cannot and must not content ourselves any longer with a step-by-step approach of mutual legal assistance in criminal affairs.

The European Parliament is certainly not to blame for this.

It is the governments of the Member States who have restricted the amount of leeway to this degree.

As a result, the European Parliament is faced with an almost impossible task.

One has to content oneself with the idea that all means, however slight, must be seized upon in order to set up better legal assistance.

By way of paradox, I could say that it would be best if as little as possible was said about this report, for the clearer we make it that only very small steps are being taken, the more the world of crime will gloat and the more the acute imbalance between organised crime and the desperate lack of judicial cooperation will become obvious.

I would therefore make an urgent appeal to the Council of Ministers to finally face reality, that is to say the fact that crime is developing faster than the law.

The goal is, after all, to provide the judicial bodies - magistrates, in the first place, but also the citizens involved - with the instruments to fight crime without prejudice to the fundamental guarantees of defence and the general principles of human rights.

If not, we will be fighting a running battle.

I therefore advocate further harmonisation of criminal law in the EU Member States in the first instance.

In my opinion, this is the only way to fight crime effectively across all Member States.

As long as this harmonisation has not been achieved, however, we need to be consistent if we want to bring about mutual legal assistance.

To this end, I had submitted an amendment stipulating that legal assistance can only be granted in the event of criminal prosecution instituted by the authorities based on facts which are punishable according to the national law of the petitioning party and the Member State petitioned.

The content of my amendment is, in fact, echoed in Amendment No 43, which also stipulates this condition of accrual.

This condition of accrual is essential since, in my opinion, the principle of nulla poena sine lege, legality in criminal law, must be observed.

As such, any request for legal assistance concerning a hypothetical action which is not a crime in the petitioned Member State contravenes this principle of legality and thus the fundamental principles of justice in the petitioned Member State.

Hence, it is extremely important that this condition of accrual be adopted.

Finally, I would like to reiterate that Mr Di Pietro has, in my opinion, delivered sterling work by submitting a report which, within the limitations, offers all possible guarantees for safeguarding individual human rights and fundamental freedoms.

If, however, we would like to give European citizens a greater sense of security, we need to step up our efforts in the field of judicial cooperation.

Mr President, my Group is delighted about the fact that an agreement will be reached to regulate the day-to-day practice of mutual assistance in legal affairs.

The aim of regulations is to define the reciprocal rights and duties of States or citizens or those applicable in the relationship between citizens and government.

The present proposal is complex, because it deals with agreements between Member States but has far-reaching consequences for the citizen-government relationship.

It is precisely in the field of legal protection that the Council' s proposal leaves a great deal to be desired.

In the words of rapporteur Mr Di Pietro, the proposal even contains colossal shortcomings.

Thanks to the agreement, it is possible to create a chain of legal assistance requests, whereby each link represents authorities and criminal law systems of different Member States.

The chain is arranged in such a way as to ensure that it cannot fall as a whole within the competence of one court.

Additional measures are hence required, such as the obligation on the part of criminal investigators to give evidence in every criminal case in which their material is used.

The fact that the Council' s proposal rides roughshod over the principle of proportionality is also hard to deal with for my Group.

There are certainly no restrictions in its scope.

As such, the agreement applies not only to fighting serious crimes and organised crime.

In fact, it is not written anywhere that it is restricted to criminal law.

It is, therefore, conceivable that the European Union will soon be taking a sledgehammer to crack a nut and that the rights of the citizen will vanish in the dust.

Mr President, the Convention on Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters that we are examining today contains the minimum requirements for efficient and rapid cooperation between the various judicial or investigative bodies concerned.

It pertains, among other things, to notifications, information exchanges, the temporary transfer of detainees, the restitution of property, testimonies via video conferences, investigative activities and 'undercover' activities, and the interception of telephone calls.

This is the bare minimum on which an agreement can be reached, and it should immediately be said that if any amendments, such as Amendments Nos 32 or 81, or the revised Amendments Nos 70 or 71, were to be passed, the whole convention would be reduced to an exchange of notifications or information and at this point should simply be scrapped, and we would vote against it.

I hope that the common sense of our fellow MEPs in the other groups will lead them to reject these amendments.

The fact that the convention has not been turned into a framework agreement also constitutes a defeat for this Parliament.

As Commissioner Vitorino will have noted in all the various speeches, the need has emerged to draw up a framework of common rules, which is to say that we cannot continue in this manner, with this disparate agenda, with these piecemeal agreements which relate to diverse sectors such as that of investigation.

What is, on the other hand, absolutely necessary is to have a bare minimum of set rules that are valid within the Community, and which clearly provide as many additional safeguards as possible, and will also provide guarantees with a view to enlargement.

My thoughts turn to what may become of this Community, of these conventions and judicial relations if, for example, a fascist country such as Turkey became a member of the Union. It would truly perplex me.

We need a corpus iuris - as everyone has said - and common rules, especially procedural ones, which guarantee the rule of common law throughout the Community.

It is clear that this is primarily an issue for the IGC and one that addresses an aspiration to which this Parliament can only make a limited contribution in as much as everything depends on the Council and the Commission.

I believe that this first half of the year, in which we have a Commissioner from Portugal and Portuguese Presidency of the Council, provides an excellent opportunity to give an initial spur to this shared aspiration.

It is precisely for this reason that we are in favour of adopting Amendments Nos 78 and 79, which already prefigure a minimum of set rules on interceptions and on video conferences.

On the one hand, we eagerly await the successful outcome of this vote, precisely so that this convention - which, I repeat, already sets minimum rules - is not stripped of all meaning, while on the other hand we are also looking forward to any form of proposal that may arrive from the Commission with a view to definitively putting into effect this minimum Community law.

Mr President, confronted with the burgeoning phenomenon of organised crime at international level, the Member States must surely cooperate with one another as much as possible. Indeed, they must set in place the institutional conditions needed to launch a tangible and efficient cooperation process in the field of law - a process that must nevertheless cover all the stages needed to prevent the untimely impositions that are detrimental to legitimate national prescriptions in the field of justice, over which Member States have sovereign powers, and above all to prevent impositions that result in riding roughshod over basic civil rights.

We must therefore proceed with caution with regard to a document like the one from the Council which, as the rapporteur himself has underlined, now claims, after years of discussion, to have found a universal solution in the space of a few months.

Furthermore - and I agree with the assessment made by Mr Di Pietro - the Council' s text would appear to be overladen with contradictions, inconsistent propositions and omissions.

It is clear that the justice sector, more than any other, cannot be handled in an inconsistent or contradictory manner.

It is the opinion of our Group that even the report, considered as a whole, would be the subject of much debate, notwithstanding the incorporation of certain corrective amendments that take into account the safeguarding of personal liberty and respect for national sovereignties.

The report contains arguments that are too disparate, which do not link together smoothly, and everything thus hinges on approximations.

We will, in conclusion, vote against this report, while stressing that the Europe to which we aspire is a Europe of rights and guarantees: rights and guarantees that call for gradual and responsible discussion, as well as very serious examination.

We must first establish general rules and institutional certainties. Only then will we be able to institute actual conventions.

Mr President, on behalf of the Members of Parliament on the Bonino List, I intend to confirm the position that we adopted in the Committee on Civil Liberties and am thus also announcing our vote on their behalf. It is a vote against this report, or more precisely a vote against the convention on which the report is based.

I would nevertheless like to thank the rapporteur and congratulate him on his work. He listened very closely to our arguments at the committee stage, and particularly those on the issue of respecting the rights of the defence, both at national level and at the level of cooperation on criminal law as part of European mutual assistance.

The committee and the rapporteur have incorporated nine of the eleven amendments that we presented, and these centred precisely on the rights of the defence.

This spurs us to maintain that the European Parliament would have done sterling work in guaranteeing that civil rights and freedoms were safeguarded, if this were a lawmaking parliament and if we were, as part of this procedure, in fact co-legislators - which we are not.

This is the problem, and it is for this reason that we are critical of the position adopted by the Council, which is one we find completely unsatisfactory.

This is a task that has lasted three years, and on which we have been consulted, so to speak, as a matter of course, when this issue, as has already been stressed, comprises highly important formal and substantive facets, which called for a range of assessments, consultations, concerted actions and codecisions.

It would seem to us that the Council has taken the various issues - those of legitimate interceptions, the rights of the defence, the rights of detainees and of the authorities legally empowered to request mutual assistance - a little too lightly.

We should have requested and rejected the first version of the convention, and then requested another: the majority on the committee did not want this and it is for this reason that we will vote against it, even if we hope that the amendments, which nevertheless improve the text, can be incorporated by the Council - we doubt that they will be, but hope all the same that they are.

In my Group, there are undoubtedly different views of Mr Di Pietro' s report.

I agree that it is - as has been said - a good and competent piece of work, which has been carried out under difficult conditions.

The Danish Members of the Group cannot vote in favour of the proposal but will, on the contrary, be supporting a number of amendments, especially those tabled by the Greens.

There are two reasons why we are saying no.

Firstly, these are immensely complicated and very sensitive legal questions which are at issue and, to my mind, the proposal entails some risks to legal certainty, which have not been fully realised.

This is in itself sufficient reason for us to deny our support.

The other main reason, however, is that, even though we are concerned here with a Convention (and therefore with international cooperation), there is no doubt about the trend expressed in the proposal.

And the trend is towards creating, in the longer term, a common European area of jurisdiction, common EU criminal law and common EU administration of justice.

We would warn against that trend.

We have this AFSJ mantra - Area of Freedom, Security and Justice - the full enormity of which lies in its establishment of EU systems which will play havoc with existing legal traditions relating to these sensitive and important questions which are overwhelmingly national in character.

Mr President, I too agree that the convention that we are examining is but a small step - and still too small a step - towards the construction of the common area of freedom, security and justice which Europe will hopefully one day become.

It is today an area for the free movement of goods and persons, in which there are no frontiers to crime, but in which significant barriers still exist to those whose duty it is to combat crime.

A small step - I say - but nonetheless a welcome one, for which the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs has quite correctly wanted to prescribe further restrictions and guarantees in the name of the defence of the fundamental rights of the individual that are in force in the Member States and in the Union itself, even if these are not yet enshrined in a European Union charter of rights, which we hope will soon come into being: just restrictions and guarantees because, unfortunately, existing rights are, in practice, not always respected by every public authority in every Member State.

Certain isolated passages in the Commission' s proposal perhaps err on the side of caution, as is the case when it is maintained that the detainee accused should be given the choice of whether to accept or refuse temporary transfer to another Member State of the Union for the purposes of preliminary enquiries.

I personally find it unacceptable, for example, for Mr Pinochet to be given the option to move to Spain for a confrontation.

Or when it is maintained that the witness or expert witness - and not simply the defendant - should have a counsel at their side during examination via a video or telephone link.

These are nevertheless minor flaws, which the rapporteur did not want and which - I hope - will be remedied when this Chamber comes to vote.

The rapporteur has made laudable efforts, which should not go unnoted and for which I would like to thank him.

The overall result is remarkable and I hope that the Council will fully take it into account.

There is, as has already been said, one point still to resolved, which is also the most delicate one: it concerns article 18 of the convention, which relates to the interception of communications originating in one Member State, but which are directly performed by another Member State, without the assistance being requested of the State in which the interception is being carried out, something which is now possible thanks to the latest technology.

This is a highly controversial issue as it constitutes a potential source of abuse.

It could be maintained that in overall terms the legislation proposed is better than nothing, but to the Commission it nevertheless appeared insufficient and far from reassuring.

It thus merits further reflection which, at a time in which the ambivalent reports on ECHELON are evoking shades of Big Brother, should probably go into greater detail on the means and methods to be used, on the one hand, to safeguard the rights of the individual, and on the other hand to facilitate an effective but at the same time correct and legitimate suppression of crime.

The objective is thus to achieve, as closely as possible, a fine balance between the fight against organised crime and respect for personal freedoms and the dignity of the individual: an objective which now specifically applies not only to the Member States, but also to the Union, which is aspiring to become a common area of freedom, justice and security.

This is a distant goal, but is one that can be attained in stages.

The most important thing will be the harmonisation of the laws of the Member States, but for now let us content ourselves with this small step forward, as it is a step in the right direction.

Mr President, first of all I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on his excellent explanatory statement.

It points out some of the serious flaws in this proposal.

The lack of clarity of language is inevitably going to lead to legal uncertainty.

Legal certainty is something that is essential in such crucial matters.

Because of shoddy drafting the Convention can be interpreted very widely, and it ignores the strict conditions which interception is supposed to be subject to under the European Convention on Human Rights.

Article 18 allows interception in another Member State without its involvement.

Not only should this be deleted, the whole interception title should be scrapped.

An initiative of the FBI drew up the user requirements which form the basis of the current legislation.

The Council proposal containing those requirements, ENFOPOL 98 was approved by this Parliament last May in the Schmid report.

Now we are being asked to provide the legal base for such interception, and it is the combination of these two documents that should be looked at.

The requirements propose to allow the authorities access to the facilities of all service providers, that is, telephones, mobile phones, Internet, etc.; and given the current extremely shoddy drafting, this is open to abuse.

I would also like to ask: given that the user requirements specify that the police has access to all service providers without exception, does this include Parliament' s in-house service?

Are we adopting rules that will allow the police access to our own systems on very, very shoddy grounds?

Furthermore, in this proposal there is no threshold for serious offences. This leaves it wide open to abuse.

Again as regards the reversal of the burden of proof, something which is recognised in international, fundamental law, the presumption of innocence is essential.

Neither the preamble nor the body of the text takes proper account of the rights of the defence, a basic principle of international fundamental rights.

We are very concerned about the direction we are taking here without proper public debate within the national parliaments or elsewhere and without the involvement of civil liberties organisations throughout Europe which are extremely concerned about these developments.

Mr President, I am neither a member of the Legal Affairs Committee nor a lawyer, but like almost all of us, I understand the need for this Single Economic Area of Europe to have its parallel in a single area of freedom, security and justice.

In that sense, the issues of judicial cooperation in matters of criminal law are important.

What did I understand on reading the related texts?

That it is dangerous to rely on the provisions made by the Council.

The many contradictions and conflicting views over what Europe is and the many different legal systems could not only lead to confusion and inefficiency but also create dangerous situations.

For example, the situation proposed by Article 18, to which many speakers have drawn attention, where each country, each large country if you will, each country with the technical ability, can enter another country and monitor its telecommunications without even securing the second country' s approval.

In my opinion, the Legal Affairs Committee and the rapporteur Mr Di Pietro have produced some very interesting work.

It is a pity that this very well constructed explanatory statement by Mr Di Pietro could not be conveyed in the telegrammatic five minutes he had here today.

Nevertheless, it is a move towards protecting the rights of countries, defendants and citizens, a path which I think must be pursued much more completely and much more boldly.

I should like, however, to draw your attention to the fact that all this is taking place in a framework in which there is confusion and a schizophrenic attitude about criminal law.

A child, a student or a pupil who smokes hashish in one country is dealt with in an educational way, while in another country he is treated as a criminal and locked up in the universities of crime constituted by the corrective system and the prisons.

How can there be any cooperation on criminal matters on that basis?

For that reason, in conclusion, I believe we should do something, particularly in the area of harmonisation of laws, not those relating to organised criminal activity, but those concerning punishable activities by the people which are more in the nature of social phenomena.

On behalf of the TDI Group, I should like to take the opportunity afforded by Judge Di Pietro' s report on mutual assistance in criminal matters to refer to a case which is a tragic illustration of the way crime is eroding security in Europe.

On 14 December 1999, a five year-old boy called Clément was found in a sleeping-car on the Calais-Ventimiglia train, crying for his mother who was taking him to visit his sick grandmother.

Corinne Caillaux, who had probably been raped, was found with her throat cut and covered in stab wounds in the lavatories on the train.

The presumed killer, Sid Ahmed Rezala, is also strongly suspected of having murdered the British student Isabel Peake, who was raped and thrown out of the train taking her to see her parents, and another young woman, Émilie Bazin, who was found dead in Amiens under a pile of coal in the building where he lived.

Rezala should never have been in France. He arrived from Algeria at a time when, according to the authorities, immigration had been stopped and there was no reason for him to come.

He should never have stayed in France, having been reported to the transport police more than 40 times for offences, which should have been enough for him to be expelled back to his home country.

He should never have been free because 14 charges of theft, violence and rape had been brought against him, one of which was for the rape of a minor.

He should never have been able to escape from France, but the officers pursuing him had no jurisdiction and European frontiers have more holes than a sieve.

He should never have arrived in Spain, where he mugged a woman at knifepoint and yet was immediately released by the Spanish authorities.

Today, thanks to the complex networks of sexual deviants, he is in Portugal.

Portugal refuses to extradite him on the grounds that he would face a longer prison sentence in France than that provided for in the Portuguese penal code.

I should like to ask the Portuguese minister, the President-in-Office of the Council, to put a stop to this scandal at once.

I should like to ask the House to wake up, at long last, to the appalling situation of the victims of policies for which the establishment, not the yobs, bears full responsibility.

Mr President, this agreement deals with a sensitive issue: cooperation in the field of criminal law.

It is therefore understandable that the Council finds it difficult to agree.

Successful application of this agreement by the Member States requires unanimity within the Council.

Only a broadly based agreement makes any sense in practice.

This, however, does not mean that the Council can work on this anonymously.

The Council' s proposal must comply with legislation of the national Member States in the field of criminal law.

The wish to reach a unanimous decision can lead to compromises which do not stand this test.

Careful parliamentary scrutiny by the European Parliament but, above all, by the national parliaments, is therefore of key importance.

Mr Di Pietro' s proposal to omit the current Article 18 regarding intercepting telecommunications, amongst other things, is understandable, although very strict.

The text of Article 18 is ambiguous: he is restricting the activities of the intelligence services but seems to allow interception activities by a Member State in another Member State without the latter' s prior authorisation.

In this way, Member States would make themselves very vulnerable and it is doubtful as to whether there are sufficient guarantees to protect the State where interception occurs and the citizens within that State.

Proposed additions, such as repeated references to the ECHR, the rights of the counsel for the defence and of the defendant and the failure of Member States to implement the ECHR, add too much unnecessary information to the text of the agreement.

I am aware of the problems but I think that these could have been clarified by means of one single change in the text.

The Dutch Members of the Group for a Europe of Democracies and Diversities will, however, despite hesitation, not withhold their support for the Di Pietro report in the final vote.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, this report is very important not only in terms of its content but also because it represents an initial step towards the establishment of better relations in judicial cooperation.

This clearly only applies to relations at national level as nothing is mentioned about the much-discussed European citizenship.

On one hand judicial measures fall outside the Community dimension yet on the other we have the free movement of people from which criminals are also benefiting.

Pursuant to Article 29 of the EU Treaty, the Union' s objective is 'to provide citizens with a high level of safety within an area of freedom, security and justice by developing common action among the Member States in the fields of police and judicial cooperation in criminal matters and by preventing and combating racism and xenophobia' .

The creation of Europol represents one step towards achieving this objective. However, we must take the next step, which is to reinforce judicial cooperation in criminal matters in order to gradually establish a genuine European judicial area consistent with the objective of creating an area of freedom, security and justice.

This draft convention therefore aims to complete and facilitate the application, at Member State level, of pre-existing conventions on other legal areas. The intention is to improve judicial cooperation in criminal matters through rapid and effective legal assistance while still fully respecting the fundamental rights of the defence and the general principles of human rights enshrined in the national law of the Member States and in the European Convention on Human Rights.

It is this concern for basic rights, freedoms and guarantees which has led us to support the deletion from the text of the phone tapping proposals. We recommend that the Council prepare a separate legal instrument to resolve this issue.

As for videoconferencing, more precise regulations must be established so that the rights of the defence and guarantees of fair trials are safeguarded.

The procedural aspect of the legal system must be respected by defending the rights...

(The President cut the speaker off)

Mr President, legislating in criminal matters is often countered, wrongly, with arguments of individual freedom and security.

Is one secure when freedoms are no longer guaranteed?

Is one free when security is no longer assured?

Modern criminal law revolves around the quest for a balance, a dialogue between security and freedom.

And this dialogue is open-ended; it adapts to the demands of the day.

Nowadays, certain forms of crime are cross-border crimes and it is, of course, in the interests of the Member States to improve cooperation so that they can crack down on them.

But the Council' s draft leaves a lot to be desired and attracts criticism on several counts.

First, the form: the draft convention is vague in the extreme, and this is totally incompatible with the objective of legal certainty in a modern society.

It is not just a question of style.

We are taking about criminal law here and criminal law has to be interpreted by the letter.

Then the content: the Council draft fudges the obvious difficulty caused by widely differing legal systems, varying practices and a total lack of legal public service standards in certain Member States of the Union.

It makes provision in article 9 for prisoners held in custody to be transferred from one state to another despite the fact that guarantees differ.

I should like to stress this point because it is paramount.

We must not forget that several tens of thousands of people are currently held in custody in the European Union without having stood trial and that, in some states, custody is abused and used as a means of extorting confessions.

It is nothing less than legal torture.

Other European countries, on the other hand, do not accept confession as sufficient proof of guilt.

It is this diversity in our criminal policies which we have to address and legislating properly means looking for genuine legal convergence criteria and facing up to the reality of prisons in Europe, which are often overcrowded places outside the law which are a disgrace to the conception we have of ourselves.

Mr President, as you know, all of our countries abolished the death penalty years ago, but with nearly a thousand suicides a year in our prisons, they have not really abolished it?

Mr President, co-operation in the field of law is without doubt essential in free market Europe, but it must hinge on the strictest respect for those principles which lie at the very heart of our civilisation: the fundamental human rights and freedoms, laid down in the European Convention on the protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms.

We can but thank the parliamentary committees, which have - via the introduction of numerous amendments - made far-reaching modifications aimed at providing guarantees to a report which, in its initial format, we did not find at all convincing.

I turn to Mr Schulz in confirming that we always submit amendments not on a personal basis or for personal motives, but in connection with general political concerns.

If it is then a question of listing the areas investigated or researching these, they can be found with the rapporteurs, among them the author of the report on this convention.

I thus believe that Mr Schulz could have spared himself the effort of making certain remarks.

As I have said, numerous amendments have been incorporated which guarantee the rights of the defence - I am thinking here of the obligation for interceptions to be requested by a judge - or the prohibition on holding both an investigative and a judicial mandate as part of a joint investigation team.

In brief, this Parliament wanted the convention to apply solely to criminal matters; the restrictions on freedom and on fundamental rights set out in the convention can but be limited to criminal matters.

We need hard and fast rules.

The Council has behaved in an unseemly manner, changing tack in mid-course, and is nowhere to be seen.

We would, on the other hand, like to thank Commissioner Vitorino for attending the debate held in this Chamber.

As I have said, we need hard and fast rules if we are to have fair trials in Europe - without intrusion from interceptions, without the illicit use of video conferences - because we in Europe should no longer have trials run by magistrates who play politics rather than administer justice, and because punishment should be meted out to the real perpetrators of crime and not to innocent people who someone finds inconvenient.

Mr President, the draft Convention on Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters between the Member States of the European Union is approaching adoption by the Council.

Most say it is about time.

According to the action plan to combat organised crime adopted by the Council in April 1997, the work on the draft MLA Convention should have been finalised before the end of 1997.

More time will pass before the Convention actually enters into force, given the fact that this requires Member States' ratification.

Even with the new rules introduced by the Treaty of Amsterdam, foreseeing its entry into force once at least half of the Member States have adopted the Convention, I would like to urge the Member States to do everything in their power to speedily ratify this Convention.

Past experience with ratification of European Union conventions in the field of judicial cooperation in criminal matters is unfortunately disappointing.

This Convention will not create a new or different system of Mutual Assistance.

Instead it aims at building on tried and tested mechanisms that have been in place for a very long time, such as the ones foreseen by the Council of Europe Convention on mutual assistance of 1959 and the Benelux Treaty.

The draft that the Council has elaborated contains provisions on a variety of matters that have been discussed by several Members of Parliament.

It is a considerable achievement of the Convention that where at all possible requested Member States shall comply with the formalities and procedures indicated by the requesting Member States.

This is particularly important with regard to the possibility of using evidence that is obtained in court.

Furthermore, requests can be made directly between the competent authorities without any need to go via central authorities.

Generally speaking, there are two kinds of provisions: those that create an obligation to render assistance, such as the provisions on telephone and video conferences, controlled deliveries and on the interception of telecommunications; and those where no such obligation is created and only a legal framework is provided for Member States that wish to cooperate in the manner prescribed, for example, the provisions on joint investigation teams, covert investigations and the sending and service of procedural documents.

The Commission particularly welcomes the inclusion of provisions that deal with new or modern investigative techniques, given their effectiveness in fighting the form of crime that is best placed to take advantage of the opening of borders - organised crime.

It is all too easy to get carried away by the obvious need to improve the effectiveness of criminal investigations.

However, one aspect of any action with regard to criminal procedures must not be forgotten - the right of defence.

I very much appreciate that the report of Mr Di Pietro, whom I salute for the excellent work he has done in such a short period of time, includes the right of defence as one of its main points.

At the present time it is entirely up to the Member States to ensure that those rights are respected under the scrutiny of the Council of Europe' s Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg.

It remains to be seen whether this will change with the new European Union Charter on Fundamental Rights, work on which has just begun.

We must recognise that Article 18 concerns what is clearly a controversial decision.

The article was carefully crafted in Council in very lengthy discussions, in order to ensure that intelligence activities would remain effective and that criminal investigations will be covered.

As far as criminal investigations are concerned, for which I am responsible, I take note of the invitation that was addressed to the Commission and the Council by several Members of the European Parliament to take this issue on board and to address it on a common legal basis, having regard to the relevance the interception of telecommunications may have as evidence before the courts.

The Commission is fully aware of the fact that the draft we have before us is not perfect or ideal.

The text we have is the result of the mixture of the institutional set-ups foreseen for judicial cooperation in criminal matters under both the Maastricht and Amsterdam Treaties respectively.

This is what we have, and only practical experience will show us in detail if and where there are shortcomings and what additional steps will have to be taken.

I am quite aware of the fact that the further development of mutual trust and mutual confidence among the judicial systems of the Member States will ease the road we have ahead of us.

Apart from that, the Tampere European Council has already indicated in which direction we, in the Commission, should go.

Among the steps to be taken will be the implementation of the principle of mutual recognition of judicial decisions and the setting-up of the Euro Just project.

The Commission sincerely hopes that the European Parliament will support its efforts to make progress in these important fields.

I do not expect you to wave through or rubber stamp everything you are confronted with in the coming years.

I am counting more on the European Parliament to be not only a critical observer, as it has been in this case, but also an active player in taking the Union forward in the fight against crime.

Mr Goebbels, I am sorry, but I think you are jumping the gun; Amendment No 37 is an oral amendment proposing that the words 'with a high rating base on a recognised rating scale' be moved. You were asking for the place to be changed.

Madam President, my apologies, I was looking at Amendment No 36, which logically precedes Amendment No 37.

But, you are right, we are discussing Amendment No 37 and here too we have a similar problem.

It is not the establishments but the instruments which should have a high rating.

The text therefore reads: 'instruments with a high rating base on a recognised rating scale are subject to reliable and verifiable valuation' .

My apologies once again for my mistake.

Are there any objections to this oral amendment?

(Parliament adopted the two legislative resolutions in two separate votes)

Madam President, I asked for the floor before the sitting started in order to say something solely intended for you as President of this House. We have a procedure for visits to be made to this House to report on certain situations.

I do respect and agree with this procedure, as I also agree with the freedom of expression for everyone. However, for the second time in a fortnight these visits have been used to attack individuals, political parties, including my own, and institutions.

I feel that this behaviour, particularly in your presence, is unacceptable and totally repugnant, especially when we are on the point of an electoral campaign.

Therefore, particularly out of respect for you, I must say that I do not approve of this type of behaviour and in fact totally reject this.

I was told that this was a personal response.

Note will be taken of it in the Minutes.

Madam President, particularly out of respect for you, for myself and for this House, I did not want to explicitly refer to the issue in question. However, as a Member of this House, as general secretary of a party in the Basque Country and as an ordinary citizen of Spain, I will do so now because of the extremely serious accusations made against individuals and against parties like my own, which has a long democratic tradition, and which has scrupulously respected and defended human rights for many years.

Madam President, I want to express my concern that this clear defence by Mr Knörr Borràs of human rights apparently does not prevent his government from cooperating in Parliament with a political group which not only does not condemn, but collaborates with and encourages, violence against people and property.

I see that Mr Gorostiaga Atxalandabaso is asking to take the floor on the same subject.

We are not going to enter into a debate now.

I shall give you the floor for any points of order after the vote.

Report (A5-0029/2000) by Mr Brok, on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy, on the proposal for a Council regulation on the implementation of operations in the framework of the pre-accession strategy for Cyprus and Malta (COM(1999) 535 - C5-0308/1999 - 1999/0199(CNS))

Relating to Amendments Nos 22 and 24

In other words, our rapporteur is proposing an oral amendment to add a recital reading: 'Whereas Malta and Cyprus will participate...'

Report (A5-0013/2000) by Mr Knörr Borràs, on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, on the proposal for a Council regulation amending Regulation (EC) No 3605/93 on the application of the Protocol on the excessive deficit procedure annexed to the Treaty establishing the European Community (COM(1999) 444 - C5-0174/1999 - 1999/0196(CNS))

Report (A5-0020/2000) by Mrs Cederschiöld, on behalf of the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs, on the Draft Framework Decision on increasing protection by penal sanctions against counterfeiting in connection with the introduction of the euro (5116/1999 - C5-0332/1999 - 1999/0821(CNS))

Report (A5-0019/2000) by Mr Di Pietro, on behalf of the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs, on the draft Council Act establishing the Convention on Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters between the Member States of the European Union (9636/1999 - C5-0091/1999 and SN 5060/1999 - C5-0331/1999 - 1999/0809(CNS))

Madam President, I want to condemn the absence of the Presidency-in-Office of the Council.

On Third Pillar matters such as these conventions which are so important for the construction of an area of freedom, security and justice, it is unacceptable for the Presidency-in-Office of the Council to be absent.

I also want to mention the translation problems, of which I will give just one example, as we do not have much time.

Correct translation is vital in this subject as it involves very precise legal concepts.

Amendment No 83 in Italian, which is the original version, states that 'il minore deve essere assistito da una persona di sua fiducia o da un perito o legale esterno' .

The term 'legale esterno' has been translated into French as 'avocat neutre' . I have no idea what an 'avocat neutre' is.

It rather seems like a contradiction in terms.

However, in the Spanish version the 'abogado' has disappeared completely.

Madam President, you have said several times that this is a very serious problem.

The lawyer-linguists should work very carefully to ensure that a reasonable version is produced.

Quite, Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi, this is not the first time and it is indeed most worrying.

We shall address this problem and check all the translations.

Madam President, I simply wanted to add my voice to that of Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi before the vote started, to say that I regret very much the absence of the Council from this debate on such important votes on matters of the Third Pillar.

I should like you, Madam President, to express to the Council our wish that they be present at such votes in future.

Quite, I am well aware that their absence is highly irregular and I shall be most happy to pass this on.

Madam President, in the phrase which reads 'Where consent to the transfer is required from the person concerned' , the words 'under the national law of the requesting or requested Member State' should be added after 'Where' .

Madam President, in the heat of the moment I forgot to mention that, in my report on the excessive deficit procedure, the last paragraph of the explanatory statement contains a mistake in the Spanish version. An 's' has been omitted and instead of reading 'la propuesta nos parece correcta' , it reads 'la propuesta no parece correcta' which is completely the contrary.

I just wanted to correct this.

Proposal for a resolution (B5-0132/2000) by Mrs Bonino and others, on behalf of the TDI Group, on the Commission communication on the strategic objectives for the next five years

(Parliament rejected the proposal for a resolution)

Proposal for a resolution (B5-0136/2000) by Mr Queiro, Mrs Muscardini and Mr Berthu, on behalf of the UEN Group, on the Commission' s strategic objectives for 2000-2005

(Parliament rejected the proposal for a resolution)

Proposal for a resolution (B5-0142/2000) by Messrs Mrs Hautala, Mr Lannoye and Mrs Maes, on behalf of the Verts/ALE Group, on the strategic objectives for 2000-2005

(Parliament rejected the proposal for a resolution)

Proposal for a joint resolution on the Commission' s 5 year Strategic Programme

Proposal for a joint resolution on coherence of different Union policies

Proposal for a resolution (B5-0125/2000) by Mr Dupuis and others, on behalf of the TDI Group, on the UN Commission on human rights

(Parliament rejected the proposal for a resolution)

Madam President, I did not want to disturb you a minute ago during the vote. But I did notice a drop in alertness and when we debated the amendments of our Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance, you mentioned the Greens on their own in every instance.

We are a group of unity in diversity.

We want to bring this across in Parliament.

I would ask you to use the full name of our Group.

Very well, I shall do so.

Proposal for a joint resolution on human rights

Report (A5-0032/2000) by Mr Corrie, on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation, on the results of the work of the ACP-EU Joint Assembly in 1999

Report (A5-0031/2000) by Mr Swoboda, on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy, on the Commission recommendation on a Council decision authorising the Commission to negotiate a stabilisation and association agreement with the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia (SEC(1999)1279 - C5-0166/1999 - 1999/2121(COS))

(DE) Madam President, I have an oral amendment which is in fact a clarification, because the passage concerned has been formulated differently in various translations.

I hope the person who tabled the amendment will agree to this.

The second sentence should read: '.., weshalb diese Hilfen' (which is why we have this aid), then 'ohne Bedingungen und' (unconditionally and) should be deleted, and it continues as follows: 'ohne Abhängigkeit von reziproken Anweisungen von seiten des Geberlandes gewährt werden müssen' . (and therefore that the aid must not be dependent on the reciprocal orders from the donor countries).

This clarification would certainly meet with our approval.

Are there any objections to the inclusion of this oral amendment?

(Parliament agreed to the oral amendment) - Relating to Amendment No 9

I just wanted to make it clear - as it has been translated differently here - that we always use the official name FYROM.

Absolutely, I do not think that will pose a problem.

(Parliament adopted the oral amendment) (Parliament adopted the resolution)

Report (A5-0021/2000) by Mrs Frassoni, on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs, on the agreement between the European Parliament and the Commission on procedures for implementing the new Council decision of 28 June 1999 - 'Comitology' (1999/468/EC)

Madam President, I would like, with reference to this report, to underline the problem of translation: reference should be made to the French or Italian version, since the text adopted by this Parliament will also be the authoritative one for the Commission.

We have encountered several problems in some of the other languages, but have not been able to check all of these, and I would thus urge you to be mindful of problems of this type.

Thank you, Mrs Frassoni, for your clarification. I shall ensure that it is taken into full account.

Before proceeding to the explanations of vote, I have a series of points of order.

I should like to give Mr Gorostiaga Atxalandabaso the floor.

I see that he has left the House. We shall therefore go on to the explanations of vote.

Madam President, I voted in favour of the Schmidt report on the regulation of investments in transferable securities because, as I stated in this Chamber this morning, I consider it very important that the monies of the citizens of the European Union be put to good use. The vast majority of these citizens are elderly people and pensioners, who want a peaceful retirement and who, after the problems encountered during the course of their working lives, have at last found financial peace of mind.

The regulation of investments in transferable securities, the vast majority of which are made by elderly pensioners, is thus a major step forward for the European Union.

(SV) Olle Schmidt' s report is an improvement on the Commission' s proposal.

I am not opposed to updating the common minimum regulations enabling a collective investment undertaking to obtain a so-called EU passport.

However, I do not consider it would be appropriate to do this before all Member States have approved Commissioner Monti' s proposal for minimum taxes on capital.

In its present form, the report will contribute to further liberalisation of the capital markets, in spite of the fact that what is most important is to restrain them.

Like the whole of the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance, I have therefore voted against the proposal to amend Directive No 1 and have abstained from voting on the proposal to amend Directive No 2.

Madam President, there has recently been much talk of the importance of enlarging the European Union.

We have before us Malta and Cyprus, which are two States keen to become members.

Given that the complexity of the procedures has been greatly reduced, I voted in favour not only because this measure addresses the need for cohesion between these applicant States and the Union, but also because I believe that this should be taken as an invitation from Parliament to the Council and the Commission to ensure that Cyprus and Malta become fully-fledged members of the European Union as swiftly as possible.

(FR) It is with great satisfaction that I welcome this report on the pre-accession strategy for Cyprus and Malta, whose accession is vital to the future of the European Union in the Mediterranean.

The aim of this proposal for a regulation is to set up the first programme to implement the strategy for Cyprus and Malta, starting in the year 2000 and lasting for five years (2000-2004).

The proposal therefore aims to facilitate harmonisation of their legislation with the acquis communautaire and the correct application of the acquis communautaire.

This new move follows on from the step taken at the Helsinki European Council last December, when it was decided that Malta had made sufficient progress to warrant opening bilateral conferences in February 2000, i.e. by the end of this month, in order to commence negotiations on the conditions of accession to the Union and the adjustments required.

As far as Cyprus is concerned, although the Council stated that a political settlement would facilitate the accession of Cyprus to the European Union. It also stated that its decision on accession would be made without the above being a precondition, which I welcome.

I have, in fact, always thought that insisting on a settlement of the present situation, in which one-third of this republic' s territory is occupied by Turkey, before starting negotiations with Cyprus was quite unfair.

On a more general note, it is true that the socio-economic situation in these two countries is far better than in other candidate countries.

However, they have received technical assistance and financial aid from the European Union in order to transpose the acquis communautaire.

Until 1999, this technical assistance and financial aid was provided under the fourth financial protocols (B7-4011).

Both countries also qualify for financial aid under the MEDA programme (B7-4012).

During the first and second readings of the 2000 budget, the European Parliament stressed that the new 'pre-accession' heading (B7-0), proposed by the Commission in the preliminary draft budget, should not be limited to the candidate countries of Central and Eastern Europe and should also be extended to Malta and Cyprus.

However, because of the Council' s refusal to negotiate a review of the ceiling set for heading 7 (pre-accession) in the Financial Perspectives, the European Parliament agreed, by way of exception, and I stress that it was by way of exception, that this expenditure should be financed under heading 4 (external action) of the Financial Perspectives for the year 2000.

At the same time, the European Parliament created a new heading: 'pre-accession strategy for Mediterranean countries' (B7-04), under which two new articles were created for the pre-accession strategy for Malta and Cyprus pending the Commission' s presentation, following the Helsinki European Council, of the necessary legal bases and a review of the ceiling for heading 7 of the Financial Perspectives.

This proposal for a regulation is supposed to be one of these legal bases!

I welcome Mr Brok' s report supporting with amendments the Commission' s proposals seeking to prepare Cyprus and Malta for EU membership.

The package will grant around Euro 15 million in total for the two countries in the current year.

It is, however, regrettable that the Commission has eschewed multiannual financing and decided instead to allocate funds on a yearly basis.

This is bound to have an impact on the ability of Malta and Cyprus to plan spending.

The funding will provide technical and financial support to enable the two islands to meet the requirements of the Community 'acquis' .

Given the already advanced state of these two countries, compared to other applicants, this should easily allow them to be 'technically and administratively' ready for membership at the end of the 5-year programme.

(FR) As a member of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs during the last parliamentary term, I welcome the adoption of this framework decision on increasing protection for our single currency.

The Union should use every means at its disposal to guard against counterfeiting.

Consumers and traders are still not familiar with the euro and it would be easy for counterfeit money to be passed in supermarkets, bureaux de change and banks and not be noticed straight away.

And the fact that coins are to have a national design on one side will make them even harder to identify.

The European information centres, which are already playing a vital role in raising public awareness of the single currency, should step up their campaigns to raise public awareness of counterfeiting.

On another level, we must ensure that Community and national institutions cooperate and implement an information system to collect and exchange information on counterfeiting.

As far as criminal sanctions are concerned, measures are needed to guarantee protection for the euro from the outset and this is the purpose of the draft framework decision on increasing protection by criminal sanctions against counterfeiting presented by the European Parliament.

The purpose of the framework decision is to supplement the provisions of the International Convention for the Suppression of Counterfeiting Currency of 20 April 1929 and to facilitate its application by the Member States.

Each Member State must take the necessary measures to ensure that the offences set out in the framework decision are punishable.

These offences must be punishable even if they relate to banknotes and coins denominated in euros but not yet issued and if they are committed before 1 January 2002.

This is a basic element of the decision.

I cannot but support the rapporteur in deploring the fact that the present national currencies from which the euro is to take over are not protected.

We must bear in mind that national currencies could continue to change hands for another 20 years!

They should therefore be protected by criminal sanctions against counterfeiting once they have been withdrawn from circulation.

It would also appear to be in the Union' s interest for all Member States to help protect the euro, especially Sweden, Denmark, the United Kingdom and Greece, which will not be introducing the euro on 1 January 2002.

Although this framework decision is a step in the right direction, it confines itself to increasing criminal sanctions by harmonising substantive criminal law in the form of minimum standards.

There is still no uniform criminal legislation on counterfeiting and there are 15 different national systems.

That brings us back to the more general need to approximate criminal law called for by the European Council in Tampere.

(DA) Mrs Cederschiöld' s report reflects an extremely peculiar form of logic. The EU introduces a common currency.

The risk of counterfeiting increases. Counterfeiting of the euro is perceived as an offence against the entire EU; the punishment must therefore be the same in each Member State.

The harmonisation of criminal law or the introduction of minimum legal standards should not be legitimised against the background of problems of one' s own creation but from considerations of reason and necessity. There is nothing to indicate that the Member States' legal principles, legal traditions and carefully tailored legal systems should be lost for reasons to do with an already familiar offence such as counterfeiting.

Nor, in the light of the international convention of 20 April 1929, can there be any confusion as to which country should deal with any criminal cases.

We are therefore voting against the report and strongly urge the abandonment of the idea of harmonising criminal law on such flimsy grounds. Instead, the focus should be upon preventing the real problem.

I welcome this proposal to protect the Euro against forgers.

When the notes and coins come into circulation after 1 January 2002, everything possible must be done to ensure maximum confidence in the Euro.

Madam President, as the representative of the Pensioners' Party, there have been many occasions on which I have stated, at the committee stage, that the European Union must intervene in regulating the lives of the elderly, and in the measures and rules on pensions, as is already the case, in coordination.

Similarly, as concerns the field of justice and criminal law, which we have discussed today, I believe not only that the different criminal law, juridical and administrative legislative systems should be coordinated, but also that we must at last formulate common standards: an offence committed in Italy must also be viewed as an offence in Great Britain, Spain or elsewhere.

I believe that we, the Parliament of the European Union, who are the elected representatives of the citizens, must give sharper impetus to ensuring that the European Union provides for the regulation of every facet of the lives of its citizens, including that of justice, and that of pensions.

Commissioner Prodi pointed out that 'Africa is our responsibility' and not apparently that of the USA and other major countries.

I worked in Africa 30 years ago, and it was poor and underdeveloped but the problems are now more catastrophic.

Two million people died of AIDS in Africa last year, approximately 200 000 died in wars.

In Zambia 25% of teachers have died of AIDS.

In some countries children had a better chance of basic education and health care twenty years ago than they have today.

Our policies in Africa lack coherence.

There is huge duplication of effort.

Furthermore, the cloud of debt remains an obstacle to real development.

It is patently clear that Africa has become the forgotten continent.

(FR) In its communication on its strategic objectives for 2000-2005, the Commission repeats that Europe needs to become a 'global actor' capable of speaking with a strong voice in the world.

What should this global actor' s objective be?

Doubtless our citizens would say something along the lines of 'to defend the countries of Europe better' , since that is the traditional and primordial purpose of political associations.

And yet this phrase is nowhere to be seen.

All we find are vague phrases about 'strategic partnerships' and the new prospects for trade which the complete integration of Europe would apparently bring with it.

The omission of this principal objective is highly revealing.

It demonstrates one of the main flaws in the European Union, a little-known, almost always implicit flaw, but one which goes a long way towards explaining our citizens' loss of interest.

There is a highly revealing passage on this point in the work programme for the year 2000 attached to the strategic guidelines.

Addressing the fundamental question of relations with the United States, the Commission mentions just one priority: 'we will endeavour to reduce and eliminate as far as possible the disputes in transatlantic trade' (page 4).

While we are on the subject, where one would expect a firm declaration of intent to defend European interests in the numerous trade conflicts under way, one merely finds the desire to eliminate conflict, which hardly sounds like determination on the part of the Commission to fight its corner.

How strange that the Commission should lose its instinct for self-preservation just as Europe is integrating.

I think there are three reasons for this: 1) in their endeavour to transcend the nation states, the European institutions have lost touch with the people and, in losing touch with the people, they have become putty in the hands of foreign interests; 2) having lost touch with the people, the men and women working in these institutions have started to become used to reasoning not as the sole champions of the people, but as international officials in charge of regulating a global system; 3) integration may afford economies of scale and productivity gains; but it also causes far more to be lost because, when it breaks nations, it breaks subtle expressions of solidarity and, with them, the willingness to present a united front.

(FR) I share the overriding sense of deep and keen dissatisfaction expressed during the debate.

I do, of course, understand the constraints of the moment and I am prepared to entertain the idea of the risk of failure....

However, experience has taught me that, in politics, modest ambitions are never the key to success!

I shall not keep saying that I am disappointed, because you need to hope in order to be disappointed.... and I have had no hope since the investiture debate.

As for the future, given that the Commission has shown itself incapable of taking action against fascism in Austria, I am convinced that blocking measures to liberalise the single market is the only way of administering a salutary electric shock treatment to the heart of all the countries in the Union.

- (IT) On behalf of the Italian Communists, I would like to express great dissatisfaction at the contents of the document, which was expected to define the strategic guidelines for Europe up until the year 2005.

Employment: for many years now, the connection between economic growth and an increase in employment has not been borne out by reality, and yet, despite the fact that it has been proved to be useless, the same recipe is being put forward again as a solution to the acute problem of unemployment.

And yet our President is a fine economist.

Pensions: The document states that, 'Member States must remain responsible for modernising social protection systems' , and yet the Commission itself intervened in the case of Italy, repeatedly calling for swift changes to the pension system to reduce rights and decrease pension payments.

And yet President Prodi himself gave firm guidance to the Italian Government during those years and is therefore aware of the nature and extent of the sacrifices demanded of our fellow citizens and which they made in order to sign up to the euro, and he is aware of the major role played by Italy in European development.

For this very reason, we cannot agree to cut pensions further.

There is an agreement on this issue which provides for a review in 2001 and this must not take place one moment sooner.

What is more, the relevant cost dynamic is completely under control.

I would therefore ask the Commission to please refrain from taking this unacceptable ideological approach and making such declarations which create instability and uncertainty among the citizens.

I referred to the case of Italy, not only because the President is very familiar with it, but because Community statistics (Eurostat) themselves reveal that not only has Italy' s welfare expenditure - currently 25.9% - been below the Community average (28.2%) since 1990, but that it has also been well below that of countries considered to be doing well, such as Germany (29.9%) and France (30.8%).

Europe' s role: we first need to emphasise that Europe rejects war as an instrument for resolving international conflict: only then can we talk of the 'military' role of the Union.

Agriculture and health: we see the issue differently from the Commission: in our view there are no consumers: there are only citizens who want to eat healthy food - products which are not designed for competitiveness but health, quality and respect for the environment. Moreover, these are factors which create employment.

(FR) The proposed action and programme presented by Mr Prodi are vague in the extreme and the social question is missing yet again.

In fact, the word seems to have been banished from the Commission' s vocabulary, whereas liberal and American references abound.

Mr Prodi reverts to the contested concept of 'governance' ; contested because it favours state intervention over a proper working democracy and refers to the notion as defined by the IMF, whose ideological agenda is predicated solely on liberalism and monetarism.

The shift in meaning is not just semantic...

The only logical thing to do on reading this document is to pursue the mass market and generalised deregulation and forget about the realignment of European policy which our citizens hoped for.

Mr Prodi talks solely of 'mechanisms' and 'structures' and fails to set out a single balanced project which responds to the aspirations of our people.

Enlargement appears to be an end in itself, but unless decisions are made on a social policy, a common value and an institution to strengthen the cohesion and democratisation of the Union, the Europe bequeathed to us at the end of Mr Prodi' s presidency may well be a simple common market area within the context of generalised globalisation, rather than the community of destiny which we hope for.

Finally, Mr Prodi' s complacency towards the Austrian Government in the name of an exaggerated sense of protocol (which in no way obliges him to send a message of congratulations) would in itself warrant a vote of no confidence.

(FR) The European Union is flaunting its unbridled expansionist ambitions.

The Commission' s objective for the next five years is to become a 'global actor' by showing 'genuine leadership on the world stage' .

The nature of the EU has not changed.

Since the beginning it has served the interests of a few dozen large financial and industrial groups and their pressure groups.

But the Prodi Commission now wants to transform the EU so that it can apply for joint global governance with the United States, which it also sees as its future competitor and rival.

This new imperial policy advocates reorganising European and national institutions, strengthening the power of the state, increasing competition, establishing a European army and redistributing financial resources.

Even daring to refer to the defence of a 'European social model' is a shamefaced lie because the more the EU combats the United States, the more it becomes its clone.

We shall vote against these objectives, because we are fighting against this policy both in Parliament and on the streets.

A European charter of fundamental rights would be the only ray of light in this policy but, yet again, there is no provision for the people of Europe themselves to be able to address and decide on this democratically.

We abstained from the vote on the motion for a resolution for the following reasons.

Firstly, the motion does not condemn clearly enough the vagueness of the priorities and commitments indicated in the Commission' s programme.

Secondly, in terms of the definition of priorities for the next five years, we consider that the main question to be considered by the Commission is its role in interinstitutional relations within the EU which neither the programme nor the motion mention.

In our opinion, the Commission' s role in the near future will be dependent on some of the European political initiative being returned by the governments of the Member States following the Santer Commission scandal.

This is very positive as this is how the national parliaments, on which the governments depend, will continue to show that their democratic mandate is indispensable to European construction.

The truth is that the European Parliament is still failing to gain the confidence and interest of national public opinion which is determined not to think about Europe, as demonstrated by the low turnout in the recent elections.

The mechanisms used in the cooperation between the governments of the Member States must therefore be reinforced and made more coherent, more transparent and more democratic.

We welcome the efforts of Mr Prodi to improve the public image of the Commission and the need for the latter to agree with this House and the Council.

However, the priority should be to reform the governmental cooperation mechanisms, particularly by creating a Council of Ministers for Europe which, by itself and in coordination with the other European institutions, can assume the responsibility for transforming the political decisions of the European Councils into specific actions.

Madam President, the work of the ACP-EU Joint Assembly was coloured in 1999 by growing concern about the sustainability of the cooperation models derived from the Lomé Conventions.

Back in 1994, the Joint Assembly passed an initial resolution, in which our fellow Member Dominique Souchet was closely involved, expressing its alarm at the foreseeable consequences of the Uruguay Round, which contradicted the very principle of Community preference which was fundamental to this cooperation.

These fears have been taking shape over the last two years and the banana row is the clearest expression of them.

The developing countries are asked to fall into line with the liberalisation of trade, despite their vulnerable economies.

Although Mr Corrie' s report roundly condemns this situation and reaffirms the Joint Assembly' s attachment to the Lomé model, he fails to highlight properly a second problem which, to tell the truth, is also the result of the free-trade error, namely the incoherence of the regional trade agreements signed by the European Union.

The cooperation agreement with South Africa is a prime example.

The Council approved the agreement negotiated by the Commission despite the fact that a basic section, namely agriculture, had not been finalised.

As Paul-Marie Coûteaux rightly said in his intervention yesterday and in his proposed amendments, one wonders exactly what political coherence this blank cheque represents.

It is most worrying, especially as a similar agreement with Mexico appears to be taking shape.

Nor is it possible to support the rapporteur' s call for the European Development Fund to be merged with the Community budget.

We want to maintain the clear commitment and the responsibility of each Member State, which is made possible by its intergovernmental nature.

Alas, there have been far too many instances of collective aid for which no-one feels responsible being derailed and we do not want to extend this disastrous system to the EDF.

Madam President, I welcome Mr Corrie' s report as a balanced assessment of the work the Assembly has carried out over the last year.

The report comes just after agreement has been reached on the renewal of the existing Lomé Convention, which expires at the end of this month.

The new agreement provides for a development budget of EUR 13.5 billion over the next seven years.

It is vital that this money is used to benefit the poorest groups and individuals within the ACP countries.

Strenuous efforts must be made to root out corruption and waste.

Civil society must be involved in the planning and implementation of these projects.

The decision to include a clause obliging ACP countries to take back illegal immigrants entering Europe is worrying and will have to be implemented with extreme sensitivity.

I hope that before the end of this new Lomé Convention we will be able to welcome Cuba as a full member.

The joint United Nations programme on AIDS estimated that by the end of 1998, there was a total of 33.4 million people in the world living with the HIV infection.

Over 95% of all HIV infected individuals live in the developing countries and sub-Saharan Africa is the worst affected region in the world.

While only around 10% of the world' s population live in sub-Saharan Africa, 70% of all people who became infected with the AIDS virus in 1998 live there.

80% of the 13.9 million AIDS related deaths in the world have taken place in this region.

The AIDS problem in Africa is not only a private or public health issue but a development one.

The effects of the AIDS pandemic mean that any progress in development matters in the sub-Saharan region is being neutralised or reversed.

From the data which I am referring to today, it is evident that this disease is taking a disproportionate toll on the developing countries least capable of responding to its wide-ranging impact.

It is clear that the spread of AIDS in the sub-Saharan African Continent is linked to poverty.

AIDS treatments that may cost $18 000 per annum for one person are obviously not affordable by countries whose annual health budget may be less than $5 per capita.

It is incumbent on the European Union and the United Nations to address what is a social and fatal problem in a comprehensive and strategic manner.

We must primarily ensure that the basic needs of the poorest people in the countries most affected by the AIDS disease are fully met.

These countries include Ethiopia, Lesotho, Mozambique, Tanzania, Uganda and Zambia.

Prevention education should begin early in the primary school curriculum in these countries.

Appropriate messages about the health effects of AIDS must be delivered to primary school children by teachers who are comfortable with the information that they are trying to communicate.

Health facilities and staff of NGOs need to be supported and resourced to deal effectively and appropriately with patients.

It is essential that these groups are able to obtain the limited resources they require to be effective.

At a more central level, there is a need for more effective co-ordination between government donors, international NGOs, indigenous NGOs and private sector initiatives so that scarce resources are not wasted.

Already weak economies are being further weakened in Africa by the AIDS virus.

Already stretched resources are being further stretched.

50% or more of hospital beds are now occupied by someone suffering with an AIDS related disease in the countries where AIDS figures are highest.

On a separate matter altogether, I would like to support Cuba' s membership as an ACP country within the framework of the new Lomé Convention which will shortly be agreed between the European Union and African, Caribbean and Pacific countries.

I know that this is somewhat controversial, particularly, because of the attitude of the United States Government towards the Castro regime.

However, on this occasion, the European Union will be insisting on introducing political criteria into the Lomé Convention Accord.

Good governance criteria broadly covering questions of refugees, corruption, human rights and democracy will be part of the finalised accord between the European Union and all countries signing the Lomé Convention from Africa, the Caribbean and the Pacific region.

(FR) The Lomé Convention, on which the entire structure of relations between the European Union and the 71 African, Caribbean and Pacific countries rests, is still the most efficient and ambitious development tool in north-south relations.

After years of 'good and loyal service' it is still the main symbol of efforts by the European Union to promote development and improve the lot of the poorest countries.

It is the humane face of Europe...

And the merit of Mr Corrie' s report is that it highlights the value of this original, proactive development instrument, together with the work carried out by the Joint Assembly.

Especially as the vulnerable architecture of this ambitious structure has been threatened.

The partnership between the European Union and the ACP was negotiated in the difficult time of the changeover to the new millennium.

I am delighted that reason and generosity triumphed over the difficulties, opening new prospects for this partnership.

Now, more than 30 years after the inauguration of an unprecedented partnership between north and south, the tool which has proven its worth and served its time needs to be adapted in order to meet new challenges.

Which is why the new 20-year agreement due to be signed in Fiji on 31 May represents more than the simple renewal of the Conventions regulating relations between Europe and the ACP.

It brilliantly illustrates the political dimension of a partnership which constitutes the only forum for dialogue and political exchange within north-south relations.

At a time when the Joint Assembly is opening its doors ever wider to the elected representatives from parliaments in the ACP, this dimension must not only be preserved; above all, it must be encouraged.

The Joint Assembly also represents the tribunal before which the countries of Europe and the developing countries defend their common interests.

After the debacle in Seattle, our duty from now on is to adopt a concerted position and ensure that the rules of world trade develop and are used to fight poverty.

The partnership is here to stay and the way is clear for it to be modernised.

First, by promoting a trend towards regional meetings of the Joint Assembly, as recommended in the Corrie report, thereby enabling working methods to be adapted to the new types of cooperation envisaged (regional economic partnership agreements).

Then, by gearing actions to micro-projects and making them accessible to the civil society in the southern countries and, finally, by calling for enlargement and the rapid accession of Cuba, which all the ACP called for at Nassau and which has now made a formal application.

But we must also preserve the original spirit of the Lomé Convention, which has enabled relations between the European Union and the ACP to become what they are today: a real partnership based on fairness and mutual respect.

(FR) A few days after the demonstrations in Seattle, the ministers of the European Union imposed an agreement compatible with the rules of the WTO on the ACP, i.e. their former colonies.

Apart from reducing the volume of exports from these countries to the Community market, what we term 'development aid' to the ACP has fallen constantly, from 70% of total European Union aid in 1986 to 30% in 1998.

The European Union prefers to send its funds to Eastern Europe, the former USSR and Asia, where there is greater opportunity for profit.

The ACP-EU agreements make a mockery of democratic principles and the fight against corruption, by sparing those who are responsible: when will sanctions and controls be imposed on Total-Elf, which is supplying those responsible for the civil war in the Congo?

Although the market is presented as the only rule which applies to ACP-EU relations, the European Union also plans to police immigration, as article 13 hints, in order to justify the policy of the European states against illegal immigrants.

We do not accept this agreement, which deprives people of the wherewithal to build societies which are independent of the European multinationals and banks.

Mr President, I am full of praise at the sterling efforts of MEPs --some of my Labour colleagues among them - on the ACP-EU Joint Assembly and their efforts towards securing a new Lomé Agreement, which will benefit some of the poorest countries in the world.

Few of my constituents will probably be aware that the EU is the biggest foreign aid donor in the world.

While others may have the biggest rockets, the EU has the deepest pockets.

This is something that the EU can rightly be proud of, and I think we should shout it from the rooftops more often.

The Labour Government' s record in Britain is also a proud one.

Clare Short, MP, is one of the few Cabinet-level Ministers for international development in the world and, as such, can take her case to the very heart of government.

Gordon Brown, MP, meanwhile, has led international efforts to relieve crippling levels of Third World debt and ensured that Labour' s campaign to reduce poverty does not end at the English Channel.

Whether through the minimum wage in Manchester or debt relief in Durban, Labour' s aim of poverty reduction remains the same.

There is still much to be done, however.

The next great challenge is to re-launch the new round of world trade negotiations that failed to take off last December in Seattle.

It must be a 'development round' , in which developing countries, effectively excluded from previous rounds, are fully included.

For the best way to reduce world poverty is to help developing countries help themselves.

Developing countries want trade not aid, a help up not a hand-out.

And the best way to help developing countries help themselves is to open up world markets to allow them to sell their products.

In this way, the power of globalisation can be harnessed for the good, to benefit the poor not just the wealthy, the many not just the few.

Thus, whether through the New Deal in Newcastle or fair trade in Freetown, Labour' s aim of opportunity for all remains the same.

(FR) The Commission' s stated desire to strengthen relations between the European Union and the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and to grant this country the prospect of full integration into the Community would appear to respond to a primary concern: a political entity which respects nations and their sovereignty could no longer postpone sending a signal to these states in south-east Europe which history has shown no consideration for since the end of the Second World War.

Having been crushed beneath the heel of triumphant Communism, this region has not stopped paying the price for the collapse of the Soviet system since the beginning of the 1990s.

And yet, under these difficult conditions, especially since the military intervention in the Balkans by NATO, some of these genuinely European countries have demonstrated a sense of responsibility which entitles them to aspire to join the Community.

In this sense, the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia is both an exemplary and a symbolic case.

Exemplary because it proves that the Balkan countries are not at the mercy of fate and that those of them which so wish are already in a position to meet the standard requirements imposed by the European Union in stability and association agreements.

Symbolic because it reflects well on the Fifteen' s project to see the birth of a policy which is common to the five countries in the region (Bosnia-Herzegovina, Croatia, Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, FYROM and Albania) and which would make economic and political stability a pressing and urgent requirement.

The UEN Group is all the more in favour of sending this signal to the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia because it leaves plenty of room for the independence and sovereignty of the states. A satisfactory solution cannot be found in the Balkans without a strong policy of cooperation between the states concerned; but nor can there be any question of blocking their process of integration because one of them is considered unworthy of such promotion.

The Union is simply doing its job when it seeks through its cooperation policy to encourage nations to espouse a platform of common values with it, of which democracy and civil liberty are the cornerstone.

It is not its job to subrogate to people in their choices or, failing that, reinvent a new variation on a 'sense of history' which perceives self-determination as a one-way street.

The Community construction only makes sense if it creates positive discriminations alone, and the UEN Group hopes that this signal to FYROM and specific action in its wake will help us make a sustainable contribution to the development and peaceful coexistence of the nation states in this fully-paid up part of Europe.

. (DA) The Danish Social Democrats in the European Parliament have today voted in favour of Mrs Monica Frassoni' s report, according to which the European Parliament is to accept the agreement entered into with the Commission about the implementing provisions for the Council' s decision of 28 June 1999 concerning comitology.

In all matters, we attach importance to the fact that there should be the greatest possible transparency in connection with the decision-making procedures involved in EU cooperation, for example with a view to guaranteeing the necessary democratic control.

Through the agreement, the European Parliament will automatically be sent the relevant material in connection with decisions made in accordance with the rules under Article 251 of the Treaty.

We should also like to see this arrangement extended to other areas in which, following the agreement, the European Parliament' s relevant committees will be sent material when they ask for it.

With the approval of this agreement, we have not achieved the final goal of transparency and democratic control where the comitology procedures are concerned.

However, it constitutes real progress in the right direction, which is something we do not wish to obstruct.

(The sitting was suspended at 1.23 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m.)

The next item is the Commission statement - Company restructuring in Europe.

Mr President, industrial change, which can be gradual or sudden, is driven by new technologies, worldwide competition or consumer preferences.

It has economic implications and an impact on employment and social cohesion, but it also provides major new opportunities when anticipated, prepared for and managed.

The acceleration of technological progress and the increasing competitive pressure of globalising markets are pushing companies to rapidly adapt their production and company structures.

Companies must be able to anticipate and identify at an early stage what they need to do to ensure the continuity of their activities.

Sometimes this calls for mergers of activities.

The Commission is acutely aware of this situation and of the need for people to feel basic security in difficult times of change.

We are convinced that the cornerstone of successful adaptation to change is dialogue at all levels and with full and transparent information as its basis.

We have had in the recent past different experiences and approaches on how to deal with large-scale operations of corporate restructuring, often affecting the lives of large numbers of European people.

In some cases these operations were prepared well in advance, fully involving workers' representatives, with due care being taken to search for the least damaging solutions.

Where necessary, workers likely to be affected were prepared through employability measures to face the challenge of sudden unemployment.

In other cases these operations were launched and implemented with less care and concern for those affected.

On every occasion, and as recently as last October in this House, the Commission has highlighted the following basic positions.

Firstly, decisions on corporate restructuring remain the prerogative as well as the responsibility of management.

This means that, when contemplating actions likely to lead to serious social consequences, job losses for example, companies should always actively search for and choose the least negative and least damaging solution.

Secondly, when dismissals prove to be inevitable, the utmost must be done to reinforce the employability of those concerned.

This requires anticipation, timely preparation and careful management of these processes.

Thirdly, nothing can justify the absence of timely, effective and comprehensive information and consultation of the workers' and employees' representatives before such operations are launched or publicly announced.

Worker involvement is always, and particularly in the event of corporate restructuring, not only a basic right but a necessary precondition for the social acceptance of such operations.

In the end it is also a decisive factor of their success, as no collectivity can survive and prosper without trust, dialogue, partnership and solidarity between its different components.

These basic ideas meet with a wide consensus in Europe.

This is what intelligent restructuring is about.

It is more and more rare to see companies embark on damaging restructuring operations ignoring these fundamental concerns, as unfortunately was sometimes the case in the past.

We have built a wide range of instruments which meet these concerns in recent years in the European Union.

We have set minimum requirements at European level, which all Member States and all companies must observe when contemplating job losses, especially when they are massive, or preparing other decisions likely to affect workers.

The collective redundancies and transfers of undertakings directive and the European works council directive constitute our legal framework, protecting the workers' rights and ensuring fair standards in the field of information and consultation at national and transnational level respectively.

As regards the national and/or local level of employee involvement, the Commission wishes to underline again the need for proper information and consultation of employees' representatives before any redundancies are decided or implemented, as provided for in the collective redundancies directive and in other national provisions.

I wish to recall that it is, in principle, up to national courts to deal with possible violations of these rules, if and when they are brought before them by national representatives.

However, even when existing rules or arrangements are formally respected this does not mean that management' s attitude is socially irreprehensible.

In fact, the Commission has argued for some time now that the rules we have established are not sufficient to deal with the challenges of today.

In a world characterised by permanent change and in the context of high levels of unemployment, the rules in force seem to us to be outdated as they do not allow or promote the key ideas behind our employment strategy and our approach to change, anticipation, risk prevention and employability.

That is why in November 1998 the Commission presented a proposal for a directive on worker information and consultation which has since then received your strong support. We thank you for that.

Unfortunately, the other branch of the legislative power, the Council, has not yet - more than one year after the presentation of the proposal - begun working on it.

I hope that this debate contributes to reminding Member States of the importance and urgent nature of this initiative.

We have recently heard from the Portuguese Presidency that a serious debate on this proposal will soon be launched.

The forthcoming French Presidency also seems willing to give this dossier the high priority it deserves.

The Commission sincerely hopes that Parliament and the Council quickly finalise this important dossier which constitutes, in our view, the most effective answer to the concerns raised by cases such as the ones which brought us here today.

As for the transnational level of employee involvement there is some indication that at least in one case the companies may have breached transnational information and consultation agreements which they had concluded with their European workforce.

They may have at least exploited some ambiguity in the legal and contractual framework in force.

The Commission will contact the relevant national authorities to check this.

In any case, I wish to say to those who believe that their rights in that respect were ignored that adequate means of enforcement and redress are available to them, notably through relevant national jurisdictional instances.

The Commission is aware of your request to proceed immediately with a revision of the European Works Council Directive.

As recognised in the report, which we will adopt in the forthcoming weeks, we accept that the directive contains some loopholes.

Nevertheless, as my colleague, Commissioner Diamantopoulou has already underlined on other occasions, when deciding whether or not to revise the directive immediately, different considerations must be taken into account.

First, any revision of the directive would have little immediate effect on existing agreements, unless the fundamental principle of respecting the autonomy of the negotiating parties no longer applies.

Secondly, an immediate revision would make things much more complicated as regards progress in respect of the other pending dossiers in this field like European company statutes and the national information and consultation proposal.

The successful outcome of these other dossiers could greatly facilitate the subsequent revision of the EWC Directive and even provide some degree of a solution to the problems identified above.

That is why we tend to consider that it might be more appropriate in this context to proceed with the revision of the European Works Council Directive only after the conclusion of those two dossiers and following a more complete evaluation of the application of the directive.

Action is not limited to legislation.

To encourage and support dialogue as the cornerstone of the successful adaptation to change the Commission is also developing the recommendations of the Lillehammer Report by preparing the setting up of a European observatory on industrial change.

We are also developing another suggestion of that expert group, the Managing Change Report.

Let me finish by addressing some of the other concerns expressed in the draft resolution submitted to this House.

As for the enforcement of the links between competition policy and social policy, let me remind you that there is a provision in the merger regulation which enables workers' representatives to be heard by the Commission in the framework of the relevant procedure.

Generally speaking, we recognise the need for proper consideration to be given in different instances to all aspects surrounding these kinds of operations, including their effects in terms of employment.

As an example of this I mention that public authorities, notably the Commission, have already taken measures through guidelines on national regional aid that came into force on 1 January this year so as to ensure that public funding remains associated with the recipients of regional aid and consequently with the jobs attached to the investment.

To this end all regional aid is made conditional on the maintenance of the investment in question for a minimum period of five years.

The same provision was included in the Structural Funds Regulation which means that it applies to all investments cofinanced by the structural funds.

Social cohesion and the interplay of policies at EU-level is the focus of the forthcoming Lisbon Summit.

I know we will be coming back to these issues again in the future to see how we can best make sure our policies are adapted and reformed to underpin economic and social progress in Europe.

Mr Gorostiaga Atxalandabaso, I understand you have a point of order.

If it is a personal statement, would you be prepared to wait until the end of this debate, at which stage I would be happy to call you?

Mr President, the problem is one of public honour in this Parliament, it is not a personal statement.

This morning, the President of Parliament, Mrs Nicole Fontaine, repeatedly refused to allow me to make a point of order.

Unfortunately, this is not the first time that Madam President has shown this inadmissible behaviour towards me.

In doing so, Madam President has breached Rule 142 that states that points of order shall take precedence over all other requests to speak.

She has also breached Rule 122 that gives the right to all the Members of this House to make observations, observations which in this case refute the remarks made by another deputy, Mr Vidal-Quadras.

This partisan behaviour of our President should be criticised most firmly.

I will willingly accept Madam President' s apologies any time.

We will certainly make sure that the President is informed of your statement.

I can assure you that as far as I am aware the President never likes to have a debate on issues in the middle of a vote.

Therefore the House was probably quite willing to go ahead at that stage. But thank you for your remarks.

Mr President, I welcome Commissioner Liikanen' s words, and I am contributing to the debate - we are all contributing to the debate - because, although the subject is broad in scope, it also concerns a specific fact.

The subject in question is of great political and social importance.

Free enterprise, free movement and free competition are essential pillars of the political and economic structure of the European Union.

Company restructuring is part of the principle of free determination of investments, and must therefore be defended.

However, all too often we witness events which are in stark contrast with these principles.

Today, we are witnessing one of these cases, which, on the surface, may seem to be of minor importance and affect only the specific industry, but which, if it is allowed to pass without an authoritative intervention by the European Union, will become an unwritten rule which will cause problems for many of the Member States and the Union as a whole.

An American company - Goodyear - with production sites in Italy, Germany and England, is reviewing its production and relocation, justifiably, in its own view.

However, it seems to be doing it without observing the relevant Community legislation, for it is certainly not giving reasonable notice to employees or heeding the obligation to render an account of their use of Italian and European public finances.

In Italy, Commissioner Liikanen, Goodyear is not carrying out restructuring but closing a plant whose production covers 14% of the market and which Goodyear itself defined as, 'having the most highly-skilled workforce of all its plants' , a plant which was opened with a total of EUR 85 million of European capital.

No notice was given of the closure, and no intention was shown of discussing the fate of the plant or its workers, despite the fact that the public funds invested in that plant make it much more public than private.

It would be a serious matter if every non-European company were to learn to use Europe as a bus where you do not have to pay for the ticket, you do not have to pay for cooperation, you benefit from using the facility and you leave without being accountable to anyone.

Europe has to guarantee every sort of freedom, including freedom to use one' s own money for the purposes of one' s own freedom and not to let others use it at will, others who make demands and then, when the break is made, refuse even to discuss the terms of the break, despite the fact that this is a break which has been declared unilaterally.

Just now, Commissioner Liikanen was talking of restructuring which must not be uninformed.

Sadly, in this case, he has not taken into account those who are affected and seems not to have considered those carrying out the restructuring.

I would also like to point out to Commissioner Liikanen that it is not easy to take a matter to a national court.

Of course, it is always possible, but when jobs have been lost and factories closed down, the idea of going to Court when proceedings are as lengthy as they are in Italy is not very reassuring.

Commissioner Liikanen, we expect an authoritative intervention.

As Parliament, we are, of course, expecting to be able to contribute to the resolution you mentioned - we are ready and waiting - but we expect an authoritative intervention on this, which can on no account be allowed to reach its conclusion and be forgotten, as has almost happened already.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, for the second time within the space of four months, we find ourselves debating the restructuring of companies in Europe.

This is - as it was the first time round - sparked off by the reorganisation of large companies, which is linked to a drop in employment.

I would like to make it quite clear that the Liberal Group is against any political interference in companies, in terms of both finance and management.

Our task is to draft legislation and to monitor to ensure that it is observed.

It appears that Goodyear in Italy received Italian and European subsidies to the tune of approximately EUR 40 million.

The company went under despite this.

This goes to show that jobs cannot be bought. The market is a law unto itself.

As such, state aid costs the government twice: first in subsidies and then in unemployment benefit.

Surely this cannot be the role of your, my and the citizens' tax money?

All this, of course, does not mean that our Group does not share the concern of the Italian Members regarding the effects of the closure on the region concerned.

My Group is also opposed in principle to the naming of specific companies in this resolution, for two reasons: firstly because this creates selective responsibility.

A company is pilloried one day and not the next.

Why should this be the case?

But I did not hear a squeak when Nissan and IBM were discussed, where, similarly, a great number of European employees were involved.

Secondly, this is not fair towards employees of other companies where reorganisations also take place and where it hurts too.

My Group has signed a joint resolution with EPP and UEN, in which, however, we made it clear right from the outset that we are against the naming of company names.

This is why the Liberal Group will vote against paragraph 8 and the second section of paragraph 9.

If these paragraphs are nonetheless adopted, my Group will abstain from the final vote.

I do hope that this will not be necessary.

Mr President, the Portuguese Presidency and the Commission' s strategic objectives for 2000-2005 both talk of full employment for which two essential conditions are required.

The first is to create new jobs for young people entering the labour market and the second is not to lose jobs.

Yet the current situation in Europe provides us with clear examples of how jobs are being destroyed, particularly, and most seriously, by companies which are making huge profits.

In the past, workers were asked to show their solidarity with companies in order to ensure their survival. Now the companies are making huge profits but are also making workers redundant.

Examples have been given in Spain of Michelin and ABB-Alsthom and my colleagues will give examples for Italy.

There is also another hidden way of making workers redundant, as practised for example in Spain by the Ericsson company under the term 'externalising' . Note that sensitive words like 'redundancy' are not used.

Externalising services by subcontracting these to contract companies results in stable and permanent jobs being turned into precarious jobs without union or social rights.

This is just an underhand way of making workers redundant.

Commissioner, if the European institutions really believe in what they say about full employment, they must take clear steps to secure this.

They must revise the directives in order to guarantee the participation of workers in these negotiations. They must revise the directive on collective redundancies, reduce the working day, link European subsidies to a clear commitment to maintain employment and include social and labour clauses in the international agreements signed by the European Union.

Mr President, sadly, once again, Parliament is having to discuss the restructuring of companies in Europe.

Yet again, workers are likely to lose their jobs.

This time, I am referring to the workers of the company Goodyear in Cisterna di Latina.

As has already been pointed out, in one month' s time, 600 people and as many families could be deprived of their sole source of income.

Despite the commitment they have shown to the company and despite their high level of professionalism - which has made the Cisterna plant one of the most productive in Europe - these workers are likely to be removed from the production cycle, while Goodyear, after years of benefiting from state and European subsidies, is totally free to walk out.

I do not think this is at all fair, either to the workers at the Cisterna plant or to all those Italian and European citizens whose taxes have, albeit indirectly, enabled Goodyear to benefit from the state aids I have just mentioned.

The European Commission and the Council must, at last, assume all the necessary responsibilities, both with regard to the adoption of a common position on the information and consultation of workers and with regard to Community and national aid, which must only be granted to companies who undertake to establish long-term agreements to protect jobs.

Today, we ask the Commission to start by protecting the workers at Goodyear in Cisterna, and therefore to put as much pressure as possible on the company for it to come to an agreement as soon as possible, thereby ensuring the continued existence and operation of the Cisterna plant.

Mr President, Commissioner, I would also like to remind the House that there is very little time available, and therefore that any measure - including those already cited by the Commission in its introductory report - which we adopt must have an immediate, timely effect.

Mr President, Commissioner, as far as restructuring goes, there is no doubt that European companies must adapt so that they are better placed to face new challenges or go under.

We are well aware of this current economic context and that the purpose of restructuring is to rationalise corporate management.

Although it is laudable from an economic point of view to make structural changes in order to be more competitive and win market shares, this approach may be reprehensible if it is made at the request of financiers, often shareholders, with the sole unavowed aim of increasing the financial standing of the company in order to raise profits which they can then withdraw from the company.

The various recent announcements referred to by previous speakers, be they by Michelin or Goodyear, are symptomatic in this respect.

Rationalised management and improved profits should, in my view, serve the company and hence its employees first and foremost, and any financial benefits should follow.

However, what we witnessing today is the phenomenon of concentration and corporate regrouping and relocation, with all the familiar consequences, both on the quality of products and at the social level, especially in terms of unemployment, difficult working conditions and increased flexibility: consequences which have a drastic effect at the human level, especially on the family unit.

There is a very real risk of seeing a two-headed monster emerge on this planet, with poor countries providing the labour and rich countries providing the capital.

Surely Europe should act as a safeguard, maintaining a certain equilibrium between increased profitability and social welfare?

We must not forget that it is human resources which make a company function at its base and guarantee it good results.

Finally, allow me to remind you that the third letter of the EDD Group to which I belong stands for 'difference' .

Europe has a duty to make its voice heard as an alternative to savage restructuring for profit at all costs. Without doubt, the voice of difference in this monotonous flood of restructuring.

Mr President, last month in the UK, in a region that neighbours mine, the Michelin Group announced significant redundancies at its Stoke-on-Trent plant due to company restructuring and increasing global competitiveness in the world market for tyres.

I, like all Members present, am saddened by this loss of jobs.

Equally, I am saddened by the announcement made by Goodyear that has prompted this resolution.

But I doubt very much indeed whether a European works council would have been able to change this company' s decision.

This House is very good at producing resolutions and legislation and we sometimes, in this institution, forget that Europe cannot survive alone.

We need multinational companies to base their businesses within our continent.

In my few months here, I have found it astonishing that whilst we all talk about the need to encourage businesses to grow within the EU, nearly every resolution we pass actually encourages businesses to leave.

In our last plenary part-session in Brussels we voted on the end-of-life vehicles directive and managed to make the legislation retrospective, adding huge costs for the European motor manufacturers that they could not have predicted.

Two days later, Toyota, which employs several thousand people in my region, stated that this directive would not only increase the cost of cars but could well also mean redundancies in their Derbyshire plant.

In a world where surely less regulation is the key, we in this House seem to believe that we can add more regulation and costs on business and that they will stay within the European Union, untempted by other locations elsewhere where there are fewer burdens.

We MEPs speak often about SMEs and have now come up with a unique way of creating them.

Take a large successful business, add European regulations, and within months you have created a small one.

Perhaps before we criticise anybody outside this place we should take a good look at ourselves and what we do here.

Mr President, I will not use my speaking time by going into the individual cases debated here today.

In this respect, I share Mrs Plooij-Van Gorsel' s view that we cannot talk about these in detail.

But maybe next time, we ought to discuss CORUS, the merger which has now taken place between our Nederlandse Hoogovens and British Steel.

I would like to place this discussion in a somewhat wider context and examine the link between policy in the field of company mergers within the European Union and policy in other fields.

In this light, I am pleased that Mr Liikanen is present and we do not only have to hold this discussion, where the interests of employees are concerned, with Mrs Diamantopoulou but we can involve the Commissioners who are active in other fields.

I would also like to advocate coherence in the Commission' s policy from these different vantage points, unlike my predecessor, who holds the belief that there is no need for rules.

We need to gain an insight into what companies are like now.

At present, we are witnessing a number of large mergers between companies which originate in an Anglo-Saxon tradition and companies with a Rhineland tradition.

What remains of the concept of what a company should be like now is naturally very relevant: whether it is merely the property and toy of shareholders, or whether it is a more broadly based stakeholder society, which is meant to guarantee continuity for staff, consumers, suppliers and the local population and has, in addition, a social function.

As such, I would like to ask these various Commission directorates and these various Commissioners to provide a wider vision regarding corporate governments.

I think that it would also fit in well with the plans which have been presented over the past couple of days on good government in Europe, as company policy forms part of this.

The government is talking to trade union and Goodyear delegates in Italy as well, in an endeavour to find a solution to the closure policy unilaterally adopted by the North American multinational in Cisterna di Latina, an area of Central Italy which has already been affected by other restructuring operations.

The closure means the direct or indirect loss of more than a thousand jobs and hundreds of families being abandoned to insecurity and sudden poverty.

The Goodyear workers are putting up a magnificent fight, in the knowledge that they are defending not only their own interests but the interests of the Goodyear workers in the different European countries as well, and there are many of them: France, Germany, the United Kingdom, Poland, Luxembourg and Slovenia.

Today, a small delegation of workers is here with us in the gallery, anxious to find out what their future will be, what solidarity the European Union will offer them and what policy it will adopt to prevent the multinationals acting solely and exclusively in the interest of their own market and profits.

The European Union, in all of its aspects, must use all of its powers to resolve this and other disputes.

Mr President, earlier this week President Prodi announced that one of the Commission' s strategic objectives for the next five years would be to aim for full employment.

He acknowledged that 15 million Europeans are currently looking for work and that unemployment is the main source of poverty and social exclusion.

What is more, the Portuguese Presidency sees the fight against unemployment as top priority.

Yet, all too often these political priorities are invisible in everyday policies.

The Commission' s decision to allow the ABB-Alsthom merger to go ahead is a case in point.

The new company has announced its intention to initiate a restructuring plan with the aim of making savings.

This global restructuring plan could lead to the loss of up to 12 000 jobs.

In my region of the UK in particular the employment consequences of this merger have been severe as a result of ABB-Alsthom having announced that it was cutting 270 jobs in Britain with 95 jobs being lost in Stafford and 112 in Rugby.

The company' s failure to inform the works council about the proposals for the merger is particularly worrying.

It is especially important in the case of large international companies where decisions are taken far from the employee.

Point 17 of the Community Charter of Fundamental Social Rights of Workers stresses the need for consultation, adding that this shall apply especially in companies having establishments in two or more Member States.

I do not think it is simply a matter of a Community charter.

EU legislation on this issue could not be clearer.

The Commission would do well in this sort of situation to make its decisions not simply on the basis of whether a merger will distort competition but also on the basis of the social and economic consequences.

We need more joined-up policy making on these issues.

What we also need urgently is an impact assessment study on the effect of merger in every situation.

This is the only way of respecting Article 127 of the Treaty.

I welcome the statement made by Commissioner Liikanen, but I also look for the support of this Parliament to ensure that the legislation which we have passed on workers' rights is implemented rigorously and to ensure that impact assessments on the workforce for proposed mergers are undertaken as a matter of course.

I have received seven motions for resolution tabled pursuant to Rule 37(2) of the Rules of Procedure.

The vote will be taken later this evening.

The sitting was suspended at 3.50 p.m. and resumed at 4.05 p.m.

The next item is the debate on topical and urgent subjects of major importance.

Racist and xenophobic incidents in El Ejido (Spain)

The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions:

B5-0149/2000 by Mr Galeote Quecedo and others, on behalf of the Group of the European People' s Party (Christian Democrats) and European Democrats, on outbreaks of racism and xenophobia in the El Ejido area in Spain;

B5-0159/2000 by Mr Gasòliba i Böhm and Mr Sánchez García, on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party, on racist and xenophobic incidents in El Ejido (Spain);

B5-0162/2000 by Mrs Díez González and others, on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists, on the outbursts of racism and xenophobia in El Ejido (Spain);

B5-0169/2000 by Mr Puerta and others, on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left/Nordic Green Left, on outbursts of xenophobia in El Ejido (Spain);

B5-0175/2000 by Mr Bautista Ojeda and others, on behalf of the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance, on xenophobia-related incidents in El Ejido (Spain).

Mr President, I am reassured by the fact that the first three speakers in this debate are intimate with this situation given our African origin.

I must firstly congratulate the groups in this House on the high degree of consensus achieved in the motion for a resolution. I am aware of the efforts made by Members to avoid using an issue such as this for electoral purposes.

Secondly, I must also assert my total conviction that neither Spain nor Andalusia is xenophobic or racist. Of course this does not mean that I do not totally condemn the violence used by individuals or groups who deserve to be prosecuted firmly and rigorously by the law, and by the law alone.

We should be tackling the issue of immigration in a comprehensive and rigorous manner.

These events, which are unfortunately overshadowing the political decisions in this area, confirm without doubt that the development of the Tampere Agreements and Title IV of the EC Treaty must be an urgent priority.

Today' s problems cannot be solved in five years.

They will take a long time, as we are finding out.

The legislation of the Member States must be brought into line with the agreements of the governments in Tampere, as paragraph 7 of the motion states.

Legal immigrants must be integrated socially without any excuses or delays.

Furthermore, the labour market must be organised realistically so that jobs held by third country nationals are subject to labour legislation on wages, social security and social protection in terms of equality. This will eradicate the labour exploitation and markets in marginalised people, which are resulting in the events condemned by the motion, and which are the real basis of the current social problem.

Solidarity, dialogue and agreements between local, regional, national and European institutions and employers, unions and the immigrant communities themselves, whose countries of origin must also undoubtedly assume some responsibility, are essential.

Collaboration with the countries of origin on this issue is vital. In this respect, the action plans approved by the High Level Group and the Tampere European Council must be allocated a budget.

Specifically, I must stress in this debate the plan for Morocco. This is a country with which the European Union has an effective relationship and common interests and which should take particular priority in mutual cooperation and collaboration.

Finally, this House must tackle the phenomenon of immigration with sufficient calm to avoid increasing tension in a debate which must go much further than the appropriate words and condemnations prompted by such behaviour.

This is a very important social debate in the creation of a European area in which the right to freedom, security and justice will be recognised in the future Charter of Fundamental Rights.

Mr President, Commissioner, whenever a serious social problem occurs, it always has a political basis. This is true of the disgraceful events which have recently occurred in El Ejido.

The proof of this lies in the fact that the groups in this House have reacted and tabled several motions for resolutions.

We all regret the deaths which have occurred and the violent and disproportionate reactions against the immigrant workers.

We all, I believe, agree in our condemnation of the xenophobia and racism which was apparent in certain actions.

These events certainly have their origin in, among other factors, the absence of a clear immigration policy allowing the affected communities to live together respectfully and peacefully.

We hope that the events in El Ejido will serve as a lesson to everyone and will not be repeated.

Yet it is not enough to regret the situation.

We do not want Africa to become our cross, in fact quite the contrary.

I should like to highlight certain measures which we are trying to introduce in another European region affected by immigration - the Canary Islands.

Firstly we are creating a network of reception centres for minors.

Secondly we are conducting a programme of social integration.

Thirdly we are carrying out education programmes on tolerance and respect.

Finally we are producing a census of immigrants.

I hope that these measures will help towards ensuring compliance with the Tampere Agreements on immigration and the new Spanish Act on aliens. In particular they must ensure that people arriving in Europe do not lose their dignity.

Mr President, last week, in the Andalusian town of El Ejido, we saw scenes which were inappropriate to the European Union in the year 2000.

This was acknowledged by the Commission President, Romano Prodi, on 9 February when he confirmed that what had occurred in El Ejido went against the very principles of the European Union.

These events have caused us great pain and shame and have awoken our fears given the extreme racism, xenophobia and intolerance demonstrated.

It is incomprehensible that ways of coexisting and ensuring mutual respect cannot be found between two communities which are mutually beneficial.

The only way to prevent these events happening again, in a place where there are large communities of immigrant workers, is through social integration. This requires a firm economic, political and social commitment from the competent authorities.

For generations human beings have not always remained within the borders of one nation state but have constantly migrated.

Geographical mobility is not an invention of the twentieth century and neither are its economic and work-related causes.

We are all immigrants, if not ourselves personally, then through one of our relations or ancestors.

However, instead of producing these events which we are condemning, migration must generate social, cultural and economic enrichment.

What happened in El Ejido is unfortunately not exclusive to this one town of the European Union.

We must therefore firstly condemn clearly and emphatically the brutal racist and xenophobic outbursts of certain inhabitants of El Ejido against immigrant workers in the area. A whole community should not have been held responsible, criminalised and attacked for one regrettable but isolated incident.

Secondly, all the authorities must act immediately. Coordination between them is the key to combating this type of xenophobia and racism.

In particular, local authorities and mayors have a direct responsibility to prevent any demonstration of racism or xenophobia, especially when this involves violent and aggressive acts against people and their property.

These authorities must also help to achieve difficult agreements between the parties involved and must not hinder these, as has happened with the mayor in question.

Thirdly, the political parties must assume direct responsibility for the political actions of their public officials. They must prevent any individual action or declaration which is contrary to the principles and values of coexistence and tolerance expressed by the European Union.

Finally, the European Union must be responsible for monitoring the application of its principles.

It must prevent any racist or xenophobic demonstrations in its territory and support and collaborate with national, regional and local authorities and non-governmental organisations and associations in the application of these principles. This must occur within a framework of constant action to combat racism and xenophobia and to encourage the integration of all immigrants resident in the EU.

Mr President, initially our Group did not fully understand the need to table this motion for a resolution on events which seemed to be a local phenomenon.

However, the incidents in El Ejido are a symptom of a phenomenon which is present throughout Europe and which deserves our full attention.

We thought we had eradicated the terror of intolerance which racism had unleashed in Europe. Yet, over the years, social disintegration in Europe has been combining with an increase in migration from surrounding countries and increased awareness of human rights to develop into this climate of racism and intolerance.

This is why what seemed to be a local and isolated phenomenon in El Ejido is actually a worrying symptom which is coinciding with the emergence of parties like Haider' s.

This House therefore proposes the adoption of urgent measures encompassing all the relevant factors and to be applied immediately. We must ensure respect for human rights, tolerance and multiculturalism and we must obtain an increase in budgets and action lines for social and health issues.

In this respect we must not forget that the original victim' s attacker was suffering from a mental illness for which he had been inadequately treated.

The current difficulties must also be taken into account so that this town can adopt the necessary measures, as indicated previously.

Finally, as our Nobel Prize Winner, José Saramago, has said, we are all in each other and as Jesus Christ said, although Saramago disagreed with this, we should not just love one another, more importantly, we should respect one another.

Mr President, Commissioner, Andalusia is one of the most tolerant and multiracial regions of the European Union.

Since time immemorial it has welcomed all those who have decided to move there and regarded them as Andalusians from day one, whether or not they were born in our region. Therefore, as an MEP, but primarily as an Andalusian, I can feel only sadness, repugnance and condemnation for the xenophobic and racist events which have occurred and which are foreign to this tolerant community.

Yet a worrying situation is apparent.

All decisions which are or are not taken and all agreements which are or are not negotiated by the Community institutions with regard to the economy of the principal sectors in disadvantaged areas like Andalusia may indirectly lead to these serious incidents. I am referring, for example, to the lack of agreement with Morocco and to the lack of solutions for the fishing industry, part of whose fleet is moored in Almería.

I am also referring to the erratic management of the import scheme for fruit and vegetables by the EU which is dominating relations between Almería and Morocco. I am also referring to the immigration policy of the regions, Member States and European Union which, due to actions or omissions, is leading to a few territories like Almería having to support this migratory pressure from north-west Africa on their own.

All these factors have unfortunately been accumulating over time and are now allowing those who are cruel, intolerant, racist and destructive, of which all our countries have some examples, but thankfully a minority, to light the fuse of xenophobia.

Anyone, whether European or not, who lives and works in Andalusia, is an Andalusian and deserves our consideration and respect. The EU can and must speak out.

For you, the south is Andalusia but for us Andalusians it is Africa.

We must therefore ensure that the EU provides every possible resource so that the economy of the south can prosper and enable a society to develop with more tolerance and respect for one another. This has not been achieved with the solutions proposed to date which have quite simply been based on looking the other way.

Mr President, Commissioner, I speak from experience acquired during many visits to El Ejido over the years. I was therefore aware how the situation was developing.

Here in the European Parliament, as in many other institutions, we have watched this situation with concern and were beside ourselves when we heard what had happened. This is because we felt the problem to be ours, as it was.

In El Ejido there is a serious social problem, problems of integration and employment and also a grave problem of public safety which acted as the detonator.

These events have also acted as a wake-up call to our consciences.

Here in this House, in Spain and in many other countries, we have all fixed on El Ejido. Yet what we do and say here and the concern we express will really serve no purpose unless this leads to the adoption of a much more determined attitude to finding out what is really happening, not only in El Ejido, but in many other places where this type of problem may be occurring at any given moment.

We all agree in our condemnation of intolerance and we also agree that we must look forward. We will not find the guilty parties in this House or in many other places.

Those responsible for what happened in El Ejido are a minority who set out to satisfy their desire for vengeance on the immigrants. We must bear in mind that vengeance is not a solution.

These problems can only be solved by close cooperation between all the authorities in order to achieve social integration and respect for all working there. This therefore requires a determined fight against illegal immigration and profound respect for the rights of immigrant workers who are legally working in El Ejido and throughout Europe.

Mr President, this resolution expresses solidarity with the democratic forces in Spain fighting for human rights.

All the Spanish democrats wounded by what is happening in their country have our full and complete support.

It was not only immigrants who were the victims of atrocities; the democratic system in Spain has been held up to ridicule, despite having demonstrated its tremendous capacity to evolve over the last 20 years.

Employers would be lost without immigrants.

Working conditions are so hard and so deplorable that no Spaniard will accept them.

Low wages, the lack of housing - some are living in cardboard huts - the lack of access to social services and the de facto system of apartheid are abominable and unacceptable and are not worthy of the respect which every human being deserves.

What happened at El Ejido is the result of inadmissible racist and xenophobic practices in Europe today.

For four days, the immigrants were collectively hounded.

Fleeing from all quarters, hundreds of immigrants took refuge on a hill on the outskirts of the town.

We are right to blacklist Haider' s Austria; but we cannot allow little local Haiders to practice policies of racial exclusion and merciless economic domination.

What happened in Spain could happen in any country in the Union if we are not careful.

We all have a duty to put our own house in order.

I support this proposal for a resolution, especially the points which refer to the application of Article 13 of the Amsterdam Treaty, and point 11 of this resolution establishing a link between the Structural Funds allocated and the fight against exclusion.

It would be to our credit were the European Parliament to roundly condemn these events and support all proposals tabled in order to ensure that the rights of immigrants in Spain and throughout the Union are respected.

Mr President, acts of racist and xenophobic violence are taking hold at the heart of Europe.

Everywhere this violence is exacerbated by the spread of extremist movements.

We must take practical steps today to put an end to all attacks of a physical nature.

No European society can truly flourish when it harbours the risk of seeing one section of its population fall prey to the hatred of the other.

Having received a delegation from the Austrian human rights association here yesterday and having seen what has happened in the province of Almería, it is easy to understand that we could easily have prevented this resurgence of racist hatred.

These violent scenes at El Ejido are so similar to archive pictures of Alabama in the 1950s, when the KKK terrified the black population, that it is hard to tell them apart. They also put us in mind of Germany in the 1930s, when the Nazis were persecuting the Jews.

Without wishing to lump everything together hysterically, because each period is different, we have failed to learn the lessons of history.

Because this witch hunt which broke out in the province of Almería should have been foreseen.

It is the result, first and foremost, of the ghettoisation and exploitation of immigrant labour.

Three annual crops of Moroccan and African workers support 100 000 people and manage to bring in an annual turnover of nearly EUR 2 million; and yet 60% of them have no running water in a region where, as we know, the temperature may reach 40 degrees in summer.

We also know that many of them only earn EUR 30 a month, while their fellow European citizens can earn three times that.

This precarious wage-earning position weakens these immigrants and their families and makes them vulnerable.

The irresponsibility of certain elected representatives and the barely disguised complicity of the authorities have contributed to this racist explosion.

We should counter such acts of terror, Mr President, by setting up a parliamentary committee of inquiry as quickly as possible so that we can decide how we can succeed in preventing other conflicts of a similar nature elsewhere. My fellow Member, Mrs Roure, was right to remind us just now that we all need to put our own house in order.

Finally, and I think this is important: why not have the honesty today to relay what was disclosed in a recent UN study explaining that, if Spain wishes to preserve its work, retirement and pension potential, it is no good just giving 30 000 immigrants a year legal status; it needs to be prepared to accept 12 million immigrants between now and the year 2050?

We must insist today as a matter of urgency on the right to education and the duty to remember, to recall the dates in history when our countries teetered on the brink of horror.

We need to educate our children on these matters and finally have the courage to recognise that we will need to be prepared to accept many more immigrants in years to come.

It just remains for me to urge you all to attend the demonstration on Saturday.

We must take to the streets of Europe to protest against these alliances with extremists which are a disgrace to Europe and which lead our youth astray.

Mr President, since the signature of the Treaty of Amsterdam, the European Union has had responsibility for combating racism and xenophobia.

Two types of measure are required for this purpose. The first should seek the integration of people of non-European origin and the other should aim to organise immigration.

With regard to the first, the Commission has sent us a series of proposals, contained in two directives and an action plan, which aim to apply the following decision taken by the Heads of State and Government in Tampere. This states that 'The European Union must ensure fair treatment of third country nationals who reside legally on the territory of its Member States.

A more vigorous integration policy should aim at granting them rights and obligations comparable to those of EU citizens' . This is totally contrary to what we have seen and found recently in El Ejido where there are irregularities, labour exploitation and indecent living conditions, which have been condemned in the past.

I hope for prompt implementation of the measures to achieve integration. I also hope that the governments which produced such wonderful words in Tampere, including Spain, will work diligently to apply these.

I have less hope about the development of an effective and fair European policy in accordance with the statement made by the Council on immigration.

The only proposal which has been made is for the directive on family reunification. This is a key issue, as we have seen recently in the media that there are many men on their own in El Ejido.

Yet we do not know whether this has been accepted by the governments. Outside the Community arena, some governments are making efforts to renew their immigration policies.

This is occurring in my country, despite the government, the party in power being the only one which does not like the new law on aliens.

The objective of combating racism and xenophobia, explained in the Treaties, should be the objective of all European institutions and politicians.

On 28 February 1998 the European political parties, including the Spanish Popular Party, signed the Charter of European Political Parties for a Non-Racist Society.

This requires coherent behaviour, yet local leaders of the Popular Party are throwing more fuel on the raging fire and boycotting the attempts of other institutions to put this out.

The party to which the Mayor of El Ejido belongs should, according to the commitments signed in this Charter, act forcefully.

It is only, as stated by Mr Hernández Mollar, through unity, responsibility and firmness that El Ejido, Spain and Europe will be able to overcome these events of which we are deeply ashamed.

Mr President, one cannot but feel disgust and indignation at the scenes of lynching, no less, of Moroccan day labourers which took place in El Ejido.

We do not the extent to which far-right commandos were to blame and how far the common people stupid enough to follow these commandos were to blame.

We wish to assure these Moroccan workers that they have our full support - as if being exploited by unscrupulous employers were not enough, they have to suffer this type of aggression.

And if the aggressors include working-class people, all we can say to them is that, in acting in this way, they are digging their own graves.

In waging war against people who are as poor as they are, they are only doing their own exploiters a favour and preparing a future of oppression for themselves.

But there are some who bear even more responsibility than the thugs who wielded the iron bars and knives: those who spread racist and xenophobic slander, those who indulge in anti-immigration demagoguery in Spain, Austria, France or elsewhere, sometimes even here in this House, are no better than those who take this stupid, reactionary demagoguery at face value.

The lynch mob and their extreme right-wing mentors are the mortal enemies not only of the workers, but of society as a whole.

I would like to begin by congratulating the honourable Member on the way in which he introduced this extremely important debate.

I want to make it clear at the outset that the Commission unreservedly condemns the dreadful acts of violence at El Ejido against the immigrant workers of the region.

We express our support for the families and friends of the victims.

President Prodi and Commissioner Diamantopoulou have both issued separate statements.

Naturally I completely endorse what they have said.

It was especially moving to hear the remarks from Members of Parliament who come from the region about what has happened, uncharacteristically, in a part of Spain that I know reasonably well.

Racist and xenophobic acts are wholly unacceptable within our Community, wherever they take place.

They fly in the face of the very principles on which - as Mr Havel said yesterday - the European Union was founded: principles of liberty, democracy and respect for human rights.

Of course progress has been made in recent years but we still have to work together towards a climate of tolerance in which racism and xenophobia are regarded as completely beyond the pale, completely unacceptable, while at the same time we deal very robustly with incidents such as the ones we are discussing this afternoon.

We need, in our judgement, to focus on a package of measures including: first, the introduction of effective, anti-discrimination legislation at Union level; second, implementation of a common immigration policy with regard to the nationals of non-Member States to promote, in practical terms, the integration of the immigrant population in Member States' societies; third, the introduction of measures to combat social exclusion.

The European Union has already laid the basis for Community legislation on combating discrimination on the grounds of race.

The insertion of Article 13, which was referred to during the debate, dealing with non-discrimination in the Treaty establishing the European Community, is one of the most significant changes of the last revision of the Treaties.

Since the Treaty of Amsterdam came into force the Commission has presented a package of proposals for the implementation of Article 13 including, in particular, a proposal for a directive on the application of the principle of equal treatment regardless of race or ethnic origin.

This proposal is under examination by the Council and the European Parliament.

The Commission hopes very much that this stage will soon be complete.

The conclusions of the Tampere special European Council, as Mr Hernandez Mollar said, clearly illustrated the will of the Heads of State and Government as regards the introduction of a common policy on immigration and the principles on which it should be based, with particular emphasis on the Union' s policy on the respect and promotion of the rights of migrants.

At Tampere the Heads of State and Government also emphasised the importance of approximating national legislation on conditions for admission and residence of third country nationals based on a shared assessment of the economic and demographic developments in the Member States as well as the situation in the countries of origin.

The European Council also considered it important to step up the prevention of illegal immigration.

Its objective here is to secure the rights of victims of criminal networks organising illegal immigration, with particular reference to the rights of women and children.

Those who organise illegal immigration should be prosecuted with the utmost vigour.

The word that is used about them in Chinese society is 'snake-heads' .

It seems to me a fitting description of them.

Let me also draw attention to the work on drawing up a European Union charter on fundamental rights, which has now reached the drafting stage.

Those rights are, by definition, universal.

The charter will extend to third country nationals in Member States even though certain rights will be reserved to nationals of Member States of the Union.

The El Ejido incidents were shocking, as several Members have said in their speeches.

But trying to take something positive from them, I hope they will spur us on to translate our aspirations about tolerance, fairness and freedom into real and effective policies that will help to transform the lives of all those families and individuals in the European Union who cry out for our understanding and our help and who deserve it, not at some indefinite moment in the future, but here today.

The vote will take place at 6 p.m.

The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions:

Violence between ethnic groups in Mitrovica and Albanian prisoners in Serbia, notably the plight of Mrs Flora Brovina

B5-0140/2000 by Mr Dupuis and others, on behalf of the Technical Group of Independent Members - mixed group, on the situation in Kosovo;

B5-0141/2000 by Mr Schori and others, on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists, on the situation in Kosovo;

B5-0150/2000 by Mr Oostlander and others, on behalf of the Group of the European People' s Party (Christian Democrats) and European Democrats, on Kosovo;

B5-0158/2000 by Mr Haarder, on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party, on multi-ethnic violence in Mitrovica, the situation of Kosovar prisoners in Serbia and in particular the case of Flora Brovina;

B5-0170/2000 by Mrs Morgantini and others, on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left/Nordic Green Left, on the situation in Kosovo and the Albanian political prisoners in Serbia;

B5-0176/2000 by Mr Cohn-Bendit and others, on behalf of the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance, on the situation in Kosovo and the Albanian political prisoners in Serbia;

B5-0148/2000 by Mr Dupuis and others, on behalf of the Technical Group of Independent Members - mixed group, on press freedom in Angola;

B5-0151/2000 by Mr Cunha and others, on behalf of the Group of the European People' s Party (Christian Democrats) and European Democrats, on freedom of expression in Angola;

B5-0160/2000 by Mrs Malmström, on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party, on freedom of expression in Angola;

B5-0165/2000 by Mr Schori, on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists, on freedom of expression, independence of the media and due process in Angola;

B5-0166/2000 by Mr Queiró, on behalf of the Union for a Europe of Nations Group, on Angola;

B5-0178/2000 by Mrs Maes and others, on behalf of the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance, on press freedom in Angola;

Native Americans in the US - Dineh

B5-0152/2000 by Mr Van Hecke and Mrs Grossetête, on behalf of the Group of the European People' s Party (Christian Democrats) and European Democrats, on the rights of the Dineh people, Big Mountain, Arizona, USA;

B5-0157/2000 by Mr Sterckx, on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party, on the rights of the Dineh people, Big Mountain, Arizona, USA;

B5-0163/2000 by Mrs Van Brempt, on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists, on the rights of the Dineh people, Big Mountain, Arizona, USA;

B5-0171/2000 by Mr Cossutta and Mr Vinci, on behalf of the GUE/NGL Group, on the rights of the Dineh people, USA;

B5-0174/2000 by Mrs Sörensen, on behalf of the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance, on the rights of the Dineh people, Big Mountain, Arizona, USA;

B5-0153/2000 by Mr Oostlander and Mr Posselt, on behalf of the Group of the European People' s Party (Christian Democrats) and European Democrats, on the case of the Russian journalist Andrey Babitsky;

B5-0155/2000 by Mr Trentin and others, on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists, on Russian journalist Andrey Babitsky;

B5-0156/2000 by Mr Maaten, on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party, on the fate of a Russian journalist Andrey Babitsky in Chechnya;

B5-0172/2000 by Mr Vinci and Mrs Fraisse, on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left/Nordic Green Left, on the journalist Andrey Babitsky;

B5-0177/2000 by Mrs Schroedter and others, on behalf of the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance, on the case of Andrey Babitsky and violation of human rights in Chechnya;

Cambodia - B5-0154/2000 by Mr Morillon and others, on behalf of the Group of the European People' s Party (Christian Democrats) and European Democrats, on the need for an international trial of the Khmer Rouge;

B5-0161/2000 by Mr Maaten and Mr Wiebenga, on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party, on the need for an international trial of the Khmer Rouge.

Mr President, before we start the debate on Kosovo or Mitrovica, I must inform you that a nasty sense of unease has come over me.

Indeed, it is not the first time that we will be debating Kosovo here.

We have adopted resolutions in the past but they usually are nothing but a warning shot, as nothing is actually done with them.

I very much appreciate it that the Commission always attends.

I certainly appreciate the fact that Commissioner Patten is present, given his powers.

But I - and many Members with me - also have to note that the Council is consistently absent from this debate.

We need to cooperate with the Council too.

I see that a diplomat from the Council is present who is diligently taking notes and who will then report to the Council but, for the rest, nothing will get done.

I would insist on changing our procedures and on the fact that the Council should be present during the topical debate, so that we can enter into direct consultation with the Council.

I think we should give this some thought.

I would request you to pass this complaint on to the Bureau of Parliament.

We note your concern and will pass this on through the appropriate channels.

Violence between ethnic groups in Mitrovica and Albanian prisoners in Serbia, notably the plight of Mrs Flora Brovina

Mr President, Commissioner, we have not signed this compromise motion for a resolution for two reasons.

First, because Mr Sakellariou, who is known for his openness and tolerance and whom I shall not quote, vehemently vetoed it in a bid to set himself up as your moral defender.

I have no doubt, and I am sure that you have no doubt, that this is a major new contribution on his part to the fight against racism and intolerance.

The other reason is that this text does not, unfortunately, go very far.

I think that it manages, through a series of clever devices, to carefully avoid addressing the central issue, i.e. the final status of Kosovo.

I doubt that any of you still believe that Kosovo can one day become part of Yugoslavia.

I also doubt that any of you can believe that Milosevic could resist for very long if the international community eventually resolved the question of the final status of Kosovo.

I also doubt that any of you think that, as things stand, it is not in Milosevic' s interest to pull out all the stops and destabilise Kosovo, as he is doing and as we have seen.

Finally, I do not think that any of you believe that the present status quo will bring minimum stability and hence minimum development to Kosovo.

I also noted a mistake in the compromise motion for a resolution, which you no doubt overlooked.

You condemn the first direct attack on the KFOR troops.

I would not want you to be birds of ill omen, but I fear that, by failing to confront the real issue, you will end up being just that and I shall hold you entirely responsible for what may happen.

On the contrary, I think it is our duty to call on the Commission and the Council, which unfortunately is not present, to insist that the United Nations consider the question of the final status of Kosovo, of the multiplicity of micro-states in the region, of what happens post-Dayton and, finally, the question of real stability which can allow democracy to be built up in these countries and give the European Union a policy in this region.

Finally, I would stress that we have been asking the Council and the Commission since July to take forceful action to secure the release of the 3 000 Kosovar prisoners and Mrs Brovina, Mr Jurti and Mr Hoti.

I note that the Union is preparing to lift certain sanctions and that we have not seen even one of these prisoners released in exchange.

Mr President, what is happening in Mitrovica in Kosovo is appalling and reprehensible.

Violence begets violence, and revenge begets revenge.

The police forces which have been sent out do not have the manpower to stop what is going on.

The Chief Commissioner of Police, Svend Frederiksen, has expressed his desperation at the fact that he constantly has to make do with less than half the manpower which was agreed.

He has fewer than 2 000 officers, and it was agreed that there should be nearly 5 000.

The police force should be large enough for it to be a visible presence, so that people can believe that it is in a position to stop atrocities. It should also be large enough to be able to clear up crimes and punish those who are guilty of them.

Otherwise, there is a danger of people taking the law into their own hands. It is therefore also important that local officers should be trained, and the idea was, in fact, that 2 000 to 3 000 officers should be trained.

However, there are still fewer than 200 trained police officers to contribute to clearing up crime.

A year ago, we did of course see what happens when agreements and resolutions which have been made are not followed up.

I was in Kosovo on 27 October 1998 when the Serbs withdrew. The agreement was that 1 800 OSCE observers should arrive to guarantee the peace.

After a month, however, there was still only a handful of observers.

By Christmas, there were perhaps 100 and, by the spring, still only a fraction of the force it had been agreed should come was, in fact, in place.

Atrocities were not even being recorded.

Then the war came, and the observers were withdrawn.

I would therefore ask the Commissioner: can you not in fact do anything to stop us repeating our follies here in Europe?

Can you not guarantee increasing the police presence to 5 000 officers and training local officers, who would naturally find it easier to clear up crimes than would officers from abroad?

I might also ask: when do you anticipate that they will be in place?

And when is more responsibility to be transferred to local democratic authorities?

I mention this last issue because it is the solution we should be embracing as quickly as possible if peace is to have any chance at all.

All who are in contact with real life in Kosovo share the same opinion: it is a tragic, desperate situation where there is a democratic void and no possibility of the different ethnic groups living peacefully side by side.

Mitrovica is a tragic example of this.

Before military intervention by NATO, Milosevic' s policy for Kosovo was certainly to be condemned, and the demands of the non-violent forces of the Rugovo era for the Kosovar regions to be autonomous were justified.

But NATO' s decision for military intervention and the KLA' s support for the armed forces had a devastating effect and have reduced Kosovo to a colony, as well as destroying civil infrastructures in Serbia.

Today, Kosovo has no adequate strategy for protecting minority groups, and these include not only Serbs and Roma, but also moderate Albanians who still believe in the possibility of peaceful coexistence and are persecuted by the extremists in power.

It is useless to talk of the Roma houses which have been burnt down and the thousands upon thousands of new refugees and the refugees from Krajina, who are now living, barricaded in, in Kosovo, abandoned by the UNHCR, which itself has been abandoned by the donors, while the emergency is still of dramatic proportions.

In the joint resolution, we ask the Council and the Member States to double their efforts to ensure respect for minority groups and to work towards the creation of democratic structures, giving a voice to all those forces which still believe in peaceful coexistence.

In this sense, I am in agreement with Mr Sakellariou' s proposals.

Another subject being discussed is the release of the Albanians held in prisons, particularly Flora Brovina, a woman of extraordinary humanity whom I met, together with the Women in Black of Belgrade, during joint attempts to build bridges between women from different ethnic groups.

Flora defended herself, and asked Serbs and Albanians to shake hands.

Flora Brovina' s husband is the guest of Serbian women in Belgrade.

This is a sign of hope, the hope that it possible to act differently even in Serbia.

It is not true that Flora Brovina has been abandoned. She might well have been abandoned by the large institutions, but we, who worked in Kosovo and Serbia for many years, are doing our utmost to campaign for her release.

I believe that the European Union must do likewise.

The embargo on Serbia must be lifted and Serbia must, in turn, release its political prisoners.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I would like to fully endorse Mrs Pack' s very emotionally-charged contribution.

What she has said here is completely justified.

There is not one truth in Kosovo, there are several.

I refuse to accept that we can now talk about a genocide in reverse - that is bending the truth.

I completely concur with the draft resolution which is before us.

We condemn all violence over there and that is what we need to do, but we cannot talk about genocide in reverse.

Needless to say, the situation in Mitrovica is very dangerous and we all know why.

There are also important economic interests at stake and the whole tragedy surrounding the Trepca mines also plays its part.

We have already talked about the fate of the political prisoners.

There is a great deal of pain, a lot of suffering in Kosovo.

The people are holding demonstrations, they are sending us e-mails.

They ask us where their children are, their sons.

We need to be able to go back with a proper answer.

The case of Flora Brovina is just one of many.

We are right to include this in the draft resolution, but there are hundreds, even thousands of Flora Brovinas out there.

I would ask the Commission and the absent Council at long last to do something for these political prisoners.

The fact that they are locked up in Serbia also fuels the unrest and violence in Kosovo.

Mr President, in the present joint draft resolution, paragraph 10 urges the Council and Member States - rightly so - to double their efforts so as to make the necessary manpower and resources available for the UN police units.

This request is fully in line with the vision held by the Special Representative of the UN in Kosovo, Mr Bernard Kouchner.

In order to fulfil his mission to restore and maintain public order in Kosovo, he needs, by his own reckoning, at least 6 000 foreign police officers.

The UN, however, have pledged to dispatch a police force of 4 800.

To date, however, Mr Kouchner only has about 2 000 police troops at his disposal.

Moreover, half of this group is from the United States and Germany.

It is logical that the Special Representative of the UN in Kosovo is extremely dissatisfied with this situation, especially in the light of the endemic ethnic violence in the region.

What is disconcerting, however, is Mr Kouchner' s sharp criticism levelled at the French Government these days.

Paris is leaving its fellow-countryman completely in the cold with a handful of policemen, not more than 37, in the crisis region.

For this hardly honourable position, Mr Kouchner blames none other than the Minister for Home Affairs, Mr Chevènement.

According to Mr Kouchner, the Minister is said to have hindered the efforts of the French police officials on ideological grounds.

I would ask the Council and the Commission to look into these serious allegations carefully and inform the European Parliament of the outcome.

Mr President, I do not intend to repeat the premise put forward earlier for fear of being accused of improper publicity.

On the question of Angola, I think that we would achieve an initial result if we had a resolution at long last.

It would be the first in a long time.

So I welcome it as such.

I think that the European Union and the western world in general has had Mr Savimbi in their crossfire for some time now, with no discrimination whatsoever, but corruption is now so rife in Mr Dos Santos' s regime that even his long-standing friends are starting to find it hard to pretend not to see anything.

So I think that we urgently need to get to the point where we can pass a general political resolution in which we can get to the heart of the matter, especially the worrying things which we are discussing, particularly logistics support for the information services by the United States and Great Britain, generalised corruption in the regime linked to multinational oil companies and numerous other extremely 'spicy' matters which we need to go into.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the European Parliament has rightly led the way in promoting human rights in the European Union.

Clearly, governments are often more sensitive to the interests of realpolitik and to commercial, geostrategic or economic interests.

We have established requirements for the countries which want to join our Union and we must also establish requirements for the countries which we support, because we believe in democracy and its values.

A free press and informed public opinion are the heart and soul of a democracy.

There can be no democracy without freedom of information and without free and informed public opinion.

Yet the latter cannot exist without free and unrestricted social communication which itself cannot exist when journalists are persecuted, detained, threatened or put under pressure.

We rightfully condemned the behaviour of UNITA which threatened the peace process in Angola and we used our authority to invite the two sides to stop the war and embrace peace. Rightfully and with the full weight of our authority, we condemn the persecution and threats against journalists and we call on the Government of Angola to ensure the conditions of freedom which are essential to the vital work of journalists in a democratic country and society.

Mr President, how much longer can we continue our cooperation with Angola?

Human rights are being violated consistently and have been for a long period of time, not only by UNITA, but also by the government itself.

The legal proceedings against the journalists fly in the face of every legal principle.

The Angolan Government must immediately authorise a substantial UN presence which can mediate and can report on human rights.

Additionally, European observers will need to be admitted to the trials against the journalists.

Europe, as a major donor, has so far remained too passive with regard to Angola.

If the Angolan Government continues to refuse to cooperate, measures will need to be taken.

Without national reconciliation, reconciliation with Europe is not possible.

This being the case, Angola will unfortunately remain a very rough diamond.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I fully support the motion for a resolution being discussed by this House. The repression of both Angolan and foreign journalists in Angola is scandalous and so serious that we cannot let it pass without comment.

However, this motion is inadequate as it actually starts from the principle that Angola enjoys rule of law and is only imposing certain restrictions on journalists and restraining them.

Yet this is not the situation.

Angola does not enjoy rule of law. It is a repressive dictatorship.

It is at war, and a bloody war at that, which is dragging on and on.

The prevalent theory that the enemy must be crushed and physically eliminated to achieve peace is not one which we can accept.

The repeated appeals made by the Angolan church and, for example, by Mr Mandela and Mr Mbeki, for new negotiations to try and achieve peace must be supported by this House.

As another Member said, we must have a general debate on Angola and not just on the situation of certain journalists suffering repression in this country.

For example, I have today received information directly from Rafael Marques, whose situation we are discussing, according to which two correspondents from Portuguese television have been imprisoned in Angola.

Yet the worst part is that there is no way out of the situation in Angola.

The silence of the major powers and our own silence are questionable and are benefiting a regime of corruption, violence and war.

I must draw attention to the fact that the war in Angola is spreading to other parts of Africa.

It is impacting on the war in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and on the situations in Namibia and Zambia. It is now also affecting the situation in Zimbabwe where Robert Mugabe has just lost the referendum precisely because he has sent troops to the Congo to prop up Laurent Kabila who is beyond salvation.

There are two sides in Angola or rather two armed groups.

The first is the MPLA, which controls the oil profits. The second is the armed band of Mr Savimbi, which controls the diamond profits.

It is oil and diamonds which are financing the continuation of the war which, as has been said, is terrible. It has displaced millions of people and caused them to go hungry.

It has led to a critical and tragic situation in Angola.

The authority of this House could play an important part if we were to have a major debate on the Angolan situation and also on the whole of southern Africa.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the motion for a resolution before us today is important because of its subject and the desire to protect the rule of law and press freedom. It is also very important because of the broad consensus which has finally been reached after some heated discussions behind the scenes.

The problem considered by the motion is a major one but, as has already been touched upon, could be regarded as minor in light of the even greater problem of the general situation in Angola which is experiencing a terrible humanitarian disaster.

This situation, as in neighbouring former Zaire, is like a festering wound in which it is not clear who is infecting whom.

As Mr Soares just said, a truly terrible situation is developing in Angola and in other countries in the region.

This was appropriately described a few weeks ago as the First World War of Africa, given the involvement of certain countries in others.

This is a major issue because the Angolan State and authorities must assume their responsibilities. The international community and the European Union must spell this out very clearly.

These journalists are professionals who are trying to inform the public in their country and denounce the corruption existing in this regime, for which they are being persecuted.

It is clear that such a scenario will never allow peace to be established in Angola.

We have experienced this in our own national and European history. People can only enjoy lasting peace if they are living in a free and pluralist society where everyone is mutually tolerant.

The cause of these journalists is therefore one which we must embrace, although bearing in mind that the problem goes much wider and much deeper and is much more terrible.

Like a previous speaker, I also fully support the appeals which have been made.

We must, some time soon, find the courage to tackle the whole Angolan problem more broadly and more vigorously.

In recent years, the behaviour of UNITA has merited our reservations and criticisms but this cannot be used to excuse the Angolan State for having established a disastrous war economy with widespread corruption resulting in the continued suffering of its people.

We must establish dialogue with other forces in Angola, be attentive to the appeals of the Angolan church and encourage the emergence of other national institutions, national reconciliation and new cultural and political forces not engaged in war. These can then eventually free this country and this people from the armed fate which they have been experiencing for decades.

The people of Angola deserve better.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, it seems as if the world is turned upside down.

Journalists are sent to prison for simply speaking the truth, whilst soldiers who are supposedly fighting each other exchange smuggled goods in the bar in the evening.

We are now expressing our horror concerning this war.

Three million victims, two million driven from their homes within the country' s borders, hundreds of thousands driven away across its borders, including women and children. This is a war which transcends its borders.

It is not just UNITA which is to blame. The government too is responsible for this continuing violence.

This is why we insist that the journalists - more than 20 were imprisoned last year - keep speaking their minds.

We would, at the same time, like to insist on other things.

We want the UN embargo, which is supposed to prevent a large proportion of arms and ammunition from being flown across to UNITA airports, to stop.

But what do these sanctions mean?

It is the western world itself which is partly to blame.

It is we, our own people, who keep the war going over there.

The so-called civilised world should hang its head in shame.

This is also the case for the so-called statutory government which is just as guilty, because if this journalist has accused the President himself of deriving benefit from this civil war, then all he is doing is voicing what the entire world knows already and which is being passed on to every tribal district across Africa.

Mr President, we are partly to blame for this war.

We should stop financing this regime and we should certainly stop supplying arms for the war.

Mr President, the facts are well-known.

On 24 December, the Angolan court sentenced a correspondent of the Portuguese paper, Expresso, to a year' s imprisonment and a fine of USD 20 000.

The journalist had brought to light a corruption scandal in the President' s cabinet.

The trial took place behind closed doors and the defendant was only allowed one witness.

Another journalist was threatened with his life during a parliamentary debate last month by a member of parliament of the MPLA government party.

These are only two examples of a trend in Angola to silence any government critics.

Over the past year, more than twenty journalists have been arrested for alleged slander or criminal offences against state security.

Their only crime was to criticise what human rights organisations have been denouncing all along, namely the large-scale corruption and disappearance of hundreds of millions of dollars, paid by the oil companies to the Angolan Government.

Even the British Minister, Peter Hain, conceded this recently.

We should ensure that the oil revenue is not used merely to finance the war or to line the pockets of prominent members of government, he told President Dos Santos last month.

But, at the same time, we note that Great Britain and also Portugal are continuing to channel military aid to the government.

There is indeed a great deal of hypocrisy regarding Angola.

On the basis of a report, the human rights organisation Global Witness concluded that the western world is turning a blind eye to the activities of Dos Santos because it is fishing for lucrative oil contracts.

I would like to challenge Portugal to deliver proof to the contrary, by making commercial interests subservient to human rights, to which so much lip service is being paid.

In my opinion, Angola is a test case.

We should, at any rate, judge the Portuguese Presidency on its actions and not on its words.

Native Americans in the US - Dineh

Mr President, the American leaders do not seem to have learnt a great deal from the criticism of how they treated the Indians and other indigenous peoples.

We have to admit that our European sense of responsibility is no more developed in this respect.

Once again, an indigenous people' s right of existence is being threatened.

Once again, the individuality, dignity and health of a people are being sacrificed to the higher economic interest.

Once again, we are losing a piece of our planet' s cultural and ecological heritage, despite the many treaties and resolutions on human rights, on the protection of minorities, rights of indigenous peoples, etc., which have already been ratified.

If tradition and culture have to make way for economic imperatives at all, we should at least give sufficient attention to the reception and reintegration of the peoples concerned.

But if we are to believe the environmental movements, even this is vain hope.

There are hardly any reintegration programmes for people who have been relocated to the so-called New Lands.

It very much remains to be seen whether these New Lands will be safe in terms of public health.

It is of key importance that the American authorities provide greater clarity regarding the way in which they are trying to offer these families a dignified alternative in keeping with a traditional way of life.

It is also important that a debate is held where the long-term effects of mining in this region are discussed and weighed up in economic, ecological and social terms.

The credibility of the industrialised north is at stake.

Indeed, what right do we have to demand of developing countries that they give their minorities a voice, that they protect their valuable natural areas and that they respect human rights, if it transpires that we are unable to meet these demands in our own countries?

Mr President, as Mr Van Hecke rightly pointed out, this is about human rights and about the rights of indigenous peoples, and Parliament must speak up, especially vis-à-vis good friends, and the United States is a good friend.

This is about the repression of a minority which unfortunately goes back a long time.

It is up to the European Parliament to protect vulnerable people.

So we need to do this.

This is also about respecting a culture, a language, a way of life and a people' s religion, a vulnerable culture which has nearly disappeared.

It is important to point this out.

This is why it is necessary - and Mr Van Hecke has already mentioned this, and this is also what we clearly ask for in our resolution - that the role of mining in this vulnerable desert area is reassessed.

We have just approved the water directive here in Parliament.

The water which these people need to exist is under threat because the groundwater strata there are being drilled by a mining company, and this is why the traditional way of life of the people who live there is being threatened.

The forced relocation scheme must be stopped unconditionally.

People should no longer be forced to move.

Over the past 25 years, no less than 25 000 people have been forced to move and this must stop.

If people need to move at all, they need to be given a viable alternative.

This is not the case here.

The area where the people in question are now being taken - and this is also the reason for this resolution - is a polluted area which is economically not suitable.

This is why I think that we as European Parliament need to ask the American authorities in any case to suspend the relocation scheme under discussion and, if necessary, abandon the scheme altogether.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, this is my maiden speech and I am delivering it with a great deal of pleasure and conviction as the topic is human rights.

In terms of human rights, Europe has a very eventful past and this is why we have become to some extent the cradle of these human rights.

We need to continue to stand up for these rights, especially in our own Member States and societies, but also elsewhere.

As Mr Sterckx said, we certainly need to do this vis-à-vis the United States which, after all, is close to us in terms of democratic values.

The treatment of the Native Americans in many respects flies in the face of the most fundamental human rights.

The account of the Dineh Indians is telling.

With the discovery and, certainly, the exploitation of black gold - and, later on, uranium and oil - all possible means were used to remove these people from their land and to send them to regions with few prospects other than poverty, hardship and contamination.

The area in Arizona which is to be the New Land for the Dineh Indians was hit in 1979 by the worst nuclear disaster in US history.

It is now the intention to send the last 4 000 Dineh Indians to this land.

The fight of these Indians is being backed by more than 250 NGOs and, thanks to the efforts of the Belgian 'Mother Earth' organisation, we are being kept informed of this situation.

This too is characteristic of American society, which hears little about it.

They get het up about wars and genocide on other continents, but wrongly keep quiet about the genocide taking place in their own country.

Today, the Dineh Indians are facing their final fight for their right to land, for their right to dignity and, above all, for their right to their way of life.

There are few of them left and they are up against a very powerful, economic adversary.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I endorse the many comments which have been made by the previous speakers, but I would like to emphasise a few things.

The Dineh people belong to the North-American Navajo Indians.

They are facing expulsion and have been fighting a battle of survival for dozens of years.

They have been living in harrowing living conditions for years.

The deprived conditions in which they are living at the moment is forcing them to compromise against their better judgement under the financial and economic pressure exercised by the coal industries.

The Relocation Act, which was introduced in 1974 and aims to re-distribute the land of the Navajo reservation, authorised the relocation of the peoples.

This relocation is, of course, unacceptable because human rights are being violated in economic, social and cultural terms.

The Dineh Indians are being moved like pawns and, in that way, lose not only their past and the land which is so extremely important to them - the land of their forefathers - but also any prospect of work and sources of income.

The Relocation Act was pushed through in Congress by a group representing the coal mining industry.

Congress never questioned where the people living in the area would have to move to or how relocation would impact on their lives.

The population was not allowed any input.

This resembles a kind of trade in human beings.

The relocation scheme was implemented and the Dineh people were moved to an area contaminated by uranium.

After the collapse of the dam in New Mexico in 1979, which resulted in the spill of 370 000 cubic metres of radioactive water and eleven hundred tonnes of pure uranium, this place is one of the world' s most contaminated areas.

The United States administration, the coal industry and all of us need to acquit ourselves of our responsibility and provide a sound alternative: either the soil is cleaned or the Dineh Indians are allocated a proper place where provision is made for all kinds of support, be it in the psychological, social, cultural or budgetary field.

It is high time we respected the rights of the Indians.

This is why we ask you to vote for this resolution: we in Europe should not be intimidated by American interests which are being pushed by financial, religious and industrial groups.

So let us contact the United States now!

Madam President, despite the protests by the international press, we still do not know the fate of Mr Andrey Babitsky, the courageous Russian journalist who has worked intensively to ensure free and independent information on the ordeal of the civilian population of Chechnya and the destruction of the city of Grozny.

Among the contradictions in the accounts that have been given, there has also been an attempt to reassure international public opinion over Mr Babitsky' s fate, by confirming the theory that there was an exchange of prisoners with Chechen fighters which, inter alia, if this did actually take place, would constitute a breach of international law, which certainly does not provide for the involvement of civilians in such circumstances.

Nevertheless, we now have more precise information: we know that the acting Russian President himself, Mr Vladimir Putin, asked Russian special services to safeguard Andrey Babitsky' s life and freedom.

This is an admission that confirms all our concerns and makes Parliament' s position on the case all the more appropriate, as it calls for a concurrent explanation of other cases of journalists who have disappeared in the Chechen region during the conflict and the safeguarding of media coverage of a conflict that has reached unacceptable levels of violence.

Moreover, we are asking the Russian authorities to provide immediate clarification of conditions in the so-called detention centres, and remind them that those responsible for any arbitrary detention, maltreatment or killing of civilians are laying themselves open to accusations of crimes against humanity.

We would ask the Council and the Commission for clear and prompt action and a political initiative which does not overlook the issue of human rights.

Mr President, in terms of human rights, there is of course a great deal amiss in Chechnya.

We have received reports from human rights organisations saying that Russian soldiers killed and apparently even executed citizens - I am talking about old men and women - in Grozny.

Citizens are believed to have been burnt alive in air-raid shelters.

We insist that these violations of human rights are investigated.

Despite the pledges made, violations in, for example, Alfanyurt have still not been investigated.

International government organisations and non-governmental organisations must be allowed access, and the Union' s general Council decided on 6 December 1999 to send representatives from the Member States to Ingushetia to study the humanitarian situation there.

I am, to say the least, curious to know how they are getting on.

The fate of Andrey Babitsky, the correspondent in Grozny of Radio Liberty, who was arrested by Russian troops, is a dramatic example of Russian policy.

It contravenes Article 3 of the Geneva Convention of 1949 and is a flagrant violation of the freedom of the press.

We want information from the Russian authorities as to Mr Babitsky' s whereabouts and his state of health.

Mr President, a journalist is on a fact-finding mission and this calls for freedom. Yet he is taken hostage and treated as a prisoner of war.

The war in Chechnya, like any war, is a trail of horrors.

The filtration camps are camps in which torture, rape and violations are perpetrated: we know that now.

And just what is Mr CFSP doing?

Russia is a permanent member of the UN Security Council and a full member of the Council of Europe and the OSCE, it has been invited to G7 and is a client of the IMF and the World Bank.

What are we doing about it?

I do not understand why the power centres of Europe are keeping quiet, letting things pass and, by working with the Russians as if nothing were amiss, giving its support to the government which is waging this war.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, the tragic case of the courageous Russian journalist Andrey Babitsky illustrates once again the depth of the democratic crisis into which Russia has sunk.

The entire Federation is allowing itself to be taken in by the war propaganda.

A warlord has become President and he has even been described as a reformer in some western quarters.

Journalists, on the other hand, who are simply going about their work in Russia, i.e. endeavouring to produce reports which are as objective as possible, are being treated like criminals.

The Russian Government appears to have lost its fundamental understanding of what democracy is about and truth appears to have become a threat in its eyes.

I can only reiterate my appeal to the Council and the Commission to stick to the rules.

It is simply not possible for a country to have normal economic relations with the EU if it does not recognise democratic principles.

Mr President, what sort of government hands over one of its own citizens to people whom it itself describes as 'terrorists' and 'bandits' ?

Without any hesitation, the Russian Minister for Internal Affairs, Vladimir Rushailo, earlier this week confirmed the answer to this revealing question.

The victim of this exchange is said to be the 35-year-old war correspondent of Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty, Andrey Babitsky.

I am using the phrase 'is said to be' on purpose, because official Chechen sources are still denying that they would have exchanged Mr Babitsky for a number of Russian prisoners of war.

In the meantime, the highest Russian authorities are casting a veil of secrecy over the mysterious disappearance of this courageous journalist.

For example, Acting President Vladimir Putin gave an assurance last Monday that he had ordered the country' s security services to bring the missing reporter back to Moscow safely.

Russia' s new strong man, however, added a rather puzzling comment to this welcome declaration: 'As far as I am aware, Mr Babitsky already feels free.'

This distressing ambiguity on the part of the Kremlin is not really surprising.

Andrey Babitsky was an unwanted busybody in Mr Putin' s 'anti-terrorist' operation in Chechnya.

Hence his disappearance of over one month.

In any case, the Babitsky affair warrants one conclusion: the leaders in Moscow cannot possibly maintain that hostage-taking and trading in defenceless citizens is a specifically Chechen crime.

This resolution is already the fourth in a row within a short space of time in connection with the Chechen tragedy.

Nor is it a mere luxury.

Indeed, it is in line with some thirty Russian media bodies which yesterday distributed a special issue on Andrey Babitsky free of charge.

Mr President, Commissioner, it is because of my experience in the Balkans, when I was there on duty, that I call on you today to support the efforts of the Secretary-General of the United Nations to bring those responsible for the genocide in Cambodia to trial before an independent court under the aegis of the United Nations.

I do not think that reconciliation is possible after such murderous tragedies, unless those responsible for starting them are brought to trial and sentenced.

Nor do I think that the people who were their victims can give them a fair trial.

I became convinced of this in Sarajevo when I had to negotiate the periodic exchanges of prisoners which accompanied each successive ceasefire agreement, none of which unfortunately lasted, between the parties to the conflict.

Every time, just as the exchange was about to take place, we found men missing from the meticulously drawn up lists.

Every time, when we asked why, the reply was the same, 'We cannot release him: he is a war criminal' .

In the emotion, pain and fury of the agreements, it was impossible to break the vicious circle of blood and vengeance.

If we want to help the Cambodians with the task of reconciliation on which they have embarked, we need to try and sentence those responsible at the highest level and thus exonerate the simple underlings and all those who were willingly or forcibly dragged along behind them.

I expect Ta Mok and his main lieutenants to be tried and sentenced by the establishment of a tribunal whose impartiality is guaranteed by the United Nations.

This will be the only way for the Cambodians to pardon those who simply followed them and to achieve lasting peace.

Mr President, it became known this week that two prominent Cambodian opposition papers have been threatened with closure because they are reported to have insulted the king and prime minister.

These papers actively support the opposition politician, Mr Sam Rengie.

Legal proceedings have been initiated against Sam Rengie himself in order to lift his parliamentary immunity so that he can be brought to trial for treason.

In his millennium speech, he dared to raise the fact that it should become clear what the procedure would be for appointing the successor to King Sihanouk in the event of his death.

In March of last year, a member of Sam Rengie' s party was killed by a group of men in military uniform in the province of Kandal.

In September, two members of the party were arrested because they were reported to have been involved in a rocket attack on the prime minister.

This is notably the only party in Cambodia which has no military arm.

In October, a member of parliament belonging to the same party was abducted by uniformed men and not released until the ransom was paid.

The pattern of intimidation is clear.

There is more going on in Cambodia: prisoners are being tortured, the army and police are involved in the trade in women and children, and people are held on remand to an excessive degree.

All this is happening on a daily basis.

Even more serious is the government' s refusal to bring the leaders of the Khmer Rouge before an international tribunal.

It is true, the civil war in Cambodia is over and political tension has eased.

The way in which the political opposition is now being treated, however, gives us cause for great concern and, if it carries on like this, it is bound to impact on the Union' s relations with Cambodia.

Mr President, there is a new doctrine taking shape in international law, according to which no country can treat its citizens or the people living within its territory in any way it likes, and the sovereignty of the state can no longer prevent outside intervention when there are gross violations of human rights, not even when the government is legally or even democratically elected.

Living examples of this have been the Pinochet-Ugarten case, Kosovo and, in milder form in our own Union, the debate surrounding the government decision in Austria.

This is what is at stake now in Cambodia unless the leaders of the previous oppressive regime are bought to justice.

At the same time, the struggle against impunity is under threat.

The situation should also remind us all that the ratification of the Treaty for an International Criminal Court has been shamefully slow.

Mr President, we had an extremely useful debate on human rights yesterday.

I am pleased that we have had this further opportunity to consider a number of areas in the world - Kosovo, Angola, Chechnya and Cambodia - where the protection of human rights has been a particularly severe challenge.

First of all, on Kosovo, the Commission fully shares the concerns expressed in these draft resolutions as regards general policy towards Kosovo, as regards the continuing ethnic violence and as regards the prisoners in Serb jails.

Our efforts in Kosovo, as elsewhere in the wider region, are directed at short and medium-term recovery and long-term stabilisation.

In particular we support the development of a free, democratic and multi-ethnic society.

Our assistance programmes in the fields of democratisation and human rights should continue to build confidence in general and, in particular, to try to build confidence between the various communities.

We have always condemned ethnic violence, no matter which ethnic group is the perpetrator or the victim.

We consider it is unacceptable against Serb and Roma minorities as it was against the Kosovar Albanians in the past.

We support the efforts of UNMIK, KFOR and the OSCE to establish a functioning civil administration and to ensure law and order.

In this regard we strongly support the High Representative' s recent appeal to Member States to provide more police officers for the UN civil police mission in Kosovo.

It was a point raised by several speakers in the debate.

I hope it will underline the importance, when we address the development of a Common Foreign and Security Policy, of looking at the non-military aspects of that policy as well as the military aspects.

It is just as important to have headline goals for our policing and institution building as for a military capacity.

We continue to be very concerned about the many civilians who are presently held in Serb prisons.

I totally agree with the points put so passionately by the Mrs Pack, either before trial or following judgement.

The plight of Kosovar Albanians who have been missing since the end of the war is particularly distressing.

We call on everyone, within and outside Kosovo, to support these common aims, to support UNMIK and KFOR in their efforts to achieve them.

Turning briefly to Angola, we had again a number of knowledgeable speeches, especially from Mr Soares, with his unrivalled knowledge of the subject.

The Commission believes strongly that press freedom and free speech will be crucial for progress with peace and reconciliation in Angola.

It is a vital precondition for strengthening democratic institutions and civil society.

An area of special concern is the harassment of journalists, including temporary detention of members of the so-called independent press.

The European Union made a specific démarche on press freedom to the Angolan Ministry of Justice in November last year.

We fully support the work of the UN through UNUA, given its specific responsibility to monitor the human rights situation in Angola.

We are also committed to the Security Council' s sanctions against UNITA, including arms controls.

While maintaining emphasis on humanitarian needs, the Commission is preparing for a post-conflict phase in our financial support for Angola.

An essential element will be support for democracy and human rights, including specific initiatives to strengthen democratic institutions and civil society.

The European Union has condemned the use of anti-personnel landmines and we are supporting de-mining operations through an international NGO.

The resolution I would love to have a debate on in Parliament one day is on demining, and particularly the importance of destroying the stocks of existing mines: stocks in the Ukraine, stocks in Moldova and stocks elsewhere.

This is a subject which is not given sufficient attention.

On the question of the indigenous peoples in the US, I am sure that the resolution which was primarily addressed to the US authorities will have been noted by them.

Our general policy however, is to recognise the inherent dignity and the unique contribution of indigenous people to the development and plurality of society, something we are looking at particularly keenly in the context of the northern dimension which we are trying to develop and which we are discussing with North America.

The Commission shares the growing concern about the missing Russian journalist, Mr Babitsky and the conditions for the independent media in Chechnya more generally.

This issue comes on top of our deep worries about the plight of the civilian population in Chechnya, and I have heard Mr Posselt on this subject before.

There are alarming reports of human rights violations.

Of course, there has been disproportionate use of force in the present conflict.

The Commission delegation in Moscow participated in a European Union Troika démarche on the eleventh of this month.

We underlined our serious concerns about freedom of the press and freedom of speech and we pressed the Russians to clarify the circumstances of Mr Babitsky' s detention in view of their obligations in the field of human rights.

We await a proper response from the Russians.

In the meantime, the conclusions of the General Affairs Council earlier this week have confirmed the message which I have given today.

And we are ready to return to the issue at the EU-Russia Ministerial Troika in Lisbon on 2 March, if we need to do so.

Finally, on Cambodia and the Khmer Rouge: we strongly agree that senior Khmer Rouge leaders should be accountable for their crimes.

I totally agree with the arguments that were put forward by Mr Morillon.

We vigorously supported the Troika démarche to Foreign Minister Hor Namhong on 4 February this year.

The European Union underlined its full support for the efforts of the United Nations on the need for a tribunal to prosecute former Khmer Rouge leaders.

At the same time, we welcome the continued dialogue between the two parties.

I am encouraged by the optimism of Kofi Annan, Secretary-General of the UN, on the chances of agreement on the proposed tribunal.

The Commission will continue to raise issues regarding the rule of law, democratic principles and human rights with Cambodian authorities through the EC-Cambodia Cooperation Agreement which entered into force on 1 November last year.

It has been useful to debate human rights twice in a couple of days.

I hope we have other opportunities, but I hope we will have fewer examples of their abuse in the years ahead.

Thank you very much Commissioner Patten.

The vote will take place at 6.00 p.m.

The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions:

B5-0164/2000 by Mr Leinen on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists,

B5-0167/2000 by Mr Maaten and Mrs Thors on behalf of the Group of the European Democrat and Reform Party,

B5-0168/2000 by Mr Oostlander and Mrs Grossetête on behalf of the Group of the European People' s Party (Christian Democrats) and the European Democrats,

B5-0173/2000 by Mr Papayannakis and Mr Sjöstedt on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left/Nordic Green Left,

B5-0179/2000 by Mrs Schroedter and others on behalf of the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance

on the environmental disaster caused by cyanide leaking from a Romanian goldmine into the Lepos, Somes, Tisza and Danube Rivers.

Mr President, we debated the framework directive on water this week, and the disaster in Romania has demonstrated once again how very seriously we need to take the protection of water.

This disaster has raised a number of important issues which concern us as a European Union.

We are delighted with the pledge that EU aid will be used to clean the rivers, and at least as important is the reinforcement of environmental awareness both in Romania and, more generally, in Central and Eastern Europe.

We therefore welcome Commissioner Wallström' s brief visit, for it can contribute to this awareness.

After all, this is a candidate country we are talking about, and this disaster is in addition to the existing concern about whether all candidate countries will comply with the EU environmental rules in time.

I wonder whether the European Union can recoup this kind of cost from the environmental cowboys who appear in the so-called 'Wild East' , making use of the inadequate environmental legislation in place.

I would be in favour of its doing so.

Mr President, Commissioner, there has been one ecological disaster after another and, unfortunately, they are all similar.

Once again, there is cause for concern at the serious pollution affecting the fourth most important wetland in Europe.

The delta of the Danube is in danger.

As in Spain in April 1998, as in Brittany and the Vendée since last December, once again an exceptional natural site is under serious threat.

The European Parliament is constantly drawing attention in its resolutions to this sort of danger, which threatens our environment, upsets our ecosystem and again weakens our populations.

This new disaster raises the problem of the integration of the environmental acquis communautaire in candidate countries.

The authorities in these counties, which are still very frail from an environmental point of view, need to overcome numerous obstacles.

First, they need to be able to prevent this type of discharge more efficiently by equipping the most critical industrial sites; then they need to have suitable technical means of curbing and containing this type of pollution and, finally, they need to be able to implement programmes to restore the most affected and the most sensitive sites.

Today, the banks and the waters of more than four rivers crossing four countries are polluted, which is why the European Union needs to concentrate its efforts and pressure on the urgent need for all candidate countries to come into line with Community environmental protection standards.

But, over and above that, it is the technologies and the means used to prevent and deal quickly and efficiently with this type of disaster which are being called into question.

I hope that our future partners will demonstrate greater responsibility.

The environment must be a priority area within the reunification of the European continent.

It must form the basis for our partners' political will.

Implementing high environmental standards will not only allow important industrial and technological sectors to develop, it will also have social and economic benefits and, at the same time, public health standards will improve.

The efforts already being made need to be stepped up.

The European continent needs to demonstrate solidarity and responsibilities must be clearly defined on the basis of the 'polluter pays' principle.

Mr President, when the Doñana disaster occurred, the non-governmental organisation, the World Wide Fund for Nature, gave us a report on the number of reservoirs of this type in Europe.

The number is huge. They are an ecological time bomb and affect the drinking water supply, ecological wealth and economic future of surrounding areas.

I visited Doñana after the spill and saw how agriculture, fishing and the lives of people in the surrounding area were enormously compromised.

I therefore believe that the European Union must, to start with, carry out an analysis of the situation of these reservoirs and compile a precise record of the number of these in Europe.

We must bring these reservoirs under Community law and the directives on waste and we must use the precautionary principle to ensure that this type of event does not happen again.

If we do not, we will be permanently endangering the ecological wealth of our continent.

Mr President, this disaster at the mine in Romania affects a large hydrogeological area with rivers and watercourses in Romania, Hungary, Serbia and Bulgaria, The fact that 100 000 m3 of cyanide-poisoned water and large quantities of heavy metals have leaked out into the ecosystem is going to have appalling consequences for people in the area for a very long time to come, as well as for animal and plant life, agriculture, the tourist industry, biodiversity and the whole of the ecosystem.

It is incomprehensible that an accident of this kind could have happened at all today.

Is a substance as poisonous as cyanide really to be used in the mining industry and in the production of metals?

The answer, of course, is an emphatic no.

There must be no more manufacture or use of cyanide.

I assume, therefore, that the EU will take the initiative and see to it that there is a total, worldwide ban on the manufacture and use of that substance.

It has already been banned in most EU countries for a long time now.

That an accident like this can happen at all is therefore an extremely shameful state of affairs.

I have been informed that the Commissioner for the Environment, Margot Wallström, has travelled from Strasbourg to Romania in order to see for herself, on the spot, what has happened.

My Group assumes that Margot Wallström will promise to provide aid to those communities which have been affected: economic aid, support in terms of environmental expertise and help in connection with the massive cleaning-up operation which is required.

This highlights the need for something which we in the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance have been demanding for an extremely long time, namely a rapid reaction force offering protection to civilians in the event of major environmental and industrial catastrophes of this type.

It also sheds light upon the low level of environmental requirements in some of the applicant States.

We must demand that there should be no exceptions which could jeopardise people' s health and the ecosystems.

Mr President, I do not think we are in a position to throw stones at the Eastern European countries which have come knocking at the door of the European Union, because ecological disasters occur as much here, in the west, as they do in the east.

For example, the overflow from the decanting basins at the gold mines in Salsigne, in France, have caused tremendous pollution and are a huge economic disaster even today.

We know full well that pollution and restoration costs run into billions.

Which is why the environmental aspect, which is becoming a matter of urgency, must be taken into account in all development projects at all costs.

I too should like to ask the European Union to put its own house in order here, i.e. to call on Member States which still have gold mines to commission expert reports, so that we know just what the situation is.

I am thinking in particular of the gold mines in French Guiana, where the workers, who are generally women, are exploited and work in absolutely deplorable health conditions.

Let me associate myself, not least as a former Environment Minister, completely and without any reservation whatsoever, with the expressions of concern by honourable Members.

An objective assessment of the facts is not easy at this stage.

But early reports suggest that the poisoning of the Lepos, Tisza, Somes and Danube Rivers is a very serious environmental tragedy.

It has destroyed an entire ecosystem in a matter of days.

No living organisms, from microbes to otters, have been spared.

Several Members have set out what seems to have happened.

We have all seen some of the consequences on our television screens.

Some environmental experts have put the environmental consequences of this disaster, at least so far as damage to the ecosystem is concerned, on a par with Chernobyl.

It has affected the peoples of three countries - Romania, Hungary and Yugoslavia.

It is the Tisza, Hungary' s second river, perhaps its most beautiful and most loved by its people, that has borne the brunt.

As with all such disasters it is the long-term consequences that are the most pernicious.

Some estimates suggest that it could take up to five years to restock the river.

There is a continuing threat to other wildlife from eating toxic fish.

We plainly have a responsibility to do everything we can, as rapidly as we can, to help cope with this catastrophe.

That is certainly the view of my colleague, Commissioner Wallström, who I know would have wished to respond to this resolution in person today.

The reason she cannot do so is because, as some honourable Members have pointed out, she is in Hungary and Romania to see for herself the extent of the damage and how best we can help the Hungarian and Romanian authorities to tackle the crisis.

We stand ready to do so.

We contacted the Romanian Government and the International Commission for the Protection of the Danube River about the accident earlier this month to seek more information urgently.

The Romanians have approached UNEF and OCHA, in Geneva, for an assessment of the damage in the Danube catchment area by an independent and international team of experts.

We stand ready to assist in this assessment if there is a joint request from Hungary and Romania and if access to the sites for nationals of both countries can be guaranteed.

It is plainly essential to establish as rapidly as possible an accurate picture of the scope of the damage so that we can decide exactly how best to help tackle it.

It is to that end that our efforts are now engaged.

There is also a need to clarify the legal responsibilities of the mining company and of the Romanian authorities.

This is an important point, as several speakers have suggested.

The polluter-pays principle is a cornerstone of European Union environmental policy.

It is mirrored in the International Convention for the Protection and Sustainable Use of the Danube River and it should be applied in this case.

The European Union could not substitute itself for the mining company for any compensation payments due.

The Union has mobilised some EUR 20 million over the past seven years to support protection of the Danube River basin.

In the context of pre-accession aid to the region it may be possible to redirect some of the assistance we are giving under ISPAR and PHARE to tackle the most severe impact of this accident, as long as the polluter-pays principle is fully respected.

We will want, in the longer term, to see what lessons can be drawn from this disaster, above all to see how to prevent such disasters happening in the first place.

The incident reinforces the case for a strengthening of European civil protection, along the lines suggested by President Prodi in his recent speech and as suggested by one or two Members today.

But for now the priority is to cope with this crisis.

As I have said, my colleague, Commissioner Wallström, is on the spot today.

She will want to keep Parliament closely in touch with the action she proposes as a result of her visit.

This has been an appalling tragedy for Europe and Europe has to respond and do all it can to ensure that incidents as dreadful as this do not continue to blight our future.

We shall now proceed to the vote.

(FR) The only reason we voted for the PSE-Verts/ALE-GUE/NGL compromise motion for a resolution is because this resolution allowed us to condemn the decision by the Goodyear-Dunlop management to close its factory in Italy.

However, the measures set out in this resolution are derisory in terms of combating the policy of the major industrial groups which are shedding jobs and exacerbating unemployment.

Moreover, it is all just words, because the Socialist governments, which are now in a majority in Europe, are just as incapable of taking action to prevent redundancies as right-wing governments.

The real problem is not finding a legal way of slightly complicating redundancy procedures, but banning them.

The only way of stopping the diabolical machine which produces capital gains on the one side and unemployment on the other is to ban redundancies in all large companies which are in profit, on pain of compulsory purchase, and to publish the accounts of large companies and subject them to the scrutiny of the workers and the general public.

Society must have the means of enforcing its own agenda on large companies and their owners. The first item on that agenda is the eradication of unemployment.

The sums needed to create useful jobs in public services and finance the distribution of work among everyone, without cutting wages, must be taken from the profits of large companies.

It is far more important for the majority of society than the waste involved in financial operations or the scandalous enrichment of a minority of large shareholders.

(SV) I cannot support the present resolution because, in paragraph 8, an individual factory in Italy is singled out with the express wish that precisely this establishment should remain in place, while the current management is being advised to try to sell the factory to a European tyre manufacturer.

It is not the European Parliament' s business to express an opinion on which factories in the European Union' s 15 Member States are to remain in place and which are to be shut down; to expand their work forces or reduce them; stay in the same location or else move; be sold or not be sold; and, in the case of those which are to be sold, to comment on whether they are to be sold to companies within or outside Europe.

Ultimately, it is a question of different spheres of authority, where the European Parliament and its Members do not have any legal means of changing the current corporate decision or do not even have a particularly deep knowledge of the situation in the factory as it stands.

The Swedish Christian Democrats would emphasise the value of the European Union' s and the European Parliament' s concentrating on their basic tasks and not undermining the value of their actions in these areas by also acting in areas outside their jurisdiction.

The next item is the report (A5­0030/2000) by Mr Viceconte, on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism, on the communication from the Commission: 'Enhancing tourism' s potential for employment - follow-up to the conclusions and recommendations of the High Level Group on Tourism and Employment' [COM(1999)0205 - C5-0112/1999 - 1999/2115(COS)].

(IT) Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, despite the European Union' s delay and indecision with regard to the introduction of a fully-fledged Community policy on tourism, increasing attention is being paid to tourism as a sector capable of generating new jobs.

One of the reasons for the Community' s interest is the structural flexibility of this sector of the employment market, which explains its attractiveness for women and young people, to whom it often offers their first experience of employment.

The importance of the tourist industry and its impact on employment - although everyone is now aware of this - is nevertheless based more on personal experience rather than on verifiable statistical data.

The fact that, due to the absence of sufficiently reliable and scientific statistical data, the tourist industry is in effect an unknown quantity has greatly limited the prospects of pursuing a consistent policy in this area and creating employment on a wider scale.

It would be appropriate, therefore, to begin by summarising the impact of tourism on the lives of Union citizens and the desirability, in both economic and social terms, of promoting the European tourist industry.

Firstly, I would remind you that the tourist industry is one of the infrastructures which any advanced society must have. Without it, institutions, business and the world of work could not function.

Tourism must therefore be thought of as the whole range of goods and services required by individuals moving from their habitual place of residence and thus confers mobility, the characteristic feature of contemporary society.

The term 'tourism' must no longer be solely perceived as synonymous with sun, sea and holidays, which has the effect of reducing the interest taken in the subject at institutional level.

Secondly, I would like to explode a myth, taking as a starting point an apparent paradox, which is clearly highlighted by Eurostat figures: the main international tourist countries are not those traditionally regarded as tourist destinations, but on the contrary the most advanced nations, whose quality of life is one of their main attractions and most heavily promoted features.

Clearly, the importance of tourism for the economy of regions traditionally regarded as tourist destinations, southern regions for example, is very different, and should be studied carefully.

It is an obvious truth, and one that is measurable by other economic and social indicators, that thanks to tourism, many Mediterranean regions have undergone a radical change for the better in their economic and social system and the way of life of their inhabitants, and achieved a drastic reduction in the numbers emigrating.

Social growth has occurred only in those areas where the tourist market has given rise to the development of all the activities required to meet the needs of visiting tourists, thus creating an entire productive system.

In such cases, there is a measurable increase in employment as a result of the growth in tourist numbers, thus establishing a virtuous circle of growth in the local economy.

This reminds us that tourism cannot be regarded as the poor countries' petroleum industry, because it requires huge investment in structures, infrastructures, entrepreneurship, professional expertise, social services and training; that the tourist industry is essential for the equilibrium of many regions as it provides a direct source of employment and a market for all local productive activities: agriculture, small firms in the industrial and craft sector, transport, services, retail sector, training, etc; that the development of the Community' s tourist industry is closely linked to its sustainability with regard to the Community objectives; that the varied geography and historical, cultural and environmental heritage must be protected and exploited.

In my opinion, the European Union can, in compliance with the principle of subsidiarity, supplement the action of the Member States and contribute to consolidating the potential of tourism by means of certain measures, such as the adoption of a specific legal basis for tourism policy in the Treaties; the adoption of mechanisms within the programmes and projects set up under its regional policies and other policies of the Union, with a view to promoting tourism in all its forms: rural, environmental, cultural, conference-based, spa-related and sports-related tourism, and also tourism focusing on senior citizens, research and training; the amendment of Directive 95/57/EC on the collection of statistical information in the field of tourism; the cofinancing of projects to set up new transport services and infrastructures; the cofinancing of pilot schemes involving benchmarking and the exchange of experiences.

These and other specific measures included in my report can, in my view, lend added value to the actions that the competent national and regional authorities should foster, in order to promote tourism and create new jobs, starting with the adoption of positive fiscal measures to assist small and medium-sized firms, particularly by reducing the burden of charges on labour.

Mr President, I would like to begin with some words of optimism, which came to us in the form of the High-Level Group communication of October 1998, the first page of which said that by the end of the next decade, it would be possible to create between 2 200 000 e 3 300 000 new jobs in tourism activities in the Union. In addition, it said that this would only happen if the right conditions were created.

The Commission and Parliament are called upon to answer two questions: what are the right conditions and what is the role of the European Union on this?

The Commission and Parliament can help us understand, in the first place, exactly what we are dealing with, because even the term 'tourism' , as was, moreover, pointed out in the Viceconte report, is still an ambiguous term, a kind of variable that depends on latitude, climate, a range of opportunities, and a series of background factors; it can be synonymous with holidays or it can be a true area of production, income, wealth and employment.

There is a shortage of facts: we have no information on the economic impact, which still remains a complete mystery.

We have criteria for the gathering and interpretation of statistics which are totally at odds with each other, despite what was said in a 1995 directive by the Commission and Parliament.

With the aim of working out a strategy, it is vital to have a reading of these facts which harmonious and as strict as possible, so that we truly make tourism capable of creating jobs.

This does not follow automatically: often in the past a great deal of wealth has been accumulated thanks to the promotion of the tourist industry, without this being matched by an increase in employment.

There is no legal basis, and we feel that this is currently the major obstacle to any intervention in the tourism sector.

A legal basis translates into the ability to formulate strategies, to coordinate and to programme, all vital factors for making European Union tourism competitive with other markets.

A legal basis would mean we would avoid having to draw on the Structural Funds, as was the case in the past, to obtain some loose change.

Moreover, only minimal amounts were made available to us: we should bear in mind that the Commission communication indicated amounts totalling EUR 4 700 000 000 over the last five years, which corresponds to the cost of building 400 kilometres of motorway.

There is no opportunity to send a strong message to the Member States: recognising the legal basis of tourism would allow the States to acknowledge one of the European Union' s competences which at the moment, is only exercised in fits and starts.

We fully endorse the Community measures which were recommended in the Commission communication: advantageous taxation, that is, fiscal measures that offer conditions that are truly competitive in this market to the production sector - 95% of which, I would point out, is made up of small and medium-sized businesses, which is equivalent to 2 million small and medium-sized businesses in the European tourism sector; it awards special attention to vocational qualifications in the European Union, and therefore to investing in training; finally, it undertakes to make the job market transparent.

The tourism market is by definition a flexible market; we do not want this flexibility to be seen in a solely negative light, with seasonal work being misinterpreted as illegal work: remember that 50% of employment, especially in southern countries of the European Union, is done on the black economy.

We feel that the European Union and the Commission needs to make a strong commitment to sustainable tourism, which means having a strategy that is compatible with the environment, after the excesses of recent years when private wealth often did not correspond to high levels of employment.

First and foremost, we need to compete in terms of quality.

Finally, we consider that tourism can, in addition to being a growth factor, be a factor for democracy, and in this regard we are asking the Commission for a clear, conscious commitment.

Mr President, there are three points I wish to address.

The first is the inclusion of a legal base in the Treaty.

This is something I favour, but currently as part of a minority in my own Group.

We are all fully conscious of the importance of tourism, both to local economies and as a factor of European integration.

The problem for some of us, however, is the lack of specification of the extent of the legal base and of just how it would relate to considerations of subsidiarity.

Second, there are similar issues related to the establishment of a multiannual programme for tourism.

The resolution contains many excellent ideas for the promotion of different types of tourism and for its increasing professionalism.

At the same time the Commission is currently concerned about confining itself to core tasks.

The question has to be asked whether some of the activities suggested in the resolution might not put more pressure on its resources than is desirable.

Third, there are several references in the resolution to permanent employment.

Of course the promotion of this is desirable and permanent employment need not necessarily mean full-time employment.

But there will always be people who are looking for seasonal employment.

We have some concern that the resolution does not give enough consideration to them and to ways in which their interests could receive specific protection.

Thus, while complimenting Mr Viceconte on his report and finding a great deal in the resolution to commend, we shall be asking for a number of split votes to allow these concerns to be addressed.

Mr President, I too believe that tourism has a very important role to play, not just in our European regions, but throughout the world, because it is a great asset when it comes to economic and social development. But it is also a very vulnerable sector, as we recently saw with the oil slick.

A flourishing tourist sector can be totally wiped out by an ecological disaster such as an oil slick.

When it comes to tourism, we can no longer do what we like where we like.

There are huge reserves; certain zones, rural zones, so-called zones lagging behind but which still have unspoilt nature and untouched natural habitats, are listed as having good potential for what we call eco-tourism or green tourism.

This could be developed and provide a large number of new jobs.

But these regions need to take real account of positive and negative experiences in other tourist sectors.

We must not kill the goose that lays the golden egg of tourism.

Tourism must be environmentally friendly if it is to continue to be an asset in the future.

I can think of many mountain regions which are continually spoilt in order to develop a tourist sector.

We have stopped counting the damage and destruction in natural habitats and mountain zones.

I should also like to refer to the darker side of tourism, the tourism exported from the Member States of the European Union. I am referring to sex tourism.

I know that action is being taken against this so-called tourism elsewhere, but we must remember the European Union' s responsibility at this level.

Under no circumstances can we, as responsible politicians, allow what is currently happening to continue, with young girls practically bought in the countries of the East and coming here to be abused on the cheap.

Finally, I should like to refer to the tourism which gives citizens contact with the outside world and democracy.

I am thinking in particular of countries such as Cuba which are isolated but I know, because I have travelled there extensively, that the Cubans who come into contact with tourists can learn something of the outside world, obtain different information and pass on different information.

For all these reasons, I think that reforming the Treaties would allow the huge tourist question, which is an important asset for the whole planet, to be properly integrated.

Mr President, during the most recent meeting of the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism, I was pleasantly surprised.

The opinion of Mr Sánchez García, addressed to the Committee on Constitutional Affairs, contained a remark regarding the IGC.

The draftsman of the opinion held the view that there was no need for a legal foundation for tourism in the Treaty.

This was in contrast to the majority opinion held in the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism.

Having heard many Members who share the view expressed in the opinion, this was a real relief.

Unfortunately, his text has not survived the vote.

It does, however, support my view that I am not, apparently, the only one who cannot agree with the majority opinion.

This brings me to the content of the report.

An important aspect of the tourism industry is employment and potential employment.

Especially in the southern Member States, the tourist industry is a major source of income.

From this vantage point, there is every reason for the government to formulate stimulating measures and a stimulating policy.

The seasonal nature of tourism and the employment fluctuations that this entails also deserve attention.

I am surprised, however, at the fact that many want to achieve this by means of Community policy.

This is not desirable, either from the point of view of tourism itself or the stimulation of employment.

The discrepancies between the different regions can often be traced back to cultural or historical factors.

Within these regions, a huge range of problems have their part to play.

It is obvious that mainly local and regional - and, therefore, to a lesser extent national - authorities are best placed to assess the situation and draft appropriate policy.

For this reason, I cannot therefore endorse the transfer of powers to European level.

In addition, employment policy in general is also a factor.

Here too, the structure of the economy differs for each Member State, and the ways in which the current status has been achieved are diverse.

It will not do for one type of policy, probably with many exceptions and adaptations, to be applied.

This would mean that the EU would unjustly be removing tasks from Member States and that the Brussels bureaucracy would be intervening unnecessarily.

It is preferable for Member States to take measures to stimulate employment themselves.

Their expertise, is, of course, superior to that of the Commission.

This is why I am very hesitant when it comes to formulating Community measures to promote employment. Even in the tourism industry.

It would really be a nuisance if Parliament were to attempt to achieve this unofficially by extending its powers.

Mr President, you will understand that we cannot assent to the present resolution as it stands.

First of all I should like to thank Mr Viceconte for all the work that he has done on this report.

It is a very extensive report.

We greatly welcome it, just as we welcomed the original report that it was based on, the report of the high-level working group which was set up by the European Commission.

I hope that the Commission will not forget that.

Having set it up, I hope the Commission actually makes use of it and therefore does not just allow it to sit around in the corridors and gather dust.

Tourism is basically small businesses and therefore a very fertile area for job creation.

As has already been said in this debate, three million potential new jobs within the next ten years is something well worth going for.

Europe can no longer refuse to give the recognition - both political and in terms of policy-making - that the fastest growing sector of its economy deserves because of its economic and social position.

We need a more dynamic vision based on tourism' s contribution to job creation.

We must recognise a sector that is predominantly engaged in cross-border activity and therefore deserves a European policy with a stimulating, innovative and proactive approach to sustainable business development.

I know the Commissioner is very keen on information technology.

He has convinced me of that.

But his portfolio of information technology and tourism actually go very well together.

There are several reasons why the tourism industry is an ideal test-bed, therefore, for integrating job creation strategies.

Let us look at some of these reasons.

The importance to the economy of tourism and its growth potential is obviously one.

Various sectors of the population are employed by the tourism industry, particularly the more vulnerable groups, such as young people, women and the unskilled.

I am not saying that we do not need to raise the skills within the sector - of course we do - but let us get the jobs established first.

The availability of unskilled, temporary and seasonal work is very important in some of the economic areas of the Community.

Tourism contributes to regional development - in rural areas that are maybe trying to diversify - and tourism contributes to urban areas that aim to raise the profile of their own cultural heritage.

If we take all these aspects together we have the potential of really doing something in Europe and maybe extending the tourism season by staggering holidays right across Europe.

We must not lose sight of the fact that with enlargement we have the potential to increase the number of visitors who come to Europe' s shores to see some of the traditional cultural heritage that has not been opened up to the world for quite a number of years - in fact, about forty years.

I believe we have to do something to make ourselves more competitive.

I hope you will help us.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, today we are addressing a very important sector that directly involves over 10 million jobs in the European Union and helps the more or less disadvantaged, island and remote areas to stand on their own feet.

And of course, tourism creates more jobs and contributes to the stimulation of employment, especially among society' s more sensitive sections: women and young people.

In view of all this, I think it is a serious contradiction that there is no European policy on tourism.

The lack of any legal base makes it impossible to adopt measures relating to the sector.

The occasional application of Article 308 - formerly Article 235 - which requires unanimity, has prevented the adoption of a programme even of only EUR 8 million for five years and 15 Member States.

The measures taken from time to time in the past have been fragmentary and therefore ineffective, and such provisions as have been made were dictated by parallel policies such as consumer protection, environmental policy, transport policy, taxation policy, etc., which very often are not only no help to tourism but on the contrary make it more difficult, since their introduction has usually entailed costs for the tourism industry without regard to its ability to bear them or its incentives to cope with them.

With sorrow, I stress that in the context of restructuring the Commission' s services, tourism is dealt with by a section, not even a directorate, within the Directorate-General for 'Enterprise' .

But we must support our tourism!

In our view, the axes which could create a basis for its support are: the addition of material capital for tourism in the new review which will also constitute a legal base for the sector, the framing of a Community tourism policy to support the sector without disturbing the operation of the tourism market, coordination of the tourism policy with other, parallel Community policies which affect it directly or indirectly, a study of the sector, and the adoption of medium and long-term measures to enhance the competitiveness of tourism as a product.

Mr President, Commissioner, since the issue of employment has been raised, I want to recall another issue which is also very serious, namely the bankruptcies among Tour Operators and their consequences mainly for hotels, which are small or medium enterprises lacking the necessary organisation and access to information that would indicate to them whether or not their contractual partners are trustworthy.

Clearly it is impossible to adopt measures at the national level.

In contrast, at European level it would be possible to look into measures for improving the relations between hotels and Tour Operators, for example a regulation of such relations, the promotion of a special bankruptcy fund, etc., in collaboration with representatives from the two branches.

In the past, the Commission had requested quantitative records of the losses incurred by companies because of such bankruptcies, so that it could form an opinion, and asked the European confederations of hotel-and-restaurant owners and tourist agencies, HOTREC and ECTAA, to work out and draw up a regulation to govern the relations between them.

Since then, however, there has been no progress.

There must therefore be measures to improve the quality and competitiveness of Europe' s tourism and, to the extent of the possible, safeguard the operation of companies.

Such measures must also aim to promote rational use of natural and cultural assets and of the tourism infrastructure, so contributing to the balanced and sustainable development of tourism.

I will end by congratulating Mr Viceconte and, as one who comes from Crete, a tourist area, I ask that we should always view tourism not only in terms of pleasant holidays but as a primary job creator in a Europe which needs those jobs.

Mr President, Commissioner, the new attitude adopted recently by the Commission on this important economic activity is striking to those of us who, in recent years, have kept an eye on tourism and its place in the Community framework.

We all know that this change of heart is basically due to the close cause-effect relationship between tourism and employment. It is also due to the recognition by the European Union, since the 1997 conference on these issues, of the enormous potential, represented by tourism, for employment.

In this respect the Commission communication before us today is opportune, as is the report by Mr Viceconte whom I congratulate.

This report contains 34 conclusions, including 15 calls to the Commission to adopt specific measures and actions without forgetting the environmental dimension and cultural protection, particularly in outermost and island regions. It also contains four calls to the Member States which highlight the need to coordinate actions with the regional authorities and the establishment of measures favourable to tourist-oriented SMEs, particularly in the tax sector and in access to financial instruments.

These would encourage the growth of employment in sectors which use labour intensively, such as the tourist sector.

Finally, once this legal basis to which many of us aspire has been established so that a common tourism policy can be developed, we must be realistic and prepare a strategy on tourism and its relationship with employment, as proposed by the Commission with the support of this House. In this strategy, young people and women, training and quality and the new information society must receive preferential attention.

Mr President, Commissioner, I should like to start by thanking Mr Viceconte for his report, which has drawn our attention to a sector which is all too often underestimated.

Tourism is a social, economic and cultural phenomenon which affects most European citizens, either as the recipients or the providers of a wide variety of services.

Every year, nearly 200 million Europeans leave their homes for a short time in order to travel, usually to other countries in Europe.

Moreover, Europe is still the main destination for tourists from third countries, even though it faces increasingly stiff competition and an increasingly diversified and attractive range of products.

Since the Treaties contain no specific legal basis for a real Community tourism policy, the European Union must help to improve and encourage cooperation in this sector, in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity, in order to take practical advantage of the potential which tourism offers in terms of employment.

Vocational training and a mobile workforce are important tools in the strategy to fight unemployment in Europe especially, as far as tourist service providers are concerned, in meeting multicultural demands and ensuring that services are tailored to customers.

Employment in the tourism sector is often highly seasonal and precarious, thereby hampering its sustainable development.

It is therefore even more urgent that we acquire and disseminate managerial and technological skills in order to promote new means of production and a supply of tourism which reflects market developments as closely as possible.

As the report notes, the adoption by the Member States of tax incentives for SMEs in order to reduce labour costs would be an excellent way of promoting growth in employment in labour-intensive sectors and, consequently, in the tourism sector.

This sector of activity is also a deciding factor in the economic and social development of less favoured regions, especially the most remote and island regions, which have undisputed assets in this area.

Let us not forget that, in the most remote regions, tourism is the most important industry in terms of income.

The income and employment generated by tourism help enormously in reducing imbalances and encouraging their economies to converge with the average rate of growth in the Community.

In addition, tourism can promote a certain cultural and economic rapprochement, insofar as it makes us more aware of other European cultures and thus helps respect for European ways of life to develop.

It goes without saying, therefore, that tourism, developed rationally in the long term, should represent a sustainable source of income for local economies, while safeguarding and enhancing the value of the rural, cultural, historical and environmental heritage.

I should like to close by stressing the essential role which the European Union should play in promoting new forms of tourism in new places which will allow continental Europeans to discover the most far-flung destinations in Europe, namely the most remote regions.

Mr President, we are having a major debate on a text of very little substance. The basic document is really no more than a Commission communication which embraces the conclusions and recommendations of a high level group on tourism and employment.

Not only is there very little substance but this is also a rather old document dating from 28 April 1999 which therefore makes it nearly a year old.

This document stems from the previous Commission. It is undoubtedly the result of work carried out by Commissioner Papoutsis throughout his term of office and which culminated in the Luxembourg summit and his failed Philoxenia programme.

I believe this is the first debate in this House with the new Commission and a new Commissioner, Mr Liikanen, who is of course listening very closely to what we are discussing.

I would take this opportunity to ask him a couple of questions directly.

Firstly, the governments made a commitment at the Maastricht Conference of 1992 to include a legal basis for this issue in the Treaties. This commitment was not fulfilled in the Treaty of Amsterdam of 1997 and is therefore outstanding.

Yet there is a Council resolution from last June on tourism and employment. What expectations does the Commissioner have that the new Intergovernmental Conference which is starting will include this aspect?

My second question is much more direct and perhaps more awkward. Bearing in mind the failed efforts of the last decade, as highlighted by Mr Koch, does Commissioner Liikanen believe that he can do something during his term of office to ensure that the Community dimension of tourism becomes a proper policy, given the importance that all the previous speakers have given to tourism in terms of employment?

Will the Commission present new initiatives in order to see whether, through the constant efforts of the Commission and Parliament, we can gradually convince the Council to do something on this issue?

Mr President, Commissioner, first of all I would like to congratulate the rapporteur, Mr Viceconte, who spoke at such length on the tangible possibility, for the fifteen Member States of the Union, of creating jobs by way of a sensible policy, a sensible European Union initiative in this field.

This very afternoon we have had a debate on workers who suddenly find themselves unemployed. We now hope to be able to solve these problems.

Tourism is an activity that falls decidedly and fundamentally within the competence of the European Union.

All the European States are known throughout the world for being tourist magnets envied by all, including the United States of America, which we spoke about this afternoon with regard to the native Americans.

I would like to stress one point in the Viceconte report which I welcome and particularly support, and which I would like the House and the Commission to reflect on before giving a favourable response.

It regards tourism for senior citizens.

I usually see Commissioner Diamantopoulou desperately tearing her hair out, bit by bit, because the elderly live too long, leading to problems with pension payments.

However, in this case, the fact that we are living longer means that there are more senior citizens.

Unfortunately not all, but many of them travel the world to see its marvels and to discover and learn more about it: Italians want to see what the English are like, the Greeks want to see what the Turks are like and the French want to see their Italian cousins.

Tourism brings the peoples of the fifteen States and of the entire world closer together, and of course, it leads to peace and understanding.

This kind of tourism, which is undertaken mainly by large numbers of senior citizens, is just as important.

This type of tourism must be promoted and supported because it allows people to work in tourist destinations, not just during the summer when we go swimming in the sea, for example, but also during winter when we go to take the air.

Senior citizens are always on holiday, all year round, from 1 January through to 31 December because they do not work and do not have just one month off during the year.

Unfortunately, this is not true of them all, but this is why I am calling on the Commission to follow up on the Viceconte report.

Mr President, I would first like to thank the rapporteur, Mr Viceconte and congratulate him on the report.

I think we all acknowledge the economic, social and environmental importance of tourism in today' s developed Europe and its great potential for growth and employment.

I am glad to see that the Commission and Parliament are converging towards the same goal in this area.

Employment issues are at present the core concern regarding tourism.

An essential condition in order to make good progress in the work in this respect is that the cooperation with Member States and the industry and with other partners be as fruitful as possible.

This will determine the success of our work.

Certainly the Commission will seek good coordination with national employment policies.

This will also be important with a view to the special summit in March, where tourism is bound to be mentioned as a significant contributor to employment.

Coordination of Community tourism activities with other important issues such as regional policies, transport, employment, environment, culture and competition must strongly involve Member States and the tourism industry itself.

As far as specific policies are concerned, I would like to pinpoint just one on which the draft resolution focuses - regional policy.

The Commission guideline document for the new structural fund' s programming period has already identified tourism as one of the areas with particular potential for employment creation through competitive enterprises.

The Commission expects Member States to put increased emphasis on tourism measures in their plans and programming.

Quality, sustainability, innovation are at the forefront of the Commission' s own policy and are priorities recognised by the Council of Ministers.

Quality products in order to improve competitiveness, sustainability in order to protect resources and innovation in particular through the use of information technologies.

Regarding sustainability indicators, the European Environment Agency is already working with the Commission on the issue.

I want to mention, as has already been mentioned by many speakers today, that tourism related to the natural and cultural heritage is expected to be the fastest expanding form of tourism in the EU during the next two decades.

These possibilities should be fully exploited.

Mr Provan said that I often talk a lot about tourism and information technology.

I am personally convinced that information and communication technologies will be a key competitiveness and innovation factor for European tourism.

The travel and tourism sector is the front-runner in making use of ICT tools.

This will dramatically change the way it operates.

Marketing, reservation and transport are expected to be the areas of profoundest change and improvement.

Use of ICT opens a completely new dimension in the context of travel and tourism.

Direct business to consumer contact will supplement, and sometimes also reduce, the currently, nearly exclusive business to business relationship.

It will give more and better choice to tourists and generate new and better tourist products.

For the Commission this requires that action in the tourism field must be tightly linked to measures promoting the take-up of information communication technology by the tourism industry, in particular by the innovation and innovative society technological programmes which are both within my competence.

The new strategy outlined by the Commission communication on tourism and employment, and agreed by the Council, places the emphases on tourism gathering and disseminating information and good practice.

The implementation of the directive on statistics aims at improving the knowledge of market structures and trends in European tourism and its industry.

Commission decisions have advanced the methodological approach. The report on the experience acquired in the work carried out under this directive is part of our work programme for the current year.

More work on the social and economic impact of tourism is currently on-going with the international organisations, such as the World Tourism Organisation.

The European Community' s prime role is to ensure a framework which enables and encourages stakeholders and authorities at all levels to optimise and realise the tourism sector' s potential for growth and employment.

Such a European strategy will be achieved through building on the commitment by Member States and the Commission to cooperate in a number of priority areas: exchange and dissemination of information, notably through new technologies; training in order to upgrade skills, quality of tourist products and sustainable development in tourism.

In the autumn the Commission will report back on the progress made in this respect.

A report on the work to be undertaken, together with the Member States and the tourism industry should be available in about two years from now.

Depending on the results of this work, a wider debate could then take place which might well be the starting-point for even more comprehensive policy initiatives.

Mr Medina Ortega asked me some very concrete questions.

As regards the role of tourism policy in the communities concerned, we must understand that many policy sectors have a huge impact on the framework on tourism.

It is not only the targeted, specific tourism actions which are important but the other horizontal actions in the field of transport.

At the moment, the question of congestion of air and roads is the fundamental problem.

In the area of environment, we are looking at ways to cooperate with Mrs Wallström; in the area of regional policy Mr Barnier is giving a lot of attention to this sector.

We need to have this streamlined approach on tourism which covers all the policies.

I am sure that we will improve on that in the future when we have had a good high-level working group report, your support with your report here and also when the tourism sector is part of enterprise policy.

Why is it so important in that sector?

It is because the key emphasis on the enterprise policy will be how to help to create new enterprises; how to make it easier for young people and women to create their own enterprises.

That is where the potential is.

If we can eliminate the obstacles to make it cheaper to create new enterprises, to facilitate the access to financing and to change the attitude of society to be more positive entrepreneurship, I am sure the tourism sector will be the first to benefit from this.

There is one problem that I hesitate to mention today as I am new in the sector.

I have been working now in all industrial and service sectors, but when you look at the organisational structure in tourism it is almost impossible.

It is very difficult for a Commissioner to try to work in an area where there are dozens of different organisations whose representativeness needs to be ascertained every time.

To strengthen the role of tourism in Europe, the organisations should do what has happened in most economic sectors: seek better focus, better coordination and concentrated activities.

Then we could have a solid dialogue in our everyday work.

That is the real difficulty which we must overcome.

As far as the Treaty is concerned, the intergovernmental conference started this week so we do not know the results yet.

I want to be very candid: I have not seen much enthusiasm about that conference or the proposal to enlarge the powers of the EU.

Tourism is also in the list of subjects which do not figure as new areas of competence for the EU.

We will see what happens but at the moment that seems to be the case.

Finally, the Commission welcomes the resolution which continues the line of the high-level group, the Commission communication on enhancing tourism' s potential for employment and the corresponding Council conclusions.

The general agreement between both institutions in this field must not keep the Commission from following the most pragmatic approach in achieving our common objectives.

The vote will take place tomorrow at 9 a.m.

(The sitting was closed at 7.40 p.m.)

Adoption of the Minutes of the previous sitting

The Minutes of yesterday' s sitting have been distributed.

Mr President, yesterday' s Minutes will naturally indicate interventions referring to the so-called 'Strasbourg Declaration" which intends to implicate the European Parliament in certain considerations which would literally lead to the conclusion that I am a Nazi.

This declaration - which, as I have said, implicates the European Parliament, although no such declaration was put before this Parliament - is a completely unacceptable form of manipulation.

I thank the President, Mrs Fontaine, who just yesterday expressed her opinion by refuting the implication of this House.

Mr President, as well as discrediting the PNV, Eusko Alkartasuna and the democratic government of the Basque Country - who have the kind of attitude which, in the case of Ireland, deserved the Nobel prize - by calling them Nazis, the declaration insults representatives of the European citizens - as in my case: I represent a section of Galician society - by saying that we are more dangerous than the Nazis, and insults groups which are clearly democratic, with decades of history, in an unacceptable and crazy way, which I would like to condemn here and now.

I would like these words to be heard, because the European Parliament cannot be implicated in this way in a crazy declaration which I consider to be totally unacceptable.

Thank you, Mr Nogueira, for your explanation.

I would remind you that questions on the Minutes should refer to the Minutes.

In any event, for those Members who not aware of the President' s position, I will read the official communication and it will thereby appear in today' s Minutes:

"On 17 February, Mrs Nicole Fontaine, President of the European Parliament, received as guests, at their request, the representatives of the Forum d' Ermua.

The Spanish Vice-Presidents of the European Parliament were represented.

Following this interview, the representatives of this Forum presented her with a text entitled "Strasbourg Declaration" . The President wishes to specify that under no circumstances does she sanction the terms of this "declaration" .

I therefore believe that the issue is totally cleared up.

Mr President, I would like to request a correction to the Minutes regarding the vote on Amendment No 5 of the Swoboda report.

Please note that Mr Michel Raymond, Mr Jean Saint-Josse and I voted against this amendment.

We take note and this will appear in the Minutes.

Mr President, this is not exactly a point of order but concerns a communication we have before us today, namely that the Conference of Presidents open to Members, which was scheduled for 23 February, has now been cancelled.

We should consider on principle whether there is any point at all in holding these kinds of meetings.

I have the feeling they are just another compulsory exercise we have to perform.

We can just as easily find out what happened from the newspapers.

That would be more productive and I do not like seeing the various committee agendas that are already overloaded being cut again and again because of this kind of show-piece.

So I think we should consider simply abolishing these meetings once and for all.

Mr Bösch, I take note of your observation but, clearly, we hold this type of Conference of Presidents, open to all MEPs at the original request of the MEPs, so that they may participate in some of them.

Surely we should be more selective.

In any event, the Bureau will consider your suggestion.

Mr President, we should like to request that the last sentence of Amendment No 2 which reads: 'also calls on the Member States to promote tourism for the elderly' be incorporated into Paragraph 25, which deals specifically with social tourism, after: 'tourism for organised social groups...'.

We think its inclusion there would be both more appropriate and more effective.

Mr President, the subsidiarity principle is one of the fundamental principles underlying cooperation in the European Union.

It is high time it was properly evaluated and that a system was set up which clearly identifies the EU's areas of competence.

A criticism which is often levelled at the EU and which, to some extent, is justified is that it is involved in far too many areas.

One such area is tourism which, by its very nature, is very much a national concern.

In so far as tourism falls within the political domain, it should be at national, regional and local level.

Tourism is a major source of employment and has a role to play as regards the EU's financial support for less well-off regions.

Even in that respect, any cooperation should, however, be carried out according to the subsidiarity principle.

Because tourism can also have a harmful impact on the environment, there needs to be a strategy for damage limitation.

However, such a strategy should come within the framework of environmental policy.

The report laments the lack of a legal basis for a policy on tourism.

However, the Swedish Christian Democrats would oppose any such development as we believe that tourism is a matter with which the European Union should only be marginally concerned.

. (DA) Tourism is a significant source of international understanding and an important part of the labour market, which ought to be promoted and encouraged.

It is of inestimable importance that people in Europe, as well as in the rest of the world, should have the opportunity to experience each other' s ways of ordering their lives and their societies.

Policy on tourism is not, however, something which ought to be planned and decided upon by the European Parliament or by the EU as a whole.

I am therefore voting against the proposal.

Mr President, before we begin our discussion, as an Italian MEP - and I believe I also speak on behalf of all Italian MEPs - I should like to condemn the position taken yesterday by the German Chancellor, who interfered in Italian internal affairs, when he threatened that Europe would intervene if any neo-fascists became members of the government.

Fortunately, the Italian Government and the President of the Republic intervened, and today the Italian Ambassador to Germany will also speak on the subject, to call on the German Chancellor not to interfere in Italian internal affairs, in so far as there are no neo-fascist candidates for government office.

We would like to thank the President of the Republic, as well as the Government and all the politicians who spoke and we too, in this House, would also call on the German Chancellor not to intervene in Italian internal affairs.

Mr Tajani will accept that it is a little difficult to understand the relationship between his intervention and the points of order, but I understand his political meaning.

We will proceed to the debate itself and Mr Monti will take the floor on behalf of the Commission.

The next item is the debate on the oral question (B5-0010/2000) tabled by Mr Hatzidakis, on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism, to the Commission, on European postal services.

Mr President, the postal sector continues to be an area in which old, outdated monopolies are allowed to operate regardless of the requirements of competition.

And, in the absence of any energetic action by the Commission, the situation has gone on for far too long.

The EU' s competition authority has intervened in all other areas, but not in the postal sector.

We have now been waiting in vain for 18 months for the Commission to put forward proposals, so I should be grateful if the Commissioner could let me know today when we are likely to have a new, modern Europe-wide postal system.

One of the EU' s most important tenets is the need for a common internal market.

We are currently working hard to enlarge this to include ever more Member States.

That requires greater efficiency which, in turn, is dependent on competition.

Today, one area after another is being compelled to introduce deregulation and liberalisation, an exercise in which the EU often leads the way, while the Commission's determination to make progress serves as a model.

The Commission is committed to liberalisation because experience has shown that the old monopolies are unable to provide the efficient service which a modern society expects.

It is also because liberalisation is necessary in order to be able to keep up with technological advances and, moreover, because it will lead to lower prices.

All that, we are assured, will be more easily attained in a free and competitive market.

It has been done in a number of different areas but, unfortunately, the postal sector has remained the one major exception until now.

It can hardly be because customers are satisfied.

We are all familiar with the much-criticised price hikes, and delayed deliveries are a constant topic of discussion.

If we really want a functioning internal market, we cannot go on constantly making an exception of the postal services.

A number of countries have been in the forefront of introducing more competitive postal services.

The Netherlands, Finland and Sweden have travelled furthest along this road.

During the 1990s, they were able to show the benefits that could be achieved.

Moreover, Sweden has introduced the changes gradually in a climate of political consensus.

The process should be allowed to continue and be given the necessary encouragement.

Experience has shown that the old monopolies cannot provide the type of efficient service which, as customers, we are all entitled to expect.

Prior to this discussion, a letter was sent out by supporters of the old monopolies.

They hold up Sweden as a warning, which might be appropriate in certain instances, but not as regards postal services.

It is alleged in a circular that the price of postage has gone up by 59 per cent since liberalisation in 1993.

That is true as long as account is taken of the 20 per cent of the total postal services market where, in practice, there is still a monopoly, that is where the state is the only player.

However, for the 80 per cent of services where there is a competitive market, prices have fallen.

That shows that competition really is working.

My conclusion is therefore: make sure that there is competition in the remaining 20 per cent of the market, too.

It is against just such a background that more and more people are calling for ...

(The speaker is interrupted by Mr Markov) I thought I had the floor.

Perhaps we can discuss this later on.

However, I should like to affirm that it is exactly as I said, namely, that prices have fallen in areas where there is competition, whereas they have risen where there is still a monopoly.

That is why I should now like to see a Commission that takes the necessary initiatives and sees to it that there is effective competition in the postal sector.

Mr Markov, in five or six minutes time, you will be allowed a few minutes to speak.

I would be grateful if you would not interrupt other Members.

Mr President, there is a mystery.

What happened to the Postal Services Directive that was passed on 15 December 1997?

There has been a deafening silence from the Commission during the period between then and now.

I am sorry it is Commissioner Monti who is here today.

I am very fond of him.

He is one of the more diligent and hard working commissioners.

It is a pity I cannot say the same for some of his other colleagues.

There has, over this period, been no real progress on the Postal Services Directive.

Commissioner Monti stated that part of the reason for this was the organisation and reallocation of duties.

For over a year the old Commission could have done some work on this.

We really have not progressed very far.

However, since Commissioner Monti is here, I would like him to take a message back to Commissioner Bolkestein telling him what the Postal Services Directive was about.

It was about gradual liberalisation; it was about a guaranteed universal service at an affordable price; it was about direct mail and cross-border mail remaining in the reserved sector.

These issues were fundamental in that report and they should be fundamental in any forthcoming directive.

The postal service is not just for Christmas.

In the area in Scotland I come from it is much more than just a postal service.

It is about keeping communities together.

The postal service is also the bus service.

The postal service is also the social service.

The postal service is also the doctor.

If we allow the postal services to drift into complete privatisation then we will lose all that and many of our local communities - we were voting earlier on tourism - will lose their tourist trade.

That message must be taken back from here today.

The Commission must listen to it.

Mr President, we are in favour of liberalising the Union' s postal services.

This should first of all stand for better service.

This is the intention and it must be the ultimate goal.

Liberalisation began because there was doubt regarding the structure of the postal services and the value of a monopoly.

Is a monopoly flexible enough in a market where the customer' s requirements and the market situation can change very rapidly, because, for example, the use of electronic data carriers has increased dramatically?

The question is, therefore: what are the demands that a monopoly or part of a service which is governed by a monopoly needs to meet?

Most Member States have been putting the brakes on, and I am pleased to note that, in my country, the new government has at long last completed something which should have been done a long time ago, and that the Belgian postal services and the Belgian government are now taking measures to ensure that the postal services are ready - at least partly ready - by 2003 to be able to stand up to the competition.

As you can see, as a new MEP, I am trying to get to grips with the dossier and I must admit that I have great difficulty doing so.

I have found a number of studies which were commissioned by the European Commission at the time, and I am also coming across documents from Post-Europe which claims that these studies are inaccurate and that the basis on which these were carried out is incorrect.

I think that the Commission could have been more pro-active on this score and could have also provided us with the studies which it had promised to give us and which we had requested.

As far as I know, that has still not happened.

I would therefore ask you, Commissioner, to help me in my task as a new Member.

Like Mr Miller, I would welcome an explanation from you regarding the implementation of the 1997 directive within the next couple of months or weeks or, if at all possible, within the next couple of days.

My second point concerns the universal provision of services. What is happening on this score, how much does it cost, how does it work, how do you intend to organise it and what proposals do you have?

I would welcome more concrete information on this.

Apparently, the postal service is a very strong lobby and rightly so.

There are hundreds of thousands of people who earn their living at the Post Office.

Moreover - and Mr Miller has already pointed this out - it will surely not be the end of the world if the postman no longer comes round, even in my country, however densely populated it may be.

But in Belgium too, there are a great number of people, older people for example, who only see one other person in the day and that is the postman.

We should not overlook this fact: postal service is about more than just ferrying around letters and parcels.

The postal service is also extremely important to companies.

A study has shown that 90% of the postal traffic is between companies and only 10% between individuals.

What exactly do you intend to liberalise?

I would like more information on this, because the key question is how you can better serve the customer using the existing services.

There are postal companies which have a monopoly and are doing a reasonably good job.

We need to protect this type of arrangement and denounce other things.

Mr President, Commissioner, this morning on French national radio, I heard that liberalisation of the French postal service was now only a matter of days or hours away and that it was irreparable, like the developments with our neighbours in Sweden, the Netherlands and Germany.

This concerns us deeply and that is why we requested this debate today.

The Commission is committed to a universal postal service, as the European Parliament has shown on several occasions, the postal service is actually, as some speakers have already mentioned, a key factor in social and territorial cohesion.

In this connection I should like to ask one of our Swedish MEPs for an opinion of the study which has been carried out and which shows that in fact in the most remote areas of Sweden the postal service was rather poor in terms of distribution.

That is not the sort of postal service that we want.

The economic value of the postal service was recognised by the Treaty of Amsterdam and we consider that it goes far beyond the distribution of mail.

It is the service which remains closest to the citizens and which we call a 'public service' , which makes it possible for everyone resident within European territory to receive the service, and this entitlement must remain an acquired right, an acquis communautaire.

The matter of the European Union' s recognition of a high-quality postal service, available to all, remains valid today, and we are increasingly concerned.

That is why today we are asking not to have any nasty surprises in the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism come Monday.

Let us point out that Parliament' s positions were clearly defined and that the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance supported them.

This resolution of 14 January 1999 required that, prior to undertaking any liberalisation of this key sector, involving 1.7 million employees after all, the Commission should provide impact studies for this liberalisation.

Well, we are not convinced that the studies currently available make it possible to implement this liberalisation right now and we are concerned because it is well known that liberalisation without impact studies would cause thousands of job losses, something we certainly do not want.

We value our public service, our universal postal service, because we know, and here too we are acting as representatives of the citizens, that the citizens value this service and the Commission undertook, during Mr Bolkestein' s hearing, to maintain this universal service throughout the European Union.

I shall not repeat all the various statements he made at his hearing, I think we all still remember them.

We further maintain that we are waiting for this proper evaluation before any definitive decision, as stipulated in the directive and the revision of the 1997 directive.

We shall not accept a date for the liberalisation of all activities in the postal sector until the Commission has offered us a guarantee that the universal service will be integrated into this directive and that the public postal service will be maintained in the States which consider this service essential to the citizen.

Mr President, I share the view that we need to make more progress from the point of view of efficiency and the analysis of the cost-effectiveness of the services offered.

But as an entrepreneur myself, I really cannot understand why it is always assumed this can only be done under the headings of "privatisation" and "liberalisation"!

Or perhaps people are not concerned with creating the same conditions of access to the postal services for all, but are thinking only of the capital employment conditions for companies in large conglomerations.

Members should however represent all the citizens, which means it is their duty to think not in terms of business management but in terms of the national economy.

In practice that means the following for the postal services: firstly, priority must be given to employment.

I have nothing against liberalisation and privatisation, but the premises must be right.

Secondly, we must guarantee that the citizens are not faced with reduced postal services.

Examples in Germany and Sweden show that this certainly is a risk.

Mr Stenmarck, Sweden is the only country in which prices rose far higher after liberalisation than in all the other Member States of the European Union.

So that is another potential effect and one that we must prevent.

Thirdly, it is vital to have, first of all, a universal postal service at an affordable price for all citizens, wherever they may be; secondly, to have a uniform price for all Member States; and thirdly, to have daily mail deliveries and collections on working days.

On the question of the cost-effectiveness of the various postage weights, it is worth considering further price cuts; but that is what the postal administration itself is saying.

We do not have to adhere to a weight of over 300g when the analysis shows that we need to ensure a minimum weight of 150g to make it at all worthwhile.

In that respect I believe it was right and important to hold this debate today, to make Mr Bolkestein aware of Parliament' s position and allow him to take certain aspects into account from the outset.

Mr President, the 1997 directive, issued on 21 January 1998, which undertook the partial liberalisation of postal services in Europe, envisaged a revision at a later date, in a rather convoluted manner, indeed, since it was to be dealt with in a Commission proposal by the end of 1998, then decided by 1 January 2000, to come into force finally by 1 January 2003.

Well, for the time being, the revision has not got off the starting block.

The two initial phases were not observed which, logically, ought to compromise the third.

My first question is this: surely the scheduled time limits were too short in any case?

It is really not possible to see how the Commission could by the end of 1998, as stipulated by Article 7 of the directive, have evaluated the effects of a text which came into force in February of the same year.

Moreover, the Commission was also not able to provide the implementation report which, according to Article 23, it was to submit by 31 December 2000.

Should we complain about this delay?

If the Commission actually did have convincing evidence in support of taking liberalisation forwards, no one doubts that it would present it without delay.

For its part, the European Parliament, which had fought hard to ensure that the 1997 directive was balanced and respected the requirements of a universal public service, is rather satisfied to see that the compromise it obtained then is proving to be tenable.

In these circumstances, it is quite reasonable for this House to express concern today, asking an oral question which urges the Commission to show the definite and unquestionable feasibility studies which to date no one has seen.

What are the scenarios for development and the potential risks?

The main risk is that the Commission, without adequate justification, might upset the balance which exists now by proposing to go swiftly on to a second phase of liberalisation which would, in some countries, throw off balance the funding of the universal postal service, making it unmanageable.

Today, following the 1997 compromise, Member States can give public monopolies responsibility for the postal service involving mail and parcels whose distribution cost is less than five times the basic tariff, with a weight of less than 350 grammes.

It may be supposed, for example, as Commissioner Bolkestein gave us to understand during his hearing on 6 September last year, that the Commission might propose reducing these limits to 50 grams and two and a half times the basic tariff.

This solution would not, in our opinion, be a fair one and indeed the Commission would have no irrefutable figures to support it.

But, unfortunately, we are aware since Seattle that the Commission has no need of a proper assessment of the previous stage before proposing that we go rapidly on to the next stage.

The second scenario, which we prefer: to defer the revision and maintain the current situation until such time as we do actually have a proper, detailed objective study of the effects of the 1997 directive.

In saying that, we are not seeking to protect monopolies whose pernicious effects we are already familiar with, but we wish to be certain that it is possible to combine the gradual evolution of the organisations with maintaining the key principles of public service.

Finally, the Union for a Europe of Nations Group wonders if the idea of foisting unified management rules on the postal services of the fifteen Member States might not be, essentially, flawed.

In France, for example, the unequal distribution of the population over a vast territorial area makes the obligation to provide a public service absolutely indispensable in mail distribution if one wishes to maintain the equality of citizens and social cohesion.

But other countries, in other situations, may have alternative analyses.

In our opinion, each one must be free to make its own organisational choices.

In fact, Article 86 of the EC Treaty, formerly Article 90, stipulates that services of general economic interest are subject to the rules on competition only insofar as the application of such rules does not obstruct the performance of the particular tasks assigned to them.

Who established the limit beyond which this public service mission is compromised?

Our answer is clear: it is not the Commission nor even the Council or the European Parliament, but the people of each Member State by democratic procedures.

To wish to proceed in any other way would be to distort the spirit of our institutions.

Mr President, we are currently in the first phase of transposition of Directive 97/67/CE on postal services and I am terribly afraid that a new phase of liberalisation might be reflected in a significant reduction in the public service offered.

During Mr Bolkestein' s hearing, my colleague Véronique Mathieu asked for an undertaking "that any new proposals, once these are known, should be the subject of impact studies to determine the implications of this liberalisation programme before these provisions are adopted."

Do we have the results of this impact study?

As you know, we members of the EDD Group, are in favour, along with others, of rural life, maintaining employment, and social cohesion in rural areas, a cohesion reinforced by high quality universal public service.

Most assuredly I would like to be able to say that the examples I observe every day in my own country and in my own region, a very rural one, convince me that we can safely proceed to a new phase of liberalisation.

Unfortunately, this is not the case and currently, by merging the start of the application of the European directive and the application of the 35-hour law, which is purely French, but also by changing the working time criteria, such as the 1 700 objects per hour to be handled per workstation as opposed to 1 400, as previously, in our rural areas we can observe either a reduction in public opening hours or a threat that some post offices will be closed.

This is already an intolerable withdrawal of the public service.

I have here the local paper for my municipality, which reads, "The manager of the post office wishes to inform the local population that as of 3 January 2000" - you can see how topical this is - "the last collection will take place at 3.45 p.m. instead of at 4.30 p.m. as at present."

So you can appreciate why I am afraid of a phase of extensive liberalisation, and a package of measures which will entail a new wave of depopulation.

As you know, in our country, each village has its own local post office or at least a post box, with a collection every day.

The postman is not just a simple mail distribution operative but also the only social link with the local residents.

So he delivers money too, and sometimes even medicines, thus making it possible for isolated elderly people to be supported in living at home.

If postal services are liberalised in a poorly regulated way, more post offices will be closed, in the name of this infamous profitability, which is often the cause of rural regression.

Once again, Europe is distancing itself from its poorest and most vulnerable inhabitants.

They will be told that they are too expensive, without drawing any comparison with other social services such as police and health services but also sports and cultural services, where lack of profitability is scarcely admitted in urban areas.

Everyone is free to choose their lifestyle.

They should be able to do so without compromising their equal opportunities and equal treatment.

In sport the saying goes, "Do not change a winning team."

Why should we wish to change a system which is satisfactory?

The universal service will be able to fulfil its social mission only if it retains an area of monopoly enabling it to balance its budget.

We cannot afford to make a mistake, for we know for a fact that we shall not be able to turn the clock back and that in the event of an imbalance, the firm will know how to tackle it: jobs will be lost, services will be reduced, the dead wood will be removed and we already know which areas will be considered dead wood.

We are told we should change the limit from 350 grammes to 150 grammes, or even 50 grammes.

But the 200 grammes that make up the difference will be seized upon by many private and therefore profitable bodies.

So, once again, why not leave things as they are and allow the public service to fund itself and to guarantee the annual excess cost of its operations in the public interest, valued in France, by Senator Larcher, as it happens, at FF 8 billion?

If revenue is lost, then public interest operations will be revised and cut, and again it is in rural areas that the most swingeing cuts will be made.

What we should do now, I feel, is wait, particularly until we know the economic and social impact of one phase of liberalisation before taking the risk of destabilising an entire section of our universal public service, which many of our fellow citizens still value highly.

Mr President, I am one of those who agree that it is appropriate that this particular service should be regulated at European level.

If people are to be free to provide services across borders it is only fair and reasonable that we should have European regulations to govern it.

In Ireland some services are provided by companies from outside Ireland, for example, English companies certainly operate there.

But this directive has never been transposed into national law.

It is the job of the Commission to ensure that national governments take account of their legal obligations under European law and transpose European directives.

That has not been done in Ireland although a certain liberalisation has taken place and has not been impeded by the national government.

A small segment of our market has been taken over by private operators.

But the need for common legislation is underlined by the fact that in the Netherlands they have liberalised, in Germany they have not, yet German companies which enjoy the protection of national law seek to take market share in the Netherlands.

This is another example of the importance of moving forward with common legislation and ensuring that it is put into effect throughout the Union.

I come from a rural area.

I support the principle of liberalising and the right of everybody to compete and I recognise the benefits that common regulation and liberalisation has brought over the years.

For example it has enabled us to fly from peripheral parts of the European Union to the centre for a fraction of the cost of 20 years ago.

I remember when people came into this House lobbying us in the national interest not to allow this liberalisation.

We allowed it and the result is that our young people can travel and broaden their education.

Our older people, even though on social welfare, can enjoy the benefits of travel.

So liberalisation has taken a lot of parasites off our back in many areas and enabled many people to enjoy higher standards of living.

On the other hand this is not a free market without limits and if you come from a rural area you recognise that some services in the free market situation cannot and will not be provided.

So, the Commission, in bringing forward their new proposals, must remember those sparsely populated rural areas and not put anything in this legislation which will deprive those areas of the opportunities of having those services.

In rural areas, for many years, even before the Irish Free State came into existence, we sometimes had this service of a post office.

Today, it is probably the only public service in many remote areas and people are concerned that European legislation will eventually make it difficult to maintain it.

I want to underline the fact that the existing legislation protects rather than threatens the right of every citizen in every remote area to have this service.

But complaints are made by private individuals about social welfare being paid in the post offices in Ireland.

I want the Commission to recognise that this is a necessary social service.

It should go hand in hand with our postal services in rural areas.

We must implement what the directive insists on, that the postal service is available to everybody.

Mr President, Commissioner, besides the fact that the postal services doubtless play an extremely important part in providing employment, they are very helpful in the effort to achieve the cohesion we all want so much and which is a basic reason for the European Union' s existence.

As is known, the Commission should already, before the end of 1998, have tabled new proposals for a revision of the Postal Services Directive 97/67, guaranteeing the continued provision of a universal service, securing its economic viability, and regulating the gradual liberalisation of the postal services market while taking into account the consequences of this for all those involved, including postal workers and customers.

To that end, the Commission has commissioned studies on the cost of universal services, the consequences of liberalising cross-border mail and direct mail, the consequences of reducing weight and cost limits in the reserved sector, the consequences of liberalising the other phases of the postal process, excluding distribution, and an overall appraisal of the results of those studies.

Mr President, we are therefore wondering, and we ask the Commission - although, of course, Mr Bolkestein is not here, but Mr Monti is a man of many parts and I think he may have a view on this: should those studies not examine the economic and social impact of the various liberalisation scenarios envisaged on each, and I repeat, on each one of the European Union' s Member States?

The postal services in Greece, Great Britain, the Netherlands or Belgium are, of course, all different.

With liberalisation, how will it be possible for the universal postal service to be funded and to operate correctly in a country such as my own, Greece, with its particular geographical features and its numerous, small but inhabited islands?

How can a universal service provider in my country survive with the liberalisation of cross-border mail which amounts to approximately 25%, as opposed to less than 5% in other countries?

How are we to deal with the transfer of the national post office' s business abroad?

We have just heard Mr McCartin on the subject.

It will most certainly be necessary, we say, because of the technological developments that simplify this transfer and thereby make it more profitable, to determine the further gradual and controlled liberalisation by setting weight and price limits.

But what will those limits be?

Are we naively to grant 'freelance' enterprises the right to operate selectively and therefore circumvent the weight limit very easily since the content of letters cannot, of course, be checked?

In any event, we ask the Commission to lay its cards on the table and put forward its proposals, having examined the ultimate foreseeable development of the matter from every aspect and for all the Member States.

It is self-evident that liberalisation is not an end in itself, but only a means towards improving services.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, the planned liberalisation of the traditional national postal services raises the inevitable question as to what the postal services will consider their core business to be in the future. In other words, what will the postal services be prepared to do themselves, what will they want to do together in international cooperation and what will they no longer provide?

This question should be answered in light of the fact that the age-old monopoly has de facto been undermined by all kinds of courier companies and by technological developments, such as fax and e-mail.

But then again, the central theme of the liberalisation of the postal services is employment.

Past experiences have sufficiently shown that early retirement schemes and voluntary redundancy schemes often have an undesired effect.

I would remind you of the fact that the Belgian telephone company had to recall employees who had been sent into retirement in order to prevent too much know-how and expertise from disappearing from the company.

Once again, the point of discussion in the liberalisation of the postal services will no doubt be a reduction in the workforce.

One should, however, be very aware of the fact that if people are encouraged to apply for voluntary redundancy, the company will primarily lose those people who already work under pressure or who can easily find employment elsewhere, in other words, they are often the people which the company in question needs.

In my opinion, it would be a sign of well-thought-out human resource management if the Commission were to share a number of these concerns, so as to ensure that a sensitive sector such as the postal service is liberalised with minimum impact on social conditions.

Mr President, postal services and post offices seem to be very topical in Parliament at the moment and rightly so, given their importance.

Only last week, in the UK parliament at Westminster the newly-elected MP from our European Free Alliance partners, Plaid Cymru, the party of Wales, made his maiden speech on that subject.

The Scottish parliament too recently had a debate with particular reference to the role which post offices, especially in rural areas, play in service provision and the sustainability of rural communities.

Liberalisation is not the only potential threat to post office services.

Post office outlets in Scotland, as we have heard, handle much more than just mail delivery.

Traditionally they have been used by governments and some local authorities as an agency for the payment of state pensions and other benefits as well as a local collection centre for house rents, local taxes and so on. But as the modernisation of public financial systems leads to more and more electronic cash movements straight to and from bank accounts, so the viability of rural post offices is being threatened.

If a rural post office closes, usually with the only local shop attached, then a major threat to community sustainability and to social inclusion can result.

Instead of allowing post office outlets to be undermined by liberalisation or by the modernisation of systems, governments, and the Commission too, should be encouraging and supporting the extensive network of post office outlets and viewing these as an asset which can be built upon, providing public information and services from a location which is convenient for residents.

Mr President, the task of the post office is to ensure that, every day, the post is delivered everywhere, be it in the city or in remote, rural areas, at the same tariff.

For 150 years, the postal services have been a public affair and, as such, just like public transport and the power supply, a core task of the national governments.

Such recognisable and useful core tasks give the electorate a reason to vote.

They are much less interested in a government which takes no interest in these affairs.

I once heard a Christian Democratic politician make the following comment in a Dutch village: "The postal service belongs to us all; taking it away from us is tantamount to theft" .

The existing postal companies no longer fall under democratic control and room is being made for competitors.

The newcomers are only interested in those parts of the work that generate high profits at low cost and low prices.

They can be the cheapest for a while only by means of a drop in quality for their customers and employees.

Such companies have always been around, but they used to be banned, whereas these days they are being heralded as progress.

The end result will be that existing companies will also be forced into bad practices.

They will get their workforce to do more work at lower wages.

They will often do fewer home deliveries, charge more for retaining post during the holidays, close down a large number of the post office branches and, ultimately, the tariffs for the individual will sharply increase, at which point the only parties which will stand to benefit from this type of practice will be companies which conclude collective agreements at a lower tariff.

It is time we stopped this trend.

A fault confessed is half redressed.

We are better off with one democratically controlled monopoly than the waste and chaos brought on by competition which cannot be controlled.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, people used to be summoned to demonstrations by letter or telegram; nowadays this is done by e-mail and via websites!

Incidentally, many thanks to Mr Scharping, the Chairman of the European Social Democrats, for withdrawing the call to take part in demonstrations in Austria from his homepage and therefore not advising anarchists in favour of violent action to go to Vienna tomorrow.

It is clear that electronic mail, electronic commerce is going to become extremely important in the future.

I also see this as offering special potential for the existing postal service.

We know that until the year 2002 it will not be possible to fill some 1.2 million jobs in the field of electronic commerce because we do not have the skilled workers needed for this market.

I believe that this opens up very extensive employment potential in the postal administration in particular, which can prepare its existing staff for this very interesting challenge by means of training and further training measures.

Of course the existing rural post offices also have a strategic advantage, because they are so densely distributed throughout Europe.

Even the tiniest village has a post office and in future e-commerce will make far more use of the post because many people will order goods by e-mail and through websites and also send bills and so forth by that means.

That is why the physical handling of these transactions will also become increasingly important.

The collection, sorting, transportation and delivery of mail will take on an entirely new dimension.

I believe that in future we must seize this opportunity.

As politicians we must devote special attention to defending consumer interests.

We want our consumers to obtain as much as possible for the wages they are paid.

That faces us with the very important challenge of offering the consumers cheaper postal services.

We should take a look - thinking also of benchmarking - at what the consumer currently pays for an employee in the existing postal services and what he pays for an employee in the private sector.

This transparency is also very important for the unions, for how can a union official who has to represent his members in a private company compete with a union official who has to represent his members in the postal service?

I think it is important for the unions too to operate under uniform economic and social framework conditions so as to achieve the best results for their members on a basis of justice, fairness and solidarity.

But I also believe that in future we will have to make the universal service sufficiently attractive.

We should define the universal service precisely, establish efficiency criteria and then issue invitations to tender.

In rural areas where we have real fears that these services really can no longer be cost-effective, I believe the decision should be taken by a regulator who can lay down fair and decent tendering conditions, so that all the market forces, and of course the existing postal services too, can compete here and so that we can pursue the best and most efficient consumer strategies.

I believe we must avoid further subsidies and should try to ensure that the private supplier and the consumer benefit from the new system.

Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, postal services, just like any European public service, contribute to the social cohesion of Community territory under the terms of Article 16 of the Treaty of Amsterdam.

By equalising tariffs, i.e. treating citizens and economic operators on a basis of strict equality with regard to the cost of the service, by meeting the obligation to provide a universal service, while complying with the requirement for quality of service, postal services reflect the concern which we must have to ensure equality between different regions and the people resident in them.

They also play a major role in maintaining links between people.

As has been pointed out here on many occasions, is the postman not in fact the last point of contact in depopulated districts or divided communities, whether these are areas that are isolated geographically or the problem districts in our towns and cities?

Let me cite the example of the initiative of the French postal service, which decided, for instance, to make interpreters and writers available to the public in post offices in problem urban areas.

Without even mentioning the jobs in related sectors, European public postal services today employ one and a half million operatives whose futures are clearly threatened by the spectre of radical, untrammelled liberalisation.

The European Parliament was confident of reconciling openness to competition with the obligation to provide a universal service in a manner which safeguards jobs.

We may congratulate ourselves on this, but we intend that this should continue and this is the reason why one can only deplore the fact that the European Parliament is today being excluded from the main decision-making process which will determine the fate of the postal sector in Europe.

Indeed it is regrettable that to date - as the resolution we are debating points out - the Commission has not taken account of the resolution of 14 January 1999.

That resolution called for the European Parliament to be involved in drawing up the planned measures and urged that the reliability of impact studies regarding liberalisation should be improved.

These impact studies are necessary in order to assess the effects of any untrammelled liberalisation, not just on the economic organisation of the market, but also in terms of its human and social aspects.

The delays in the Commission' s work will inevitably have a knock-on effect on the proposed timetable and the deadline of 2003 must certainly be called into question.

By defining a sector reserved for public postal services, on the basis of weight and price limits, the postal service directive would clear the way for controlled liberalisation in phases.

The sudden reduction of these limits poses a threat to the balance between the obligation to provide a public service and economic viability for postal services.

Against a background of globalisation, where the rationale of profitability and profit is coming increasingly into conflict with the wish to achieve both a balance between regions and social cohesion, we must here, as a matter of urgency, reiterate our commitment to European public service, whether it be, today, the postal service or, tomorrow, the rail service or, the day after that, the health service.

Mr President, I rise as other Scottish Members of this House, representatives of Scotland, to protest against anything that lead to a decline in the quality of rural life in remote parts.

The postal service and the post office are a vital feature of life in rural communities throughout Europe and not least in Scotland.

It would be a disaster if action were deliberately, or even inadvertently, taken which had the effect of damaging that.

I do not believe that it is anybody' s intention to do so.

I do not believe that the Commission has set out to make war upon the islands of Scotland or Greece.

But they might accidentally do great damage.

The point is to determine at what speed and by what methods the gradual liberalisation of the postal services should take place.

If too low a limit were set for the continuing monopoly right of the postal service, it would become uneconomical to maintain in the outlying areas universality of service at what would remain an affordable rate.

The critical thing is to balance universality and affordability.

The message that is coming very clearly from all sides of the House to the Commission today is that the Commission should tread warily.

The Commission should not, for example, take a stepwise jump from 350 grammes to, as some have suggested, as low as 50 grammes.

On the contrary, it should proceed cautiously.

I imagine anything less than 150 grammes would be extremely unwise in these circumstances.

The solidarity and cohesion of people all over Europe depend on the thought that you can post a letter anywhere and it will be delivered anywhere else, at an affordable stamp price.

Mr President, the only way to guarantee a high-quality universal postal service is to keep this as a public service.

A universal service offering high-quality postal services at affordable prices throughout the country forms the basis for the operation of the whole postal system and must lead to a uniform nationwide tariff.

This service must therefore be kept public.

This is the only way to guarantee that the network, from collection to distribution, will be a comprehensive network which cannot be broken up or used only in part and according to the convenience of postal service operators.

However, further to the directive on common rules for Community postal services, the Commission has undertaken studies which have not been forwarded to the European Parliament. We are therefore unaware of the impacts of the directive' s application on either the level of service provided to the people or the current European postal operators in terms of both economics and employment.

In our opinion, the whole process of applying this directive must therefore be halted, including its timetable.

Any change to the current situation must be preceded by a rigorous study of its various implications, with the objective always being to guarantee a high-quality public service and to retain the current public operators and existing jobs.

Mr President, liberalising postal services could increase competitiveness in the postal sector and guarantee cheaper and more flexible services for the public; it could also address the challenges brought by modern technology.

I emphasise the word 'could' , and that is if it is done well and with care.

Wrongly done, the threatening images that have been described here will certainly become a reality.

Social problems will increase, interregional disparities will grow, and competition will occur only in those areas where the economy is strongest, areas where there are more people and, especially, more businesses.

On the other hand, the losers will be the remote areas and their inhabitants, and the people that will not benefit from the new services.

Before we decide whether to liberalise postal services, there should be much more discussion about how we can make the present services more flexible and more customer-friendly, and how funding systems can facilitate the investments called for by the new technology.

I think this policy has been reasonably successful in Finland, as testified by the present public system.

I think, however, that common rules have to be applied to this sector, so that we do not find ourselves at some stage somewhere out in the Wild West, or even the Wild East. We need rules in common based on equality and the principle of a public service.

Mr President, a precise assessment of the effects of the first directive is the least we can ask for when approaching the future of the public postal service.

It would be obscene to wish to settle the fate of hundreds of thousands of postal workers, millions of service users, in a great rush.

But, despite the unfavourable opinion of ten European postal services, a form of unacknowledged privatisation is brewing in the corridors of the Commission.

By lowering the price/weight threshold reserved for public postal services and by liberalising mailshots or cross-border post, the second directive may offer the most profitable sectors to the competitive sector.

Postal services may then keep whatever does not whet the appetite of the private operators.

Whether total or partial, privatisation will only make an already dismal situation worse.

Just the example of the privatisation of British rail services should suffice to prove the extent to which opting for maximum profit is antipathetic to maintaining a socially useful service.

Instead of fighting amongst themselves, public postal services should cooperate, take staff on and guarantee decent, stable working conditions, while meeting the needs of service users in terms of both post delivery and savings bank services.

Like Mr Radwan, I am glad that Commissioner Monti is here rather than Commissioner Bolkestein because I believe that he can explain to us certain aspects relating to competition.

I do not know if Mr Monti is aware of the judgement of the Court of Justice of the European Communities of last week, 10 February, which recognised the possibility of the German postal service being in a dominant position as a result of its holding a postal monopoly.

Competition policy will no doubt have to be applied to this sector before the coming liberalisation - before 1 January 2003 - because at the moment the tendency is to divert mail via countries with lower postage rates.

This has consequences for free competition between the different postal administrations.

In the event that liberalisation is brought about throughout the European Union, what consequences would that have for free competition?

For the moment, it appears that, in the only country where liberalisation has taken place - Sweden - there has been a 59% increase in the price of postal services.

We do not know what will happen in each of the countries where liberalisation is going to take place.

It is likely that postal liberalisation will lead to greater cost differences between countries, which will no doubt have implications for competition, which will not only affect the cost of the postal service but also the establishment of installations.

For example, there are currently companies which set up in Holland because the postal charges are lower than in Germany and the same may happen in the future.

I therefore wonder whether the Commission' s package on postal liberalisation will include the preservation of free competition, because it is very possible that - as has happened in most sectors in the Community today - it will lead to concentrations of large companies which will cancel out the benefits of this theoretical liberalisation.

At the moment, in services which are not theoretically liberalised - as is the case with national postal services - there is a basic form of liberalisation, which is agreed within the framework of the Universal Postal Union, allowing for lower tariffs.

In a service which is theoretically liberalised, free competition may disappear as a result of the concentration of the service amongst large companies abusing their dominant position, agreements between companies and other similar circumstances.

I would therefore advise Commissioner Monti to deal with the issue of postal liberalisation, taking strict account of free competition, because I believe that this will probably become a very worrying issue in the future.

My prediction is that the liberalised postal services will probably be much less competitive than the current public postal services.

Mr President, the postal service is not a normal service provider like a hairdresser' s or a fitness centre.

For us in Finland, a sparsely populated country, a visit to the post office is a social event.

In the world of networking, the mail service is the most democratic of all networks. It creates and maintains interpersonal relationships.

The common market in postal services will be created on the terms of the marketeers.

For us in the north it will mean that the EU will be destroying the social infrastructure.

Commissioner Monti, the principle of competition cannot be applied to interpersonal relationships: postal services must be improved, not run down.

Only a public mail service can guarantee that information technology is within everyone' s reach in society. The post office is democracy.

It is better suited to handling such matters than telecommunications companies.

Telecommunications costs have risen as a consequence of companies being bought and sold and marketing costs accounting for more than 50% of companies' turnover.

Democratic investments have to be made to preserve a democratic post office.

It is particularly appropriate that Mr Monti is responding to this debate because the great conundrum with postal services is how to square an open market and free and fair competition with providing a service which is universally available to all, even in the remotest and least inhabited region of the European Union.

In the hills and glens of Scotland and the rural borders and central belt, on the beautiful but fragile islands of the Hebrides, Orkney and Shetland, there is real concern at possibly losing this essential service.

Yet we all know that service quality can only improve if postal services, like all service industries, are given the financial and management freedom of the private sector and the spur of open, even international, competition.

I would suggest that there is a solution. It is already employed widely in the transport sector.

Air routes, ferry routes, train routes, bus routes, within and to these remoter areas are put out to tender.

The bidder who offers to provide the specific service at a specific quality level and at the lowest subsidy level gets the contract.

Let us call this a negative tender franchise.

This permits desirable competition in providing these services under a publicly-supported but fully transparent franchise system.

Why could not mail collection and delivery in a certain region be put to negative tender in this manner?

The lowest subsidy would win the franchise for a certain period of time.

Why could not the sub-post office in a remote village also be put out to this sort of negative tender?

It would therefore be up to the appropriate democratically accountable government body, local, regional or national - probably under overall EU supervision - to set the service criteria and the financial resources for meeting this particular social purpose.

Otherwise the postal services can be left to all the demands and constraints of the marketplace.

Mr President, Commissioner, it is no coincidence that I am the fifth Member of this House from Scotland to rise to speak in this debate.

That is a measure of the importance to us of our postal services.

Scotland as a country is larger than some Member States.

It has many remote mainland communities accessible only by road, sometimes served poorly by public transport, sometimes not at all.

Such communities rely for their survival on having local facilities, such as a school, a post office and a shop.

It is on the last two that the elderly, in particular, depend.

Often they are located together, each service being made more viable by the existence of the other.

Scotland also has many island communities, some of which can be reached by air but most of which depend on sea ferries.

It has been calculated that the actual cost of carrying a letter from Edinburgh to the Central Highlands is about ten times that of carrying the same letter across London.

And it is about four times the postage cost actually charged.

The more remote the community, the greater the difference becomes.

That is the measure of the problem.

It is not to oppose liberalisation to ask that it be done in a way that takes account of these factors and allows the continuation of a universal and affordable postal service.

It is for all our remote and island communities, no matter where in the European Union they are situated, and not just for the people of Scotland, that I ask you to preserve the vital lifeline that their postal services provide.

. Mr President, I consider it a privilege that I am replacing my colleague, Commissioner Bolkestein, on the occasion of such a high-quality debate on postal services.

I will try to respond to the debate on the basis of information provided by Commissioner Bolkestein.

May I repeat that on Monday he will be available to the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism of Parliament.

Some Members, like Mr Stenmarck, complain that there have been delays with the new proposal.

Others believe that it is not so bad after all, if there is a slight pause after the first step of liberalisation.

This is, for example, the position expressed by Mr Berthu.

The Commission' s position is that the new proposal was delayed mainly owing to the internal problems of the Commission, of which I am sure Parliament is not totally unaware.

But we feel that there is a legal obligation for a proposal to be made.

It is Commissioner Bolkestein' s intention to present such a proposal to the Commission for adoption in the first half of this year.

The scheduled date of 1 January 2003 for implementation of the next steps remains feasible.

The proposal will take account of the studies undertaken and in particular look at such issues as universal service, to which I will come back in a second.

As regards the existing directive and its implementation, most Member States have taken the necessary legal measures to transpose the directive.

A number of problems exist as regards the structure of the regulator and its independence.

The implementation deadline for the Member States is January 2003.

In some areas competition is already taking place, as in the parcels sector and in the express services.

The quality of services has, generally speaking, improved, in particular in regard to cross-border activity.

The quality of services, which is so relevant to consumers, was a main concern of all speakers, some of whom, like Mr Rübig, were very explicit on this point.

The experiences in countries where liberalisation is more advanced such as Sweden, Finland and the Netherlands, prove that when liberalisation takes place in an orderly way, the quality of service may be raised as a result of higher-quality service requirements imposed by the national regulations and their follow-up.

So this is not a selling-out of the service and of its quality.

Frequently liberalisation leads to guaranteed standards and the on-going standardisation of the measurement of the quality of service also contributes, as these standards will better reflect actual performance.

This will allow for meaningful bench-marking and improved customer orientation by the incumbent operator as a result of the combined pressure by regulators, competitors and customers.

We can see in the incumbent operators, in public post offices, a change of culture that I believe nobody can consider negative if the current trend towards concentrating on customers' needs continues.

The concerns expressed in this Parliament this morning by honourable Members will be at the core of the activity of my colleague and of the Commission as a whole in the preparation of the further proposal.

That proposal will fully take into account the need to ensure universality of service, the development of efficient safeguards for consumers, and the creation of a climate which would be favourable to new jobs - not to fewer jobs - in the framework of a progressive, gradual evolution.

The issue of universal service was mentioned by Mrs Isler Béguin, by Mr Miller, whom I thank for his personal message, and by many others.

We are all aware of the extremely important aspect of social and structural cohesion, especially in the sparsely populated rural areas, one of which has been particularly strongly and overwhelmingly represented in the debate this morning.

We believe that the universal service is a pillar and I am sure that my colleague will be able to provide reassurances to the appropriate parliamentary committee.

Mrs Gillig, but others like Mr Markov and Mr Ésclope, voiced concerns about employment.

Experience in other sectors show a sort of U-curve pattern: a phase of reduction in employment starts just before liberalisation takes place, as, of course, the incumbent prepares itself to be competitive; then a second phase of steady employment, as new jobs in newcomer operators balance further potential employment reductions; finally, a third phase of net job creation, both in the incumbent and new operators as the benefits of liberalisation reach users and the market develops more quickly.

In the postal sector the first phase is already in progress, as the universal service providers have embarked on a process of modernisation.

The new technologies and logistics rather than the process of postal liberalisation are the most important factors impacting on employment.

On the availability of the studies, - a point raised by Mr Staes and others - copies of each of the studies were handed to Parliament in September 1999.

They have all been available on the Commission' s Internet website since August 1999 and the Commission is willing to provide copies to anybody who is interested.

The studies have been the object of some criticism, especially on the part of the public postal services.

I am aware that all the studies launched experienced difficulty in collecting adequate data.

This was no surprise, since the universal service operators do not always have the systems in place for detailed letter collection.

Does that not say a lot about management ability?

No single methodology for accessing the cost and financing of the universal service is accepted by all the parties.

Nevertheless, Mr Bolkestein is convinced that the studies undertaken provide enough clarity and precision to form the basis of the decision-making process.

I finally come to three interventions about a subject I am supposed to know better than postal services, that is competition.

Mr Purvis, I found your methodologically provocative remark about the tender interesting and certainly worth exploring.

Mr Medina Ortega, I am as convinced as you are that we must be even more vigilant after liberalisation, because we do not want the disappearance of public monopolies to give rise, through unchecked concentration, to private operators.

This applies both to the post and other sectors.

If I can provide one example of this sort of vigilance, it is the case of Deutsche Post where, following complaints and an action before the court, the Commission initiated a formal state aid procedure in July.

We have just received the reply of the German Government to the observations made.

The state aid procedure covers the question of cross-subsidisation between monopoly letter services and commercial business parcel activities as well as the financing of Deutsche Post' s numerous recent acquisitions.

I will not go into the details due to lack of time, but this is perhaps one illustration of the fact that the Commission does not stop its work as liberalisation progresses.

In a sense this is where its work begins.

Finally, Mr Radwan, of course, there should be limits to competition and there are limits to competition.

In particular, if we take the issue of competition and services of general interest, where a Member State defines a mission of public service, it is important to quantify the costs for discharging that mission and state aids that compensate for those costs are certainly not a violation of competition.

I would slightly disagree with the terminology you used when you said, Mr Radwan, that it is time for the needs of citizens to be taken into account rather than exclusively the need for competition.

That concept I reject firmly, because competition is there for the citizens, and for them alone.

Competition is run and managed in the interest of the citizens, their economic interest and for their liberty.

The examples of liberalisation and competition in air transport and in telephony services in Europe show that citizens have benefited from this.

I can only say again that Commissioner Bolkestein will be able to address all the concerns on Monday, in the appropriate committee, more competently and in much more detail.

Pursuant to Rule 42(5), I have received a motion for a resolution to close the present debate.

We shall now proceed to the vote.

(Parliament adopted the resolution) EXPLANATIONS OF VOTE

We voted in favour of the resolution because we received a request to this effect from a French postal service trade union which was looking to obtain, in the event of a favourable vote, an additional time frame in which to defend employees.

This does not mean that we approve the entire contents, which are too vague and which leave out the main concern.

The policy undertaken by the European institutions and by national governments, especially the French government, is a retrograde policy, counter to the interests of both the service users, i.e. the great majority of the population, and the postal service workers.

Postal services must continue to be public services.

All people, regardless of their location or social status, must have access to the postal service on an equal footing and subject to the same conditions.

In organising the public service no consideration must be given to the idea of profitability, and private firms must not be authorised to amass private profits by carrying off the most profitable public service activities.

Consequently, the post office and its equivalents in the various countries of Europe must keep their monopoly of this service.

In order to ensure that we have proper postal services on the European Union level, it is essential to put an end to the policy of closing down local post offices, reducing the number of deliveries and overworking postal staff.

The post office and, more generally, all public services must, on the other hand, recruit additional staff.

Such jobs are unquestionably useful, and creating an adequate number of them would reduce unemployment in Europe.

Mr President, personally I voted in favour of this resolution, because the essential thing is that the European Parliament should discuss the postal service and we should get away from the current ambiguous situation.

If we dismantle the public service, this would be very serious, and we wish to know what are the Commission' s intentions.

Saying that the client will receive a better service at a lower cost is patently inaccurate.

People who live a long way from civilisation will clearly not receive a better service or else they will then have to pay a great deal and some of them will not be in a position to do so.

Postal services do not provide simply a postal delivery service but also a social service.

Occasionally for some people the postman is the only person they see all day.

We can salute them, these postmen who, whatever the weather, sometimes walk for miles to be able to offer this service to everyone.

Dismantling the postal service, the local communication service, would be a serious mistake and we would be unable to maintain the principle of the equality of all citizens.

Profitability at all costs means going against fraternity and against social cohesion.

Mr President, I voted for the resolution and should like to explain my motives.

Several speakers mentioned that the only person with whom many elderly people have any contact is the postman, particularly in mountain communities.

However, it also seems to me that the pensions of many elderly people are being reduced as a result of national budget constraints.

In my own country, Italy, there are some 200 000 postal workers who cost the state approximately ITL 50 million a year per capita, or EUR 25 000, that is, a total cost of around EUR 5 million.

Liberalisation of postal services would mean that the state could give each pensioner an extra ITL 10 million a year so that a million pensioners would see their pensions doubled.

That should amply compensate them for forgoing their contact with the postman.

Mr President, I voted in favour of the resolution on European postal services with all the more satisfaction since it reiterates once again the position I have always defended in this House, which is the need for a high quality universal service, particularly ensuring this service in the least populated regions and rural regions, and there are some even in my small country, the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg.

In these regions but also in some districts of towns and cities, as Mr Posselt explained so clearly, post offices and postmen have an almost socio-cultural role, I might say, which goes beyond merely delivering mail.

I know that this service is unprofitable.

It would perhaps be less costly to make a fax or email available to isolated houses or villages.

In principle, I am in favour of abolishing public sector monopolies, whether in water, gas, electricity, telephone, satellite, cable or any other services.

Nonetheless, liberalisation, which has a lot to offer to the consumer in terms of the price and the quality of the service, especially in the telephone sector, must cease as soon as the service provided becomes inadequate or disappears, when the firms profiting from liberalisation are not making money.

If they cannot be obliged to provide what the state monopoly was able to guarantee, particularly thanks to its obligation to provide a universal service, then the public service must be protected.

I feel we can still afford to maintain a postal service, even if our post offices operate like businesses.

They clearly have to make some effort so that they are no longer described as snail mail even if they cannot attain the speed of email.

(FR) Here indeed is a sector which has highlighted the limitations and serious deficiencies of liberalisation.

I am not, personally, a blinkered militant in favour of monopolies, whether public or private, but when I see the results achieved by private firms in this sector I am reinforced in my position as a defender of public service!

If liberalisation continues in this area too, then there is a great risk that one day we will see entire regions with no postal service.

For who can believe for one moment that private firms, motivated only by profit, will continue to provide services in high-cost areas unless the costs are borne by the already disadvantaged inhabitants who are not, therefore, in a position to take advantage of the service.

I should add that today, at a time when Europe is revealing itself and is proving to be incapable of opposing the inclusion of Fascists in a government within the European Union, it is no longer acceptable to have an ultraliberalism which destroys public services foisted on us in the name of this same Europe.

I am a European and even a federalist.

To achieve this I was ready and I am ready to make certain sacrifices, but not just anything!

Most especially, I am no longer ready to accept the formation of a liberal single market if Europe is not at the same time capable of defending the values on which it is based and which, in the 1960s, made me a committed European!

The Minutes of this sitting will be submitted for approval by Parliament at the beginning of the next part-session.

I declare the session of the European Parliament adjourned.

(The sitting was closed at 11.10 a.m.)

I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Friday, 18 February 2000.

Ladies and gentlemen, as you know, on 22 February, ETA struck again in a brutal attack in Spain with the murder of Fernando Buesa Blanco, the General Secretary of the Socialist Party of Vizcaya and the spokesman of the Socialist Party of the Basque Parliament, and Jorge Díez Elorza, his bodyguard.

The same day, I conveyed my own and the European Parliament' s deepest sympathy and sincere condolences to the victims' families.

These men paid with their lives for their commitment to democracy.

I utterly condemn this act of barbarism that is unworthy of any civilised society.

The rule of law and the respect of rights and fundamental freedoms are the principles on which the European Union is based.

Terrorism, whatever form it takes, is unacceptable.

In expressing the hope that these men will be the last victims of ETA, I call on this organisation finally to cease resorting to violence and to use the democratic channels that exist in Spain.

I would ask you, ladies and gentlemen, to observe one minute' s silence in memory of Fernando Buesa Blanco and Jorge Díez Elorza.

(The House rose and observed a minute' s silence)

Madam President, on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists, I want to thank you for your statement last Tuesday and for your words today in memory of Fernando Buesa Blanco.

He was a member of the Basque regional parliament, spokesman for the Socialist Party in that parliament and also a former vice-president of the Basque regional government.

Madam President, the best tribute that my Group and this House can pay to Fernando Buesa is to take on board his vision, as a European, of the Basque Country, Spain and Europe.

The following is a translated extract from his autobiography. 'We are in Europe.

Anyone of my age - I am 54 - can remember their grandparents' era and their parents' era and, of course, is living in the current era. We can also see into the era in which our children will live.

In my grandparents' time, it took several days to travel from Vitoria to Seville.

Now you can go from Vitoria to Copenhagen in 2 or 3 hours by plane.

Today, at the end of the 20th century, a single market is operating in Europe in which we will soon be using a single currency.

We can now travel much more easily than our grandparents could within Spain or even within the Basque Country.

We are building a vast European area which will firstly be linked economically and then politically.

This process may take a long time but it is unstoppable and, what is more, desirable.

The public still regard this as being a long way off but it is very real and should serve to make us question certain aspects of our current situation.

In a debate within the Socialist Party on the Irish process, someone said: "In the end, the key to the Irish solution was that everyone involved had the following thought: does it really matter whether we are Irish or British?

Everyone can be what they want to be because, if Ireland and Britain are both in the European Union, there is no point in killing each other for being Irish or British.

What difference does it make if the national level is no longer going to function?"

We in the Basque Country could ask ourselves the same question. Does it really matter if we are Basque or Spanish or European?

We have talked a lot about what it is to be Basque, but a Basque today dresses like a Dane and reads the same things as a British person.

If life is going to be lived on a much more global basis, as is already happening, and our children will therefore be living in the Europe which we are creating, why are we killing each other for being Basque or Spanish?'

Fernando Buesa also said the following, which everyone in Ireland has probably thought. 'If we are killing each other for no reason - and this was happening in Ireland because there were paramilitary groups on all sides - we should be resolutely asking ourselves this question in the Basque Country too.

What difference does it make to be Basque? Surely it is all the same thing.

You can be what you want to be.

If, in the future, economics and politics and vital decisions for each country are dealt with in the European arena, there is no point killing or dying for being Basque or Spanish' .

Madam President, on behalf of the Group of the European People' s Party and European Democrats, I want to express our most profound feeling of solidarity with the families of Fernando Buesa, an elected representative of the Basque people, and Jorge Díez, a member of the Basque police force. We also naturally want to express our solidarity with the whole of the Basque Socialist Party.

In recent times, in this House, we have sadly had to discuss the various faces of extremism in Europe.

It does not matter what banner these come under because, in the end, they are all different expressions of the same thing.

Faced with these, we democrats cannot resign ourselves to the peace of the dead. On the contrary, we must take strength from knowing that the only social division which exists in the Basque Country is the abyss which separates those who kill, and those who support and express understanding for the latter, from the vast majority of the Basque people who simply want to live in peace and freedom.

Madam President, on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party, I must indicate my complete and categorical condemnation of the terrorist attack on 22 February in Vitoria which took the lives of the socialist MP and spokesman in the Basque parliament, Fernando Buesa, and his bodyguard, Jorge Díez.

In a country governed by the rule of law and which is a member of the European Union, it should be possible for all ideas and options to be defended, provided that this occurs democratically and with respect for the rights of the individual and the principles and values of justice, freedom and economic and social progress on which the Union is based. The transgression of these principles is simply not acceptable, as clearly indicated in the Treaties.

There is no justification in our society for terrorist acts such as the one which took the lives of Fernando Buesa and Jorge Díez, particularly when the former was a freely elected representative of the Basque people.

We pray that these are the last victims in a process which, as you said, Madam President, has seen much barbarism. We pray that a way forward can be found which will allow the Basque people to live together in peace.

Madam President, on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left/Nordic Green Left, I must add my voice to those of my colleagues who have expressed their grief at the truly perverse and cruel outrage which has occurred in the Basque Country. We send our condolences to the families of the victims and emphatically condemn these acts which have been going on for so long and which must stop.

The terrorist organisation ETA has, in its time, killed police officers and soldiers.

It has placed a bomb in a supermarket and killed men, women and children.

In the streets of Madrid it has killed a general, Quintana Lacaci, who defended democracy at the time of the attempted coup of 1981.

It has assassinated the spokesman of the Popular Party in the town council of San Sebastián, Gregorio Ordóñez.

It has been to the lecture room of the university professor in Constitutional Law, Francisco Tomás y Valiente, and killed him in cold blood. Now, just a few days ago, in the same odious way in which it assassinated Admiral Blanco, it has killed the socialist MP and spokesman in the Vitoria parliament, Fernando Buesa, and his bodyguard, Jorge Díez, of the Basque police force.

ETA must be condemned. However, those who support and express understanding for these attacks must also be condemned.

There is no point continuing to ask these people and organisations to go down the democratic road.

We must appeal to the whole of society and particularly to the democratic parties, whether they are national or nationalist, and no matter how pro- or anti-European they are.

It is regrettable that there are organisations and people who are saying nothing or simply regretting the deaths as if they were the result of a road traffic accident.

All European democrats in this House must join together to send a message to the Basque Country that it is time to put an end to the division and killing.

It is time to share the Basque Country, Spain and Europe.

This, Madam President, is the only way forward which we therefore fully support.

Madam President, on behalf of the Union for a Europe of Nations Group, I would like to express our sorrow for the victims and our rejection of terrorism and those who defend it.

For the friends and relatives of the victims this is a human tragedy and for their political families it is a political tragedy, but I feel that we are also witnessing a cultural tragedy, in that the culture of death and of violence is constantly gaining ground against the culture of respect for others, democracy and democratic life.

So, Madam President, maybe we should consider taking some action if we want our sorrow and our rejection of terrorism to have any actual significance.

Why does Parliament not meet in all the countries of the European Union and show that it rejects terrorism?

We are not just confined to Brussels or Strasbourg.

Let us all go back to our respective nations and shout from the rooftops that our belief in democracy and our indignation are not just words, but a demonstration of our actual political commitment.

Madam President, as a member of the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance and also as an MEP for the Basque Nationalist Party, I must firstly categorically condemn the cowardly attack which took the lives of a Basque police officer, Jorge Díez Elorza, and the Basque MP and former vice-president, Fernando Buesa.

Secondly, we send our deepest condolences to their families, their socialist colleagues, the Basque parliament and the Basque police force. We also want to express our solidarity and heartfelt sympathy.

Thirdly, we denounce the extreme nature of an attack which, by being perpetrated against an elected representative of the people, not only violated human dignity and human rights but also showed absolute contempt for the will of these people.

Fourthly, we express our repulsion at the fact that this dual assassination was intended to directly destroy the political process aimed at achieving peace in the Basque Country.

Fifthly, we again call on the Spanish and French leaders and politicians to show the same tolerance as in the United Kingdom and Ireland in order to resolve the current Basque conflict with something more than police measures which, on their own, cannot bring about the peace which we all desire.

Sixthly and finally, we reaffirm that ETA' s terrorism and violence must end. ETA must stop hijacking the will of the Basque people who must be allowed to decide on their future freely and without violent coercion.

Just three months ago I took the floor in this House to congratulate the Irish and British people on their success in reaching the Northern Ireland settlement, as many other colleagues did.

In Northern Ireland in the last thirty years too many people have been killed and injured - too many families shattered.

So far, unfortunately, in Spain and France, just the opposite has been happening as regards the on-going conflict in the Basque country.

We, Euskal Herritarrok, are convinced that a definitive solution to the present struggle can only be found through an open process of dialogue and negotiation with no limited agenda.

Before 20 January last, during nineteen months, the only killing we witnessed in the Kingdom of Spain was that of José Luis Geresta, member of ETA, in March 1999.

In spite of that and the arrests made by the Spanish and French police, including arrests of ETA negotiators with the Spanish government' s agreement, ETA honoured its unilateral ceasefire.

Then, last November, before the ceasefire was over, the Spanish Government spokesman, Mr Piqué, declared that his government had done and would in the future do everything possible to hinder present moves towards a political solution in the Basque country.

We, Euskal Herritarrok, have regretted many times the loss of human lives.

We share with all the Basque citizens the sufferings of our people.

We are committed to dialogue and ready to work together with all those eager to find a democratic settlement for the Basque country.

Twenty years have passed since the Northern Ireland question was first raised in this Parliament.

May I ask: Quousque tandem - Noiz arte?

Madam President, thank you for giving me the floor.

I must say that it is very hard for me to follow on from the last intervention.

When Mr Puerta mentioned some of ETA' s victims, he made no reference to someone who was killed by ETA 16 years ago. I believe he did this out of respect for me.

The person I am talking about was a socialist senator who was also a member of the Basque regional parliament. His name was Enrique Casas.

Madam President, Senator Casas was my husband. I was left a widow with four children, the youngest of whom was only eight months old.

My husband was an Andalusian by birth and a senator for the Basque Country.

He had been sent by the Basque Government to defend the Basque Country in Madrid. His only crime was that he was a socialist and a democrat and nothing more.

Madam President, I have never spoken of this here apart from on the day that ETA declared the cease-fire which I welcomed as a ray of hope for all Basque people and for the whole of Spain and Europe.

This was the only time I had spoken of my husband' s death but I must do so again today and I do it willingly.

Madam President, I was born in Germany, educated in Sweden and married to a Spaniard.

I know what democracy is because I had the good fortune to grow up in a country like Sweden which has a long democratic tradition.

I arrived in the Basque Country keen to integrate and, despite what has happened to me, I am convinced that some day the Basque Country will achieve the peace it desires. To those who believe that there is conflict in the Basque Country, I would say that the only conflict in the Basque Country goes by the name of ETA and must be eliminated.

As for the other problems, we can talk about these.

We democrats can solve the other problems by allowing everyone to put forward their ideas, because freedom of expression, free elections and freedom in general do exist in the Basque Country.

The only restriction on this freedom is ETA which must therefore be eliminated.

Thank you, Mrs Dührkop Dührkop, I should like to assure you of my empathy and sincere respect.

Adoption of the Minutes of the previous sitting

The Minutes of the previous sitting have been distributed.

We are about to discuss the subject of reforming the Commission and you will recall, Madam President, that at the beginning of the last session, I raised with you the question of whether, in the interests of openness and transparency, the Members' register of interests could be made more available to the public by being published on the Internet.

You promised Parliament you would raise this subject with the Quaestors that very evening.

I wonder if you are now in a position to confirm to Parliament that the Quaestors have agreed in principle that the register should be published on the Internet and, if so, whether you will personally set them a deadline - perhaps 1 April - for doing so.

I can tell you, Mr Davies, that the Bureau has adopted the principle of publishing the Members' register of financial interests on the Internet and the Quaestors are studying in great detail the problems and the legal questions that it may involve.

But we shall have a decision very soon.

The next item is the Commission statement on Reforming the European Commission.

I shall give the floor straight away to the President, Mr Romano Prodi.

- (IT) Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, last July, here in your presence, I made a solemn commitment to reform the Commission.

I would just like to take a moment to recall the events of last July: the outgoing Commission had been in crisis, I had just been nominated and you gave your preliminary approval of that nomination.

The climax of the chain of events was my undertaking to reform the Commission, to reform it thoroughly, completely revolutionising the Commission' s way of working.

Today, that commitment has been fully discharged: you have the reform here, before you, in the form of an institutional White Paper which has just been adopted by the Commission.

I would like to emphasise that, on that occasion too, the Commission voted unanimously, with one voice.

Briefly, these are the main points of the reform.

One: definition of political priorities and translation of these into practical measures through the focused use of resources.

This is at the heart of the system, and it is this, the setting of political priorities and the focused use of resources, which will enable the political sphere to assert its primacy and to take its responsibilities fully on board.

In order to do this, we have created a completely new policy-planning mechanism, a system which will allow the College to set annual policy guidelines and to establish the budgetary procedure on the basis of these, to assign well-defined objectives to the Directorates-General and to keep the relationship between available resources and activities assigned under control, which is of fundamental importance.

In this context, activity-based management is the key to ensuring coherence between objectives, actions and resources.

The second point is human resources.

It is the central part of our reform. Our staff are the Commission' s best asset, its richest resource.

They are extremely highly qualified, of a calibre which it is difficult, if not impossible, to find in the individual national administrations because of the nature of the recruitment methods and criteria used.

This was the impression I received when I first became President of the Commission, and it has been confirmed by observation during my daily work.

However, at the same time, I have found that morale amongst the Commission' s staff is very low. Previously, there was pride and pleasure taken in being part of a universally admired institution, but now staff are frequently demoralised by the unceasing criticism.

All this has to change, and this is one of the main reasons for our reform.

Recruitment, career development, mobility and disciplinary measures are all being based on completely new criteria: there will be greater emphasis on individual service, credible and, above all, verifiable performance appraisal systems, lifelong learning and a greater degree of management responsibility.

These are the areas in which changes will be made.

The third point, which was also rather a sensitive, key issue in the recent crisis, is financial management.

This is the hub of the administration which has to ensure efficiency and security.

We are going to create a management and control system in every Directorate-General.

At the moment, our control system is completely centralised; with the reform we will switch to a control system which combines decentralisation of management control with an efficient central audit system. This means that we will have a central financial service to provide financial management guidance and advice, decentralisation in every Directorate-General of the entire chain, that is of programmes, undertakings, contracts, expenditure and the related ex ante control systems, and an external auditing service which will direct these operations.

This is a complete revolution of the Commission' s way of working; it is a totally different method of organisation and it will require a totally different way of thinking.

We are familiar with the problems associated with this transitional stage, and it is this transition which has caused the greatest concern among our staff: we will therefore adopt the necessary security measures and put the necessary safeguards in place.

In fact, the Commission desires this reform in order to become a model of excellence for the whole of Europe and the world.

We also want to be exemplary in our advanced use of information technology.

We want to be a model of a completely computerised administration.

The Commission has been accused of being buried under piles of paper, and so we are going to become a paperless Commission.

This will make the Commission itself more efficient and encourage the use of new technologies outside the Commission.

This is not just a technical revolution, but a complete organisational revolution as well.

I shall leave to Neil Kinnock the task of explaining the details of the reform, but I would first like to thank him for the intelligence, enthusiasm and energy he has brought to this exercise.

We would both like to thank all those who have worked on the project and all the Commission staff, who took part in the broadest debate ever organised at the Commission.

I would stress that this style of debate is something very new and, in my opinion, it has forced us to radically change our way of thinking as well.

The White Paper before us is also the product of contributions from the Commission staff: they knew that the Commission would have to undergo substantial reform in order to become, once again, that internationally-admired institution which was at the heart of European history.

The adoption of the White Paper marks the end of a chapter of history - and I hope that it will remain closed forever.

Now we can focus on the future, on the challenges awaiting the Union and on the programme for 2000-2005, the contents of which we have outlined to you over the past few weeks.

The very political essence of the reform is mirrored in the objectives of this five-year plan.

We need - the whole Union needs - a strong Commission, a Commission which has regained its ability to act as a political entity and is recognisable as such in all its actions.

This is why we are redefining all our work priorities.

This is why we are offloading all the activities which it is no longer appropriate for us to carry out - another important area of reform - in accordance with a principle of decentralisation and subsidiarity.

For this reason, we are reforming the administrative machinery in order to create the necessary conditions for us to be able to carry out our work efficiently.

We will make the best use of the resources at the Commission' s disposal, but they are very limited and we have almost exhausted them.

We may need to come back to you and ask for additional resources to fund the new tasks which have been assigned to us and those which will be assigned to us in the future.

In September, we undertook to present a White Paper on reform, and today we are fulfilling that undertaking according to the conditions established in your presence.

The Commission wishes to be judged on results and results alone - on what we achieve.

I would, however, remind you, and this is my final point, that the Commission is not the only Community institution.

Parliament and the Council are also called upon to take up all the challenges presented by these reforms.

The Commission has resolutely forged a path, and I hope that all the institutions will follow it right to the very end, in the service of the citizens of Europe, to achieve an ever-stronger and ever more transparent Europe.

I am glad to be here together with President Prodi and my colleague, Michele Schreyer, to present the White Paper adopted by the Commission this morning: "Reforming the Commission" .

As honourable Members will see from the document, which will be available to them today, the unprecedented consultations with the staff of the Commission, with this Parliament and with the Council, which have taken place since the adoption of the consultation document in January, have been very productive and resulted in useful refinements.

Together with Romano Prodi, I express my gratitude to this House and to the very large number of people who have put time and effort into giving us their constructive responses.

The White Paper puts reform in its proper political context.

In the Commission, systems and structures have built up over forty years in which successive enlargements have occurred.

The treaties have been revised, new managerial tasks have been attributed by this Parliament and by the Council to the Commission, and many other changes of great significance have occurred in our Union, in our continent and in the world.

Those realities, together with the approach of further enlargements, all counsel strongly for modernisation of the Commission, so that this essential institution can fulfil its primary tasks of policy conception and development, of treaty application and of management of the public resources and do so with maximum effectiveness, maximum responsibility and maximum accountability.

The sustained independence and strength of the Commission are, of course, basic to that mission as this House has repeatedly recognised.

Reform and renewal are essential for that purpose too.

The Commission is not and will not be a secretariat of any kind, and that is clear to all of the institutions - it is well understood everywhere.

But the Commission does exist to serve the Union and its peoples with high standards of performance.

That is what the public has the right to expect and it is what the people who work for the Commission want to provide and will provide.

The House will be aware, of course, that the Commission cannot fulfil these objectives alone.

All institutions in the European Union will have to face up to the issues posed by the reform and face up to them honestly and responsibly.

I know that my colleagues and I can count on the support of many Members of this House across the spectrum.

One of the biggest challenges that may come from the essential efforts to match the tasks of the Commission with the resources of the Commission will confront this House.

Last month, as Romano Prodi has just said, we launched a thorough evaluation of activities and resources throughout the Commission and we will fully report on that in September.

Our aim is to focus the Commission on essential policy priorities and on core activities in line with our strategic policy objectives for the next five years.

Inevitably, that will mean identifying activities that could and should be reduced or ended.

It means taking a very hard look at how the use of internal and external resources can be most effectively balanced in the interest of the Union.

It means allocating staff to areas of high-policy importance within departments and across the Commission.

And when that assessment is complete, we will be able to establish whether the resources at our disposal are commensurate with the tasks attributed to us.

If they are proven not to be, we will put the case for more resources to the budgetary authority.

If that does not meet with a positive response, the difficult issue of which of our lower-priority activities should be discontinued will then have to be addressed, not just by the Commission, but by this Parliament and by the Council too.

I do not make this point because of any desire in the Prodi Commission to retreat from activities or responsibilities.

On the contrary, as many in this House understand, I am setting out these considerations because we want to meet our responsibilities and meet them with full effectiveness and full accountability.

That means closing any significant gap between obligations and operational resources either by reducing activities or by increasing means or by a combination of both.

In each of the three pillars of reform, the active support and cooperation of this House will be absolutely vital.

The new activity-based management system, that the President just mentioned, will link political priorities to the availability of resources and consequently to the budget for the first time.

The role of the budgetary authority in the operation of ABM will, therefore, be vital.

Attempts to micro-manage the Commission' s operations are clearly in no one' s interest.

A resilient and practical interinstitutional agreement will, therefore, be a prerequisite for the efficient operation of activity-based management.

In human resources policy, the involvement of Parliament will unavoidably have to be as an employer of civil servants as well as a democratic institution to which the Commission is accountable.

Again, that will be a very demanding challenge.

And finally, in the crucial area of financial management where the Court of Auditors, the Committee of Independent Experts and other external and internal analyses have strongly advised radical change, the support of this House in implementing the recommendations for full security of money and value for money will be of prime importance.

In the limited time available for this statement, it is obviously impossible to go into the full details of our proposals.

I have no doubt that we will do that on several occasions in the coming months and years, and I certainly look forward to the questions of honourable Members this afternoon.

It is clear, of course, that in many ways the really hard work starts now, with the implementation of our proposals.

I look forward to working with this Parliament, with the Council and with the staff of the institutions to ensure that the reform strategy is put fully into effect for the benefit of the Union and for the advantage of all of its peoples.

We shall now move on to Question Time.

Madam President, the Commission proposals include the waiver of immunity of officials.

Recently, the immunity of a former Commissioner was lifted and proceedings are currently pending before a judge in Brussels on the basis that Brussels is the seat of the Community institutions.

Yet these institutions have other seats and, given that the Community' s actions affect the whole Community territory, there are in fact thousands of courts which could judge officials, Commissioners and so on.

Is the Commission aware that, in order to lift immunity, it would be necessary to adopt a new legal instrument to regulate the procedure for holding Commission officials accountable, including former and current Commissioners?

In the particular case that the honourable Member has in mind, not only did the Commission easily and quickly come to a decision to waive the immunity of a former Commissioner, but the former Commissioner herself advised the Commission of her desire that the immunity should be lifted.

I can see the complexities that concern the honourable Member, but I say to him that in the last five years there have been ten cases in which there have been requests from national legal authorities for the immunity of 26 officials to be lifted, and every single one of those requests has been met, and met with alacrity.

I think that the House can therefore be confident that not only are the civil rights of individuals who may be accused or required to produce evidence safeguarded, but so is the interest of the properly constituted legal bodies of every Member State in seeking to get information, or the right to interview or investigate anybody associated with the Commission.

As the Parliament' s rapporteur on the staff elements of your report, Mr Kinnock, I very much welcome the fact that we are now starting the process, and if I may say to all colleagues here, we have a very important task to do, which will be absolutely central to the future of the Commission and its effectiveness.

And I make the point, before I move to my questions, that what happens concerning the Staff Regulations in the Commission has a fundamental role on our responsibility also as employers of staff because, of course, the European Parliament staff operate under the same conditions.

That will form part of the work that we will have to do and I sure that all of you today will want to engage in that process.

Now there were two points I wanted to pick up with Mr Kinnock, if I may.

The first one concerns the timescale of these important reforms.

Mr Prodi said in his very important opening statement that he had identified severe problems in the Commission about low morale and low motivation, and clearly that is a major concern.

Big expectations are built up for these reforms both within the Commission and outside.

And if we are to move forward, I suggest to you that the reforms on the personnel side, early evidence of change of culture, empowerment and motivation of staff have to happen sooner rather than later.

And if we look at the original proposals - and I suspect that we will see the same in the new ones - it was not until 2002 that we were going to complete overall reform of the Staff Regulations.

Indeed, it was not until 2001 that some of the key elements of appraisal were going to be introduced.

I suggest that is too long, and we really must move forward much more quickly than that.

The second point that I want to make concerns information technology.

Have you really taken into account the changes in staff structure that new information technology will bring about, because those will be fundamental in the new direction of these reforms.

On the second part of Mr Harbour' s question, he will see in the course of this year how with greater precision we will be showing how the application more extensively of information technology will facilitate change, not only in terms of the working practices and conditions of the staff but in the operation of the Commission, as the President briefly outlined in his statement.

Could I thank Mr Harbour for the energetic commitment that he has shown to the issue on which he is rapporteur and respond to him by saying that we firmly believe that the morale, the motivation and the professional commitment of Commission officials, which is already very strong, will be enhanced by the introduction of comprehensive training, the allocation of responsibility, the upgrading of management and a number of other changes which we will be introducing.

Cultures are products of structures and systems, and the structures and systems have become old.

By renovating those structures and systems, in some cases very radically, we will assist the people of the Commission who are strongly committed to the European ideal and have high quality of capability to release talents and manifest themselves as never before.

I would like to make one last point in answer to Mr Harbour.

I share his impatience to secure the full implementation of the mechanisms of reform and change practices.

I wish I could honestly say to him that we will be compiling and providing in the form of proposals communications before 2001 and certainly be putting them into effect before 2002, but he will be aware there are legally required consultation procedures and periods which we must respect.

I do not use those as an excuse.

We indeed take huge encouragement from the very positive and constructive response offered in the consultation over the last month and I believe therefore that although there may be a slight delay in the compilation and application of reforms, these reforms will nevertheless be strengthened by the extent of understanding and commitment that will be produced by the consultation which we will undertake assiduously.

I would like everything to happen much more quickly.

It is better to do it absolutely properly.

Madam President, we admire Mr Kinnock' s vision and sense of realism.

For he is holding up visions of a well-oiled and effective administration and is, at the same time, drawing our attention to the difficulties which will arise and which can already be anticipated.

Mr Prodi has pointed out that he would like to give up a few of his responsibilities.

We will therefore need to focus on policy priorities first.

I think it is more important to bring into focus what we want to achieve before we give up responsibilities, because I can imagine we could meet with a great deal of protest otherwise.

Enlargement - that is enlargement of the Union - is one of the key challenges in this context.

I would also like to point out that when it comes to keeping the peace, it will require a much greater effort to get a great many more people on board.

We must resolutely switch from our present, rather bureaucratic approach which we are all familiar with - it pervades our development cooperation for example - to a cooperation for peace. Could Mr Kinnock say what timeframe he is expecting the Council and Parliament to come up with for these priorities?

I am grateful to Mrs Maes for not only the comments that she has made now but the sustained commitment that she has shown to change ever since she came into this House.

Can I assure her that our attitude is not guided by any motivation to farm out.

We are concentrating on core tasks and we are concentrating on priorities, not in order to evade any obligations but to absolutely guarantee that we can totally fulfil the central obligations that we have.

One of those obligations very clearly - and I am at one with Mrs Maes in this - is in the preparation for effective, smooth, calm enlargement that will work to the mutual benefit both of the people of the incoming countries and of the citizens of the current Union.

One of the reasons for having to ensure that we focus very strongly and sharply on our priorities is to be able to guarantee that we can fulfil that absolutely critical role of being the agents of enlargement to maximum effect.

Can I say to her that the mechanisms that we are going to introduce of strategic planning and programming facilitated by activity-based management may sound to be immensely dry and completely bereft of any idealism.

Since I was brought up to believe that the victory of ideals needs to be organised, I may be able to make an appeal to her to understand and support our mechanistic view of this because it is for the great and central purposes of the Union and its enlargement.

I hope that, in terms of the degree of cooperation and partnership that we can enjoy in all aspects of this policy with the Council and with Parliament, not only will we get rapid implementation of policy development in the most effective way, but that we will be able to do it by coordination at the right time which will produce the maximum benefit for the Union.

I do believe that reform with all it implies, including the new mechanisms, will very strongly facilitate changes of that kind.

I would like to take the opportunity firstly to congratulate the Commission on unanimously bringing forward this timely and substantial White Paper with the accompanying action plan and I think when the President of the Commission described his Vice-President as acting with intelligence, enthusiasm and energy that indeed that is a fair and valid description with regard to this procedure.

We anticipate, if I understand correctly, a report in September on core activities.

Will that already begin to impact possibly in some form of amendment to the budget exercise which the Parliament will have to close in the last quarter of this year in respect of the budget for 2001 and can you already say whether the Commission anticipates such a procedure?

Secondly, on the question of ex ante and ex post auditing and procedures, do I understand correctly - and I have not had the opportunity to wade into the detail of the paper - that the unanimous decision of the Commission is indeed to empower the Directorates-General to liberate them from the ex ante visae system but to put in their place a strong ex post and independent and centralised audit system?

If that is the case I can say at least that after prolonged and at times engaging discussion each way in my own Group, I believe that if we have demanded in this House as we have done that we have responsibility at each level in the Commission, its necessary counterpart is that we free people up to be managers.

I want to thank Mr Cox and indeed his group for the way in which several Members have strongly engaged themselves and interested themselves in the detail of reform which can sometimes be rather trying but is always, as he indicated, worthwhile.

So far as the September communication is concerned, it is unprecedented.

It will not be just one of the screenings that the Commission has periodically undertaken but a very thorough and sharp review within Directorates-General and across the Commission for which we have established a mechanism for reviewing the demands on us and the means that we have to meet those demands.

It is conceivable therefore - I cannot say with absolute certainty at this stage - that at that stage in the budgetary procedure and in the cycle in which Parliament is engaged we may have to - I emphasise very strongly the conditional - we may have to come to Parliament with some conclusions and discuss the possibility of revision.

That is a sensible forecast to make, it is not an ambition that we have but it is a possibility that we may have to entertain.

Can I thank Mr Cox for underlining the virtue of following absolutely the recommendation of the Committee of Independent Experts and introducing a system which will end definitely with the revision of the financial regulation and the end of centralised ex ante control.

I would emphasise, too, that the intention is not only to liberate the personnel of the Commission - that is certainly an objective - but it is simultaneously to "responsibilise" - it is an appalling word but we all know what it means.

In undertaking such a development in our organisation I am certain that we can match or even advance upon the success and increase in job motivation which has come as a consequence of similar developments in several administrations, both in the public sector and in the private sector, in the last decade or so.

I think that the end of the centralised system will certainly not result in any relaxation of effective financial control but will increase its effectiveness and its relationship to operational tasks.

Financial control will be absolutely secured, both because of the way in which we will introduce the changes, and because we will introduce a completely professional, independent internal audit service.

As I said earlier, our ambition is total security for money and value for money.

We are also interested in value for the people who work for us.

The changes in financial management and control will greatly enhance the possibility of doing all of that.

I am also grateful, at the risk of being repetitive, to Mrs Theato for the consistent attention that she has given to these matters and indeed the way in which, if she will allow me to say so, she played midwife to many of the changes which we are now contemplating.

I hope that she will come to take pride in the child for which she has at least part parentage.

First of all, I am not sure if I got the interpretation properly, but I do not think it would be possible for someone as expert as Mrs Theato to talk about the abolition of independent financial control.

There is a degree of independence obviously allocated to the current Financial Controller by the financial regulation.

However, because of the mixture of roles of both financial management and control, and audit under the present terms, it is very difficult to think of this as an uncompromised role, no matter how great the integrity of the person actually holding it.

So, the changes that we seek to make - as I say consistent with the very strong and clear recommendations of the Committee of Independent Experts - are not negative in any way at all.

Coherence, consistency and universally good standards in a decentralised system of financial control are guaranteed by a series of measures.

One is to ensure high quality training, another is to ensure that no Directorate-General can take over financial control responsibilities unless and until the auditor service is absolutely certain of the robustness of the system, another is the establishment of a central financial service, as honourable Members will see from the White Paper, to ensure that those standards are set and supervised, and there is also the additional belt and braces and boilersuit approach of having an effective and independent internal audit service.

I will not go into all the details in the course of a parliamentary answer of this kind but I am certain that on examination Mrs Theato will be able to see that in the details of the White Paper, there are very strong assurances.

There will also be evidence of the fact that we have taken heed of the representations made in this House particularly in the Committee on Budgetary Control, and that is significant in respect of the use of ex ante visas in Directorates-General.

If that is felt in a Directorate-General to be a relevant and effective way of enhancing financial control, the ex ante system can be used.

Naturally, there are diverse requirements across the Commission depending on the number and nature of the financial transactions in which particular Directorates-General have to engage.

Account is taken of that too in the White Paper but where there is a desire and a demonstrated need for the use of such a system, it most certainly can be used.

Lastly on transition, I share the reservations of Mrs Theato over so-called "soft law" .

We have had this discussion before and she knows I make a distinction between various forms of codes which can have a very positive effect and eventually be turned into what I suppose we could call "hard law" .

But, on this issue, I do not see any room for soft law which is why in the transition period there will be total adherence to the current financial regulation until that law is changed by due democratic process in this House and in the Council.

There are absolute assurances of that and provisions made for it in the White Paper.

In addition, however, and very importantly, because it is a transition period, there will be training, there will be advice, there will be support, there will be assurances. The new head of the audit unit will be in place by 1 May and with that and an accumulation of other assurances I think that we can be as certain as human beings can be that there will be a totally secure system even during the period of transition.

Two other points I must make, because this is an essential question central to reform.

The first one is that people feel - for reasons I well understand - that in that transition there is a danger either of irresponsibility or of inertia.

Irresponsibility because the feeling exists in some quarters that there will not be sufficient control and discipline.

I completely reject that simply because of the standards of Commission officials, the responsibility of directors-general and the assurances that we have built into the system.

Inertia would only be born of anxiety and we are doing everything we can in terms of support and training to diminish the possibility of that occurring.

Lastly, the system we currently have - as the Committee of Independent Experts asserted very strongly - is now unsustainable.

Indeed the Court of Auditors has called it fiction.

Change will have to come in any case, change would imply a transition period because there is no possibility of any system being invented that could enable us to move from one Friday to the next Monday from one system to another.

In so far as it is at all possible with all of the advice at our disposal and all of the design capability that we have, I am certain that we have installed, or that we will install on the basis of our proposals, a system that will provide the Union, its taxpayers and this House with complete security.

Madam President, great importance has been attached to the reform process, which deserves to be acknowledged, although this may be somewhat premature.

My question is this: there is a need for reform, due not least to the accession of new countries, and thus to the enlargement of the Union.

How can we - the Commission, Parliament and also the national parliaments of the applicant countries - meet this challenge more effectively, taking into account the ideas and considerations of the applicant countries?

The delegations are actively engaged - as am I in my delegation for relations with the Czech Republic - but it is clear that there is often a pronounced schoolmasterish tone to our dealings with one another.

How can the reform process help make the relationship and cooperation between the European Parliament, the national parliaments and also the Commission, and the work they perform together, more effective?

I am grateful to the honourable Member for underlining the fact that, apart from its own inherent merits, reform will be made necessary by accession, the enlargements, and particularly the kind of enlargements that our Union will shortly be engaging in.

It is essential that we have that reform, both for the sake of the current Union, and certainly to facilitate accessions.

In the course of the coming years I will be continuing the practice I have already started, together with several of my Commission colleagues obviously, of very profound discussions with the administrations of the incoming new Member States.

We are doing it in order to try to explain in the fullest terms the system into which they will be entering.

I would also like to see the enrichment of the training effort undertaken both by current Member States and by the Union generally to ensure that as new officials come in to the Commission and officials and administrators in the Member States have to deal with the realities, the complex realities of membership of the Union and the single market, it will be difficult to see the joins.

That is the level of sophistication and provision I would like to see.

All I can do now is to promise to strive for it.

Can I start by wishing the Commissioner a very happy St David' s Day.

It is important that the Commission never loses sight of the fact that the reform process will be a complete waste of time unless it reconnects with the European public.

That really has to be the sharp focus the whole time.

It has to give a service to them and certainly the recommendations on cutting down on payment delays I am sure will be very welcome, but the other major complaint we get from the people we represent is paperwork.

Is there a reference to cutting down paperwork and bureaucracy for applicants to European funding whilst ensuring financial control?

That is a clear complaint that we get. That needs to be addressed.

The other question I would like to ask is on the audit progress committee.

This, of course, is welcome, but it is essential it include a reference to the monitoring of recommendations that come from the European Parliament within our discharge procedure.

Will you be adding that into your audit progress committee' s work?

Finally, the Socialist Group agrees with activity-based budgeting and with responsibilisation and you will be judged, as Mr Prodi says, by your actions, not your words.

I should like to thank President Prodi and Commissioner Kinnock.

Statement by the High Representative for Common Foreign and Security Policy

The next item is the statement by the High Representative for Common Foreign and Security Policy.

Please give a very warm welcome to Mr Javier Solana to whom I shall hand over without further delay.

Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, it is a great pleasure for me to appear before you again, here in the European Parliament.

Much has happened since the last time I was here to talk about foreign and security policy issues in our continent.

Sometimes we may feel that too much has happened.

This afternoon I should like to share with you some ideas, particularly on the Common Foreign and Security Policy.

The world has certainly moved on significantly in recent months and many events have occurred. However, I will wait for question time to give specific answers to any questions you may have for me.

In recent months, since the last time I appeared before you, important events have occurred in this House and also in the European Union. I would remind you of two of these events, one of which is very dear to you all as members of this Parliament, and particularly to the President.

These are the opening of the Intergovernmental Conference and the starting of negotiations with the future members of the European Union.

The events in Kosovo and the Balkans in general have certainly stirred our hearts and minds. There are also important issues at stake in the Middle East in which the President of this House played a major role on her recent trip.

Certain important steps have been taken to secure progress in the summit between Europe and Africa in which I was pleased to participate in cooperation with the Portuguese presidency. A vital meeting has also taken place in Portugal, in Vilamoura, with the eighteen countries of Latin America to try and develop a deeper relationship between the European Union and Latin America.

Chechnya has also been one of our main concerns and I will speak briefly on this at the end, in the light of an important conversation which I had this morning with the Council of Europe representative, Mr Álvaro Gil-Robles, on his recent visit to the region.

However, I realise that you asked me here to talk to you more specifically about foreign policy and particularly security policy in Europe since Helsinki.

I will speak of this briefly. If you wish to ask questions at the appropriate time, I will be pleased to answer them.

The Helsinki Summit under the Finnish presidency took place a little over two months ago.

Decisions were taken at this summit which are fundamental for foreign and security policy in our continent.

These were essentially of three types which I will describe.

The first was the decision to establish within the European Union three committees for decision making relating to crisis management. The first is a political and security committee, the second is a military committee representing the Chiefs of Staff of the fifteen Member States and the third committee is to make decisions on the European Union' s relations with third countries and other organisations.

This basically involves relations between the European Union and the Atlantic Alliance and relations between the European Union and those countries which, although geographically in Europe, are not part of the European Union, or at least not at the moment.

I will restrict myself to these three points in order to bring you up to date with events.

Firstly, with regard to the decision-making bodies, the Political and Security Committee met for the first time this morning, 1 March 2000. This committee was established by the last General Affairs Council.

Therefore, two months after the Helsinki declaration and decision, a Political and Security Committee meeting has taken place for the first time within the European Union.

I was able to attend this meeting this morning and met with the representatives at lunch.

You can be satisfied with the progress made.

The fifteen countries have appointed diplomatic experts at ambassador level in order to tackle one of the most important issues which we will face in the coming months.

Secondly, the Military Committee, which represents the various Chiefs of Staff of the fifteen countries, will hold its first meeting on 7 March which will be just over two months after the Helsinki declaration.

This Military Committee, as you can imagine, will have various duties.

In the interim stage, its basic duty will be to advise the Council and myself and to take initial decisions on how to set up the final bodies which we will, of course, try to have in place by the end of this year or the beginning of next.

Thirdly, the Military Staff will represent senior military personnel from the fifteen countries. Together with myself, this staff will form the civil and military secretariat whose task will be to prepare, with the assistance of the Military Committee, any operation needing to be organised in due course in the context of crisis management within the European Union.

This crisis management will not be a strictly military affair but the military representatives and the Military Committee will be responsible for advising on the logistics of any humanitarian operations which may require the involvement of military forces.

Mozambique is surely an excellent current example of how intervention may be required in terms of military logistics, not for military purposes, but with strictly humanitarian ends.

We are therefore working diligently in this respect. Madam President, if, a few months ago when I had the pleasure of appearing before you for the first time, I had told you that I would be able to announce on 1 March 2000 that the first meeting of the Political Committee had been held today, that the Military Committee would be up and running within a week after that and that tomorrow the first members of the Military Staff would start to arrive at the building which we are to use, many of you would surely have thought that the High Representative was going mad.

We are not mad. What we have done is to work long and hard, with determination and, without a shadow of a doubt, with the support not only of yourselves but also of the Heads of State and Government of the countries which you represent.

Few initiatives within the European Union can have been progressed with such determination, drive and commitment as has been achieved in crisis management since Helsinki.

In less than two months we have established the mechanics for cooperation with the Commission.

I must thank Commissioner Patten who is here today for his support and the tremendous energy that he has also invested in trying to ensure that all these issues could be settled in such a short time.

I will now move on to the second issue which I should like to discuss with you.

We have already looked at the bodies which we have set up but we also have a fundamental obligation in terms of our credibility. Europe must be able to provide the military capacity to act in times of crisis.

I must repeat that the European Union will not be using this military capacity to make war but to bring peace. It will participate in crisis management in order to help where there is war or situations of conflict, to re-establish calm and to take the heat out of these situations and also to avoid them.

As you may recall, it was in this respect that the Helsinki Summit intelligently agreed to form a force of 60 000 soldiers from all the Member States. It will be possible for this force to be deployed at any given moment within 60 days, or two months, to prevent a crisis and for it to remain in action to prevent conflict for a period of one year.

This is a major operation and an important objective but I can say that we are in a position to meet this challenge which the Heads of State and Government posed in Helsinki. On Monday, just two days ago, in Sintra, a beautiful city very close to Lisbon, the Defence Ministers of the fifteen Member States met and took some important decisions towards implementing this Headline Goal defined in Helsinki.

The proposed timetable is tight but essential and will require great determination from all of us, including this House.

I will set this out in five points.

Firstly, before the next General Affairs Council which will take place this month, we shall be able to define precisely the detailed and specific meaning of the Headline Goal, bearing in mind the views that the military planners may consider appropriate.

To say that we will deploy 60 000 soldiers in a peacekeeping operation is not the same thing as organising an operation to achieve peace. We must therefore have considered all possible scenarios so that we can do this job and do it well.

Before 24 March we will therefore have established this timetable so that the General Affairs Council can, on this date, do its job and do it well.

Secondly, we must look at the capacity which each country has so that this total force of 60 000 soldiers is distributed in an orderly and efficient manner between the fifteen countries.

Thirdly, we must look at the differences between the Headline Goal and what each country can provide.

We may not have enough between the fifteen countries which will have to make an additional effort to meet the proposed needs.

This should be decided by a Conference of the fifteen countries to look at the gap between what we want and what we have and to see how to distribute what we need among the fifteen Member States.

Madam President, the timetable must ensure that, by December of this year during the French presidency, the process can be completed with a major conference of forces from all the countries to ensure that the needs and capacities match. We will then be able to say truthfully that we have a plan of what we must do between the end of the year 2000 and the year 2003 which is the date we have set for having this capacity available.

This is what we are doing and we are committed to this.

We have worked hard in recent months and weeks and will continue to do so for the rest of this year during the Portuguese presidency, which is clearly carrying out excellent work, and during the French presidency which will undoubtedly continue working with the same speed and skill as it has demonstrated on other occasions.

I would like to say that in the meantime there will be at least four European Councils, those in Lisbon and Feira and two during the French presidency.

On these four occasions, the Heads of Government will also be ready to continue examining these issues so that we do not lose the momentum and so that, by the year 2003, we are able to deploy what we have agreed, if necessary.

Madam President, we are therefore working on this issue with determination, energy and the full support of all the governments and all the Heads of Government.

I have two further points to make on this process.

The European Union must carry out this whole operation in collaboration with the third countries to which I have referred which, although geographically in Europe, are not members of the European Union.

We have to work with these countries and involve them so that if such a crisis arises, which I hope will not be the case, all forces and all countries will be more than welcome.

Secondly, we have to be able to establish a smooth and transparent relationship with NATO.

The operations to be carried out in the future will be of three types.

The first type will be operations in which European forces are involved within the framework of NATO.

The second will be operations involving European forces and directed by them, but using the means and infrastructure of NATO.

The third will be operations in which the European forces act alone.

In the first and second types we will need to cooperate with NATO and must therefore establish a transparent, positive and confident relationship between ourselves and NATO, as appropriate, which will be good for both the Alliance and ourselves.

Madam President, I have talked about the military capacity which we are ready to provide, the timetable which we want to apply and what has been achieved in recent months.

However, we must not forget that these crisis operations must be tackled from a civilian front as well.

As far as possible, we are also providing or trying to provide solutions to any humanitarian crises and public order crises such as those which are currently unfortunately occurring in Kosovo and the Balkans. We are working in this direction with the Commission and Commissioner Patten.

On Saturday morning I will meet with all the Ministers for Home Affairs of the fifteen Member States to try and make them see the need to mobilise a police force as well.

There are times when a crisis which started out with a military need develops so that, after a few months, a police force is needed rather than a military force. Then, in the final moments of the crisis, it is perhaps courts or bodies to create democratic institutions which a country may need more than police.

In this respect we are also working closely and positively with the Commission.

I am not going to say much more on these issues.

Many other events have taken place in recent weeks which I should like to mention, such as in Kosovo, the Middle East and Chechnya. There are also many other issues which I should like to discuss with you.

However, I would prefer, Madam President, to stop at this point and allow questions to be asked so that I have time to answer them.

However, before this happens, I must tell you about a telephone conversation which I had a few hours ago with the Council of Europe representative on the subject of Chechnya.

Mr Gil-Robles returned this morning from Chechnya where he visited Grozny. When we spoke he gave me his initial impressions which are not good, as you can imagine.

The situation in the refugee camps in Ingushetia is poor and deteriorating. In most cases there is no hot food during the day as the Russian authorities are failing to provide this and are leaving this work to the non-governmental organisations.

In Grozny, there are now approximately 20 000 people in a desperate situation who have to walk miles and miles to get something to eat.

Yet there is one positive point which I must share with you.

Mr Gil-Robles told me that, when talking with the Acting President and the Foreign Affairs Minister last night, the Russian authorities had agreed to allow Council of Europe representatives to be involved in the humanitarian mission which is in Grozny at the moment and which is being directed by the Russian authorities. The latter were also in negotiation with the Chairman-in-Office of the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe to allow OSCE representatives to be involved as well, if feasible.

These are the only positive aspects which I can tell you about at the moment. I hope that in the next few hours we will have more information from Commissioner Gil-Robles and, in particular, better news from the Russian authorities.

Madam President, this brings me to the end of my speech.

I would just like to repeat what I said at the beginning.

I am delighted to be participating in the work of this House and to be informing you about the work which is being carried out collectively by all the countries and with the Commission. This work has one clear objective of allowing our European Union to participate as effectively as possible in the international sphere in peacekeeping operations.

Europe does not want to make war anywhere but rather to cooperate so that peace and stability can be achieved throughout the world.

Thank you very much indeed, Mr Solana. I shall now give the floor to Mr Poettering, on behalf of the Group of the European People' s Party (Christian Democrats) and European Democrats.

Mr Poettering, it goes without saying that Commissioner Patten' s participation in this debate is most opportune, and we have agreed that I will allow him to speak when he so wishes.

Commissioner, would you like to speak now or a little later?

(The Commissioner indicated that he would speak later) Very well, thank you.

Madam President, Commissioner Patten, Mr Javier Solana, usted no es una persona loca, todo lo contrario (you are not mad, quite the opposite).

We are delighted about the rapid progress which has been made following the Helsinki Summit.

We know that you have an important role in this.

I am also very pleased that you have mentioned Mozambique today, and in this context, and that a major humanitarian effort can be made using the resources in question.

We cannot, of course, talk about foreign policy without mentioning Chechnya.

My friend Jacques Poos will be talking about this on behalf of my Group.

I want to concentrate on Kosovo.

It is now quite clear that the situation in Kosovo shows that a lasting solution to the crisis there cannot be provided by military means.

The KFOR forces have made, and are making, an invaluable contribution, but tanks and fire trenches cannot deal with political problems and ethnic conflicts in the longer term.

It has now reached the point where the Pentagon has prohibited American forces from returning to northern Mitrovica.

They have now been replaced by robust Danish, Finnish and Swedish troops.

It is easy to despair in the face of the violence and the hatred, but it is important for the sake of Kosovo, the Balkans and Europe that we do not fail.

Through the Stability Pact, we have taken major steps which place us under an obligation.

This is therefore a test of credibility for the Union' s common foreign and security policy.

At the moment, there is a huge shortage of suitable personnel in Kosovo.

Last autumn, we already heard Mr Bernard Kouchner call for a civilian police force.

I am now delighted to hear that, this weekend, Mr Javier Solana is to call the interior ministers together to discuss the question of policing.

I hope that this discussion will, in the first place, concentrate upon Kosovo so that the desperate situation there might be remedied.

When it comes to the Balkans and Kosovo, I also hope that the Council will comply with Parliament' s and, as I understand it, also the Commission' s demands for a multiannual budget for operations in Kosovo.

The situation in Kosovo has taught us a lot, for example that we should provide ourselves with a military capacity for crisis management, an idea which has already been translated into practical action.

Another, at least as important, lesson of our experience, however, is that it is better to prevent a crisis than to have to take emergency action subsequently.

Therefore, the EU must also have an independent, credible conflict-prevention capacity.

On behalf of the Commission, Commissioner Patten has taken a number of praiseworthy initiatives in this direction.

I am thinking of the proposal to set up a rapid reaction facility and a rapid reaction force for non-military operations and to introduce headline goals for non-military operations, together with a Commission Crisis Centre.

My last question to Mr Solana is this: what concrete preparations are being made for conflict prevention of this kind?

How have these been organised by Mr Solana' s office and how has the initiative been coordinated with the Commission?

Mr President, Mr Solana, you have the full support and confidence of the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party, but we would remind you of the huge responsibility which now rests upon your shoulders.

I am thinking partly of the forthcoming and important humanitarian, peace-keeping and peace-making tasks.

But I am also thinking of the responsibility you now have for ensuring that the new European cooperation on defence does not give rise to any kind of split between NATO and the EU or between the United States and Europe.

Such a split would only delight the despots and rogue States which threaten freedom and human rights.

I believe you heard the concerns which some members of the American Congress expressed last week here in Parliament.

You must lay these concerns to rest for, as you yourself have said, when we are able to present a united transatlantic front, we are in a position to do something.

When we are divided, we are weakened, and the suffering of the oppressed is prolonged.

So, maintain as close contact as possible with our American allies and do not forget Norway, Turkey and Canada, either.

You also share a heavy degree of responsibility for ensuring that we do not end up as paper tigers.

As George Robertson has said so often, we have two million soldiers but could not even put 40 000 soldiers into Kosovo.

It may have been our weakness and lack of credibility which led to the war.

Diplomatic pressure is only successful when it is backed up by credible economic and military threats.

That is why the Member States must either authorise more expenditure or rearrange their priorities in favour of modern mobile units so that our soldiers are protected by the best equipment. We are therefore delighted about the decisions which were taken last Monday in Sintra.

The third heavy burden on your shoulders is the responsibility for ensuring parliamentary scrutiny.

This should be exercised first and foremost in the Member States.

No soldier can, of course, be despatched without the approval of the relevant national parliament.

It is therefore wrong for people to talk about a European army.

It will be a force comprised of various national units.

What is new is that it will be well prepared and able to act quickly under effective common leadership and using modern equipment.

However, there is, of course, also room for a certain amount of parliamentary scrutiny and control by the European Parliament.

As someone who both speaks and listens, we are glad to see you as a frequent guest both here in plenary and in the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy.

Finally, I should like to join you in expressing my pleasure at the incredible unity and speed with which this new form of cooperation is being set in motion.

Yesterday, a few of us met the Portuguese Defence Minister.

He was just as pleased and pleasantly surprised as yourself at the fact that it had been possible to agree about so much.

Bear in mind that there are also non-aligned countries at the negotiating table.

We share your delight, as long as we do not race ahead so quickly that transatlantic cooperation is impaired.

There is one thing I shall again finally emphasise: that the purpose of all this is, of course, that we should acquire such credibility when we exercise economic and military pressure that military force is not used at all.

That is the purpose of all this, and it is therefore also important that you should cooperate with Mr Patten, for it is military, economic and diplomatic pressure which together will put a stop to atrocities in neighbouring countries.

Mr President, Mr Solana, we are very uneasy about replying to you because, in our view, you are responsible for an area that does not really exist.

We believe that poor old Europe can only speak with one voice to say nothing or, and this is possibly more serious, that it can only resolve its diplomatic contradictions by simply tagging along with American politics.

In the lyrical mode of illusion and evasion that they are so fond of, at Sintra, the Fifteen decided to equip themselves with an action force that is 'pretentiously' called autonomous.

Now, the Union can certainly call the body an 'action force' even though for the moment it is only the mobilisation of a few funds and the mustering - on paper - of men, weapons and logistics.

But to believe that this muddle can be autonomous is another matter altogether.

What interests will this so-called force defend, in view of the fact that the countries of Europe do not have the same interests?

Let us just consider for a moment.

What is the basis of armed action?

It is the defence of a territory, the protection of a country and in general of interests considered to be vital?

Just what is an army in the absence of a home country, in the absence of territory - because Europe is incapable of clearly defining its borders - and in the absence of clearly identified vital interests, which the Fifteen have, for good reason, never dared to discuss.

In short, what purpose can an armed force have in the absence of any policy?

We fall back on a kind of ersatz army based on humanitarian rights, a kind of army in the service of vague ideas, of an ideal, the dangers of which have many times been shown in history.

A foreign policy presupposes that one has a clear definition of oneself and of one' s own interests.

But the CFSP will never be anything else other than a cover for the national interests that already manage to dominate the system.

Who cannot see that in this case we are dealing with the twosome formed by London and Berlin, escorted by their respective henchmen, and who have no concept of their own diplomacy as being distinct from that of Washington, seeing themselves at best as bit-part players.

Mr Solana, you yourself are a perfect illustration of this, as it were, structural complicity, passing smoothly from NATO to the CFSP as if they were one and the same. Of course, in reality, they are the same thing.

It is still the old imperial service.

It is not without some amusement that we have seen you, in your pathetic rivalry with Mr Patten, present this delightful and most charming argument: one day you told a German newspaper, "I am the one that the Americans phone up" .

You might have added, Mr Solana, 'to give me their instructions' , because that is what we see, in fact.

In the case of the Balkans, just like everywhere else, one day the United States wants us to destroy the place and the next day they are asking us to rebuild it.

Yes, Jean-Claude Martinez was indeed right to interrupt you, Daniel Cohn-Bendit. In every case, it is follow-my-leader syndrome.

Do you think I am going over the top?

Every day the news brings more proof of our subservience.

Echelon is one of many examples of this, giving an image of Europe that is quite different to the one we like to envisage here.

The experts speak of a cultural problem, I think they might be right!

On behalf of the combined European right, I must say to you, Mr Solana, as High Representative for Common Foreign and Security Policy, we do not have confidence in you.

You say that you are against war, but as Secretary-General of NATO you started a war.

A war of aggression, slavishly carrying out American military policy, in a sphere that was not that of the North Atlantic Treaty, against a state that had never been a member, that was not threatening any international borders and in violation of the rules of international law that establish the principle of non-interference as well as those governing the declaration of war.

Today, even Mr Cohn-Bendit - and that is saying something - can gauge the results of the disastrous policy that he so wished for.

We also have several questions to ask you that show our concern, that is the least one can say.

First of all, in your view, does the common foreign and security policy aim to protect the security of the Member States of the Union, as one might think, or do you recognise their right to intervene anywhere in the world?

Secondly, if you do recognise this right, then what standards of international law and political morality are you going to base your decisions on?

I can already hear your reply: humanitarian standards.

In Kosovo, it was for humanitarian reasons that we systematically destroyed all the civilian infrastructure in Serbia.

When the US killed 2 000 people in Panama, it was not to impose their politics, it was to combat drug trafficking.

When they landed in Somalia, before having to withdraw in disarray, it was not to guarantee their takeover of the oil route, it was to restore hope.

'Restore hope' , do you remember?

In a nutshell, can you not see that nowadays all these evil deeds are committed for humanitarian reasons.

Finally, you spoke about using the great resources of crisis management.

Not to make war, of course, but to protect peace.

But these are always the words that those who conduct preventative wars use to justify their actions.

Can you assure us that there will not be a preventative war against any State you care to mention, particularly those which, in their elections, do not ratify the policy adopted by the other Member States of the Union?

Mr Solana, these questions convey our concern.

You say that you are against war, but you would not be the first warmonger to swear that.

May God spare us the disastrous consequences of the bombastic principles that you have just put forward.

Mr President, it goes without saying that the development of a European security and defence identity will have a huge impact on the three countries which joined NATO last year: Poland, the Czech Republic and Hungary.

As candidate countries of the European Union, they therefore wish to fully participate in this interesting initiative from the very beginning, that is to say as of now.

This request, however, was not honoured by the Council at its Helsinki Summit at the end of last year.

In the Finnish capital only vague pledges were made regarding consultation and cooperation.

This is why I would like to ask the High Representative, Mr Solana, to what extent Prague, Warsaw and Budapest are, or will be, involved in European military crisis management plans.

Given Poland' s rather critical stance, this question is all the more pressing.

Its reservation is captured in the following, rather blunt wording: avoid American isolationism and European separatism.

As one might expect, the Polish Foreign Affairs Minister, Mr Bronislaw Geremek, has expressed this concern in more diplomatic terms: "The development of a European defence identity should not be at the expense of NATO' s unity.

If anything, the European defence identity should serve to strengthen NATO" . We all very much share this opinion.

Minister Geremek is certainly not the only leader among the new NATO Members from central and eastern Europe who feels excluded from this crucial process today.

The Czech Defence Minister, for example, shares this opinion.

In the autumn of last year, the latter stated: "Security within Europe is not divisible.

It cannot be restricted to a small number of countries, with others only being allowed to observe or execute decisions" .

These opinions add substance to my question addressed to Mr Solana.

Poles only need five words for this: nothing about us without us!

What do the current EU Member States intend to do about this fair request submitted by candidate countries?

Mr President, I too welcome the presence of the High Representative and his availability to answer Members' questions this time round. On his first appearance in November this was not possible, although this was not Mr Solana' s fault.

It should be acknowledged, however, that he noted down and undertook to answer as quickly as possible the questions asked by Members.

We should also acknowledge the efforts which Mr Solana is making towards achieving a more effective, visible and coherent Common Foreign and Security Policy for the European Union.

In this respect, I agree with the previous speakers about the need to have a comprehensive policy which includes not only military elements but also civilian, diplomatic, humanitarian and police elements, to which Mr Solana referred.

The Portuguese presidency has made great progress in establishing a series of provisional or interim bodies.

In record time it has organised this Informal Meeting of Defence Ministers and has highlighted a whole series of milestones on the long road towards this Common Foreign and Security Policy.

One of these milestones was the meeting in Sintra which I would like to ask Mr Solana about.

This meeting was based on two documents, one being a British document on the Headline Goals and the other a document on the permanent military bodies of the European Union.

Mr Solana, would you be prepared, at your next appearance before the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy, to explain at length to the committee members the content of these documents discussed at the summit? I should like to ask Mr Patten and, through you, the President-in-Office to also attend and answer the same question.

Secondly, to what extent do you support the comments and statements made by the French Defence Minister that the Member States had to allocate 0.7% of GDP to defence expenditure? I would like to hear your opinion.

Do you share this view or do you feel a more significant contribution is needed from the Member States in this respect?

Thirdly, what assessment would you make of the 'Crisex 2000' exercises which have just ended in which, for the first time, the European Union took part in a series of initiatives with the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation?

Fourthly and finally, if the Member States asked for this, would you be prepared to chair the Political and Security Committee? In this way you could contribute all your experience as Secretary-General of the Council of Ministers, High Representative for Common Foreign and Security Policy, Secretary-General of the Western European Union and a former Secretary-General of NATO.

Mr Solana, as the rapporteur of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy, I shall limit my speech to those subjects.

You have, Mr Solana, heard the force of the criticisms made by the Members of Parliament who do not accept the appalling situations in Kosovo, Chechnya and elsewhere.

For my part, I do not wish to give up hope.

And today, as far as you are concerned, I acknowledge your efforts to build a European security and defence policy that is worthy of the name and which has not hitherto existed.

Indeed, we are still a long way from having achieved the desired objective, in any case, the objective that I wish to achieve.

But I do give you credit for your intense work, the number of meetings held, your efforts to create a rapid intervention force, your specific efforts to prevent crises, to manage them or stop them through civilian means and, if necessary, by military means.

I should like to take advantage of your presence here today to ask you two questions of the "what is to be done" variety.

The first concerns the forthcoming European Councils in June and December, without counting the extraordinary Council meeting in Lisbon.

What are the main priorities that you hope to achieve at the next summit meetings?

And finally, what do you most need at these next summits?

My second question is different, although it is not unconnected with the previous one.

Do you not think that the agenda of the IGC should include the question of European security and defence policy in order to supplement the treaties, if it appeared that, as the texts of the treaties stand at the moment, they do not allow for a real defence policy to be established?

I believe that the Italian President of the Council mentioned this point at your meeting on 24 February.

Can you tell us your position on this subject?

Mr President, Bosnia and Kosovo have shaken Europe.

At long last, the European Union realises that it cannot afford to always give the Americans the political and military initiative.

The decision to set up our own peace force is excellent.

However, if Europe wants to take military action at crucial times, the Treaty must include a flexibility clause.

Mr Solana can play an important role in this.

He is not stupid. Certainly not!

He is a driven man, a competent man.

But the question remains as to whether this accumulation of responsibilities exceeds even his level of competence.

In addition to being Secretary-General of the Council, Mr Solana is also Secretary-General of the WEU, as well as High Representative for the Common Foreign and Security Policy.

He also heads the Unity Policy Planning and the New Early Warning Unit.

One wonders whether he gets any time to sleep, Mr President.

From a democratic point of view, I actually find this accumulation of responsibilities unacceptable.

This is exacerbated by the fact that Mr Solana is, of course, not a democratically elected politician, but a high official who is not accountable to any parliament.

His position threatens to eclipse that of Commissioner Patten, as has been illustrated again today, in fact.

It appears that, as European security and defence policy takes shape, the Commission and Parliament are increasingly being left out in the cold.

This too is unacceptable in my view.

Naturally, every attempt should be made to make European policy more efficient, but this should not lead to unwished-for concentrations of power.

Mr Solana must keep Europe awake without nodding off himself.

Mr President, peace is the European Union' s very raison d' être.

I am pleased about the fact that Commissioner Patten and Mr Solana have already underlined this repeatedly.

We have also opted for a common and joint development along the road of democracy, cultural diversity and tolerance. But look at us now!

We are observing the misery in Chechnya in a position of powerlessness, and regard the wars in Africa with indifference, despite the fact that we have close ties with so many of these countries, given that they are ex-colonies.

Some of them are our ACP partners.

The war is an extension of degenerated underdevelopment.

In Kosovo, we stepped in with military means, having been unable to prevent the war in ex-Yugoslavia.

We are now unable to guide the peace.

This is why Europe is not credible as a Union.

I do not believe, Mr Solana, that we can restore this credibility by military means.

As representatives from the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance, we all come from nations and regions which have never gone out to war with foreign countries, but we always needed to fight those who came to oppress us.

We are very sceptical about your current plans to form a military capability in the short term.

This is not because we are against European defence, but European defence can and may only be the outcome of a sound, democratically-based decision process in respect of foreign affairs.

At the moment, Europe does not have a foreign policy to speak of.

I can hardly believe that we will ever achieve this at intergovernmental level.

In my opinion, it is far too easy to sit down with the military and gather up all the military equipment, which are such nice toys, after all.

I am very sceptical about the fact that Commissioner Patten cannot inform us in an equally credible way that he has drafted a prevention plan to stave off further degeneration, underdevelopment and conflicts in Europe and outside. Because our borders do not stop at the Mediterranean Sea.

Mr President, allow me to start with the conquest of Kosovo.

It is obvious since the NATO bombing stopped eight months ago that the purpose of the bombing was not to stop ethnic cleansing, not to promote peace and order but to drive a wedge even further into Yugoslavia, to change the borders and to promote the New Order.

Today, we are turning a blind eye to the involvement of NATO occupation forces in the savage ethnic cleansing of the Serbs and non-Albanian speaking minorities.

All the signs point towards a second round of attacks on Yugoslavia and this is confirmed by the KLA attacks on Serbs in Mitrovica, the attempt to annex three towns in southern Serbia to Kosovo, the promotion of the independence of Kosovo, the fact that two thousand men have been channelled into Kosovo via Greece, despite the objections of the Greek people and, at the same time, intense efforts by NATO and the European Union to overturn the legitimate government of Yugoslavia.

On the other hand, despite his declarations on humanity and peace, it is clear from what Mr Solana has told us that, according to the Helsinki resolutions, we intend to set up a terrorist army, starting with 60 000 men, in order to strike at anyone who raises their head above the parapet.

Mr Solana has confirmed our view that, in a militarised European Union, NATO will have the upper hand.

That is why this job went to Mr Solana, the Secretary-General of NATO, who is also guilty of the crimes committed against Yugoslavia; the right man for the right job, against whom charges have been filed, calling for him to be tried as a war criminal.

Commissioner, Mr Solana, there is no doubt that you are acting quickly and forcefully and that you have made great progress in certain areas.

I wonder, and here I do not entirely agree with the positive interpretations of a number of press bodies and fellow Members, about the direction in which we are going.

I think that contrary to the great process of Economic and Monetary Union, which was an integrated process within the Community structures, today, unfortunately, the common foreign and security policy is entirely an intergovernmental procedure.

My first question, Mr Solana and Commissioner, is to establish whether, together, you have framed strategies that will, at least gradually, lead to the creation of a process that integrates the common foreign and security policy within the Community process.

We have taken fifteen years to achieve Economic and Monetary Union.

We can take fifteen years for the defence and security policy and foreign policy, but the process must be clear.

I also believe that we should not underestimate, and this is a question that I put to you, the stranglehold and the force of the lobbies of the foreign ministries.

We know the strength that they have acquired over these forty years of building the Community.

Today, they would have everything to lose from the communitarisation of foreign policy, and I believe that they are working with that in mind.

Finally, with regard to Kosovo - Mr Cohn-Bendit was right to emphasise this point - I believe that it is urgent that the European Union raise the question of the status of Kosovo.

Without this status, there will only be instability, murders, provocation by Belgrade and it is a matter of urgency that the European Union should come to a decision on this matter.

Finally, I should like to thank Mr Poettering because I believe that the Belgian initiatives, as we say in common parlance, are getting a bit much.

I think many Member States among the fourteen other Member States would have many reasons not to cooperate in European Union meetings on justice, for example.

Four years after the arrest of Mr Dutroux and his associates, we have still not had a trial, and we still do not know what is happening.

As far as tourism is concerned, there will be many people in these fourteen Member States who could consider discouraging parents of young children from taking holidays in Belgium, for example.

So the time has come and I would ask Mr Solana and Mr Patten to tell Mr Michel that perhaps he is going a bit too far and that finally it may backfire on him, which is what I hope will happen.

Mr President, first of all, I would like to warmly congratulate Mr Solana on this first day of March, for a number of frameworks have been put in place today which have a bearing on European security and defence policy.

But I do wonder what his own view is on this.

According to the documents, cooperation with the High Representative was fruitful.

You said yourself just now that you talked to them over lunch. You have to admit, it would be a rather odd if you were not on speaking terms with them and if there was a lack of cooperation between you and the new frameworks.

But do you not regret the fact that you do not preside over them yourself and are not their leading light?

I - and I believe many with me in Parliament - would like you to be the driving force behind them and would not want you to run the risk of being sidelined to some extent.

Over the past couple of months, High Representative Solana and Commissioner Patten have, during discussions, among other things, with members of the NATO Assembly, tried to separate the defence policies of the EU and NATO.

One gets the impression in fact that they both think that the Petersberg tasks are ideally suited for inclusion in the EU defence policy in due course.

The Treaties also point in that direction, although they allow for a more general defence policy which ties in more with the traditional line of thought of incorporating our policy into a European pillar.

We would then have a voice in NATO through this European pillar.

Actually, I hear less and less about this.

I am under the impression that the European Union has pared its ambitions down to the Petersberg tasks, with Mr Patten taking responsibility for civil affairs, which would include a police and diplomatic corps capable of being swiftly deployed, about which he has talked with enthusiasm, and rightly so, and Mr Solana taking care of the deployment of military troops and military equipment.

It seems evident that they would do this in joint cooperation, which would work very well.

But is there not more to it than that?

I cannot shake off the impression that in terms of defence policy, NATO' s role is actually very much emphasised with regard to collective defence.

The European pillar does not really function any more as such.

Europe is not venturing beyond the Petersberg tasks.

Is this actually how we want things done?

Moreover, whilst there may be talk of integrating the Western European Union into the European Union, there is no longer any mention of Article V, which is, of course, of direct concern to us.

Article V touches upon the wider defence tasks and not just Petersberg.

At the same time, an appeal has also been made in broad terms to increase the defence budgets.

I think that this is to be welcomed, but this appeal does not really distinguish very clearly between Petersberg tasks and wider, collective defence tasks.

I wonder how this will develop.

I would like to ask both gentlemen how they view the long-term future.

Is it necessary to give further attention to this during the IGC or will the Treaties inevitably set the ball rolling?

I am pleased that this has opened a few matters up in relation to defence policy.

I do wonder, if Turkey were to bring in a brigade, would we also have to grant it codecision rights concerning that policy?

The fabric of Turkey' s government contains a few Haider-type personalities.

That would seem odd to me.

Secondly, the Baltic States are also knocking on our door.

Will they also take part in our defence policy?

It is a very interesting position to be in, to say the least.

High Representative, you have efficiently drawn our attention to the progress we made in this field between Amsterdam and Helsinki and to certain decisions which have already been taken since Helsinki, such as the establishment of the three committees and, of course, the decision to provide for the deployment of a 50-60 000-strong military force.

However, this increase in pace accentuates the lack of coordination between these decisions and the on-going Intergovernmental Conference even further.

I believe that we will have to reach a compromise in this area between those who, rightly, are pushing for the communitisation of this policy and those who think that such advances should be the responsibility of the Intergovernmental Conference.

A word of warning to the latter: this policy needs substantial democratic legitimisation.

We are aware of the importance of public opinion when we intervene in matters of foreign and security policy, and I would therefore ask you, in general terms, of course, whether you feel that the reform could tackle any of the following issues: the new, two-level Commission-High Representative structure; a clear, practical distinction between civilian and military crisis management.

At this stage, this could include, for example, collaboration between the Commission and the Political Committee, the consolidation of Community responsibility for non-military crisis management, the creation of a Council of Ministers for Defence, coordination of the Treaty on European Union, the NATO Charter and the WEU, the legal personality of the European Union, reinforced cooperation in this area as well, parliamentary control and, lastly, financing.

Do you think that any of these issues could be included, at least in the agenda of the current Conference?

Mr Solana, I am sitting quite close to you, close enough to see your face.

I think that you have aged, your face is quite lined.

It pains me to look at you and I despair on listening to you; that applies both to what you say about games with little soldiers, as Mrs Maes just put it, and what you do not say.

You bear a huge responsibility because the pretext of ethnic cleansing is being used to spill blood in another bout of ethnic cleansing in Kosovo and yet you have stood up here, while blood is being spilled in Kosovo, and you have not said a word about it.

You are Spanish; you are from a large country, Mr Solana.

Spain and Franco were not one and the same.

Spain maintained its unity, it kept the Basque country and Andalucia and Catalonia and it did well to do so, because no one identified Spain with Franco and no one played around with Spain' s unity in the name of a Fascist dictator.

Today, you are identifying Yugoslavia with Milosevic and you are playing with Voivodina, with Montenegro and with southern Serbia. It is you who has created this mess.

Which is why, unless they are accompanied by clear political solutions which respect borders and autonomy and all the democratic guarantees, all these plans on paper will lead to new blood-letting in the Balkans.

Mr Solana, the war in Kosovo and the continuing crisis, have served to reveal a European public opinion that is aware that defending the fundamental values that gave rise to the European Union, throughout the world, should no longer continue to rest solely on the shoulders of the President of the United States of America and that the time has come to share the burden, which our American friends have constantly been demanding since Europe became a world economic power.

Over the last year, the Member States of the Union have, naturally, decided to implement specific measures designed to strengthen the operational capability of their armed forces and the informal summit in Sintra, held the day before yesterday in your presence, has just confirmed the main trends.

I have two questions on this subject to which your knowledge of the subjects concerned and the parties involved should make it possible to provide enlightening replies for our further debates and our work.

The first question concerns the training of this rapid intervention force of 60 000 men, which, as you have said, is likely to be deployed to perform peace-keeping and peace-building missions and be capable of maintaining them on a long-term basis, if necessary.

For the information of our colleagues, I must say here that the corresponding contingents should be divided into three parts: one third to prepare the mission, one third to carry it out and one third for rehabilitation, following often difficult ordeals for personnel and equipment.

This explains why the initial figures given in the press, setting the volume of the forces to be built up at around 200 000 men, is close to reality, which has certainly surprised the uninitiated.

My first question, Mr Solana, will be simple and more direct, perhaps, than those of my colleagues who have spoken before me.

You know the French proverb, 'Nothing for nothing' .

Do you really think that the governments of the Union are prepared to pay the corresponding price at a time when many of them, apparently at least, have decided to continue to reap what ten years ago were called the peace dividends.

My second question is of a more technical nature, but it is important for the responsibilities of the Atlantic Alliance and the Western European Union to be transferred to the European Union as harmoniously as possible.

You have told us, in this regard, that three committees are being set up, a political committee and a security committee, which started up today, and a military committee.

You then spoke of their relations with the third country members of the Atlantic Alliance or associate members of the Western European Union but which are not members of the European Union.

In the operation of the temporary institutions, whose establishment has just been decided, can you tell us, Mr Solana, what status you intend to confer on the members of the Alliance and on the associate States of the WEU which, I repeat, are not yet members of the European Union?

Could they, for example, have a place, at least as observers, in the different political and security committees or in the military committee?

You know that they are concerned about the risk of being isolated and I should like to say that I understand their wish to participate with you in bringing this to a successful conclusion.

Mr President, Secretary-General, as you can tell, the Members of this House have listened with great interest to your information on the result of the Informal Meeting of Defence Ministers in Sintra and its significance in the European integration process in terms of security and defence.

Thank you too for sharing with us your telephone conversation with Mr Gil-Robles.

However, in terms of foreign policy, I am not sure whether we can advance at the rate needed to meet requirements, as some Members have said this afternoon, without ignoring the problems which you are coming up against. I will give you an example.

During the recent trip by the President of the European Parliament to the Middle East, which you mentioned, the various conflicting parties were in agreement about asking for a more active presence from the European Union in the on-going peace process in the region.

Do you believe that representatives of Community institutions and Member State governments are acting with the coordination and balance required of those who, like us, hope to mediate between two opposing parties?

This House is rather doubtful about this and I am not sure whether you share this doubt.

In this respect, as you will know, the European Parliament is working on an initiative to form a common diplomatic corps of the Community. This is clearly not intended to replace the diplomatic services of the Member States but to complement these and possibly improve their coordination.

Could you give us an initial reaction to this initiative, without compromising the more detailed reaction which you may be able to give us in the Foreign Affairs Committee?

Mr Solana, it has been said many times in this House that prevention is better than cure.

Of course it is, but there is no reason why Europe cannot equip itself with the means to intervene when prevention proves unsuccessful.

In any case, it is prevention that I would like to discuss today.

War is threatening to break out again in the Gulf.

As you know, the Iraqi Government has refused to abide by United Nations Resolution 1284, and this is likely to lead, within the next six or seven weeks, to a refusal to issue entrance visas to the committee monitoring the destruction of nuclear, biological and chemical weapons.

If this happens, the United States' Government and the British Government have given it to be understood that they will resort to military intervention.

A visit to Iraq and meetings with the Iraqi leaders and leading figures, particularly Mr Tarek Aziz, convinced me that there is actually a possibility of persuading the Iraqi Government to cooperate in enforcing Resolution 1284.

However, the responsible authorities of the Western countries need to make it clear that, once the mission of the United Nations committee has been successfully completed, the embargo will be lifted and normal trade relations will be able to be resumed.

I would like to know what you and Europe are doing, Mr Solana, or what you intend to do in the near future, to stave off this threat of war. Today, we have the chance to prevent it; tomorrow it may be too late.

I would also like to know whether, in this context, it would not be possible to do something to induce the Iraqi Government to take a humanitarian step and to release some information regarding the 615 missing Kuwaitis, or to set them free if this is within their power.

Mr President, High Representative, Commissioner, with regard to the war in Chechnya, we have all noted the particularly restrained and almost accommodating reaction of the international community in general and of the European Union in particular.

Now, what has happened and what is still happening in Chechnya is similar to genocide.

How else can we describe the complete annihilation of a regional capital of 400 000 inhabitants, the unremitting and inordinate bombing of towns, villages and districts where, in amongst the whole of the civilian population, there are perhaps a handful of Chechen fighters?

How should we describe the sinister filtration camps, which are comparable to concentration camps, in which the population is suffering the most dreadful humiliation and from which able-bodied men between 15 and 65 years old rarely get out alive?

How can we describe the rapes, the looting, the deliberate fires, the deportations, which are called "cleansing" , that recall the worst episodes of the Middle Ages in Europe?

And what can we say about the leaden shroud that is crashing down on Russian and international journalists and with the banishment of the humanitarian organisations and any international commission of inquiry at the sites of the massacres?

If that is realpolitik, if we really do not have any means, Mr Solana, as High Representative of the CFSP, and Commissioner, I put this question to you both, let us at least use the means that we do have, namely, the aid programmes to Russia.

The war in Chechnya proves, if proof were necessary, that the duty or the right to intervene stops at the borders of the great powers.

Let us therefore ensure that in future any euro spent in the Russian Federation is spent to alleviate the suffering of the people who are the victims of war, to the exclusion of any other objective.

Mr High Representative, you have spoken to us of the progress made to date in relation to the decisions taken at Helsinki.

Some of us here are passionately in favour of creating a distinctly European security organisation to defend peace in the world.

Of course we recognise the role of the Security Council, as the Helsinki resolutions clearly state, in maintaining international peace and security.

However, we note that you have said nothing to us about the fact that the role of the Security Council, as referred to at Helsinki, was contested recently.

The point is: does the political will exist to grant real administrative autonomy to this mechanism, which will cover the entire spectrum of Petersberg decisions?

Is there some sort of provision which will allow the system as a whole to have this administrative autonomy?

Secondly, what will happen to the European defence industry which, after all, comes under the more general activities relating to this system?

Will current programmes continue to be implemented?

Finally, if the Treaty needs to be amended, how do you think this amendment will be implemented, following the report to be submitted in Feira? How will it be incorporated into the more general procedure for amending the institutional framework of the Treaty and how do you think this will fit in with the possibility of a system of qualified majority voting?

Has any thought been given to the matter?

And to what extent has collaboration between you and the relevant Commissioner brought about concrete results and created some sort of framework strategy as to how you and the Commissioner hope this system will prove truly efficient?

Mr President, I seem to recall from my study of European history, that the 1809 Convention of Sintra was a controversial peace agreement which probably lengthened rather than shortened the Napoleonic wars and nearly cost the Duke of Wellington his job.

I hope this is not an omen for this Sintra Agreement.

That said, I would like to congratulate the high representative on the progress that has been made so far.

But it has to be admitted that much of what he said is the progress in institutional matters, and the real test of the European defence identity will be in its ability to produce capability and capacity, rather than nicely formulated institutions.

And, to that end, I am not clear as to the extent to which we have progressed on developing heavy lift capacity to be able to get these 60 000 troops into operation, or what progress we have made on autonomous intelligence capacity, particularly given the American statements that they are not giving intelligence to Europeans until they can deal with security.

We have all heard some of the tales emanating from the Council of Ministers building in Brussels.

To what extent are we going to get some form of convergence on defence expenditure, because some Member States spend considerably more than others.

And indeed, some Member States are not geared for mobility.

They are very static in their military forces, and unsuitable for this sort of warfare.

Can I perhaps also turn to Mr Patten as well and ask, in terms of the conflict prevention work we are going to be doing, to what extent will it be possible for us to look at long-term conflict-causing situations such as environmental degradation and shortage of water and then incorporate them into mainstream EU policies, particularly in development, because there is no point trying to rapidly respond to something we have had years to put right.

